Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to commend the Austrian
delegation for its work in the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of November and to
thank it for convening this open debate, to which my
country attaches special importance. I also reiterate the
importance of the Council's holding public meetings to
allow all Members of the Organization to express their
opinions and interact with members of the Council.

This year, the Security Council is considering for
the tenth consecutive year the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict within the legal framework
of resolutions 1265 (1999), 1296 (2000) and 1674
(2006) and the aide-memoire on the protection of
civilians (S/PRST/2002/6) adopted by the Security
Council in 2002. This year also marks the sixtieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Geneva Conventions
of 1949, the keystones of international humanitarian
law.

In accordance with international humanitarian
law, the protection of civilians in armed conflicts is a
legal obligation under international law. It is
regrettable that the Council must continue to deal with
the matter because civilians continue to this day to
suffer the grave consequences of armed conflicts. We
are therefore convinced that the Security Council must
remain committed to the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts by promoting respect for international
humanitarian and human rights law and fighting
impunity.

At the open debate held by the Council on
26 June (S/PV.6151), my delegation referred to the
Secretary-General's report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts (S/2009/277) and
expressed its regret that the situation was just as
discouraging as it had been 10 years earlier.

The 1949 Geneva Conventions were a step
forward for the international community, given the
dehumanizing situation it had recently experienced.
Sixty years later, conflicts continue to arise and,
regrettably, there remain numerous situations in which
civilians are the targets of attacks and, as others have
noted, the number of victims among the civilian
population is unacceptably high; in which children are
recruited as soldiers or are subject to abuse; in which
sexual violence is a daily occurrence; and in which
thousands and even millions of people are displaced
and humanitarian access is severely hindered.

Parties to armed conflict are required by the basic
rules of international humanitarian law to guarantee
protection of civilians from the effects of the conflict.
With regard to non-State armed groups in armed
conflicts that are not of an international nature, it is
clear that common article 3 of the four 1949 Geneva
Conventions sets out specific obligations that must be
respected by the parties involved, including non-State
parties.

With respect to peacekeeping operations and the
protection of civilians - the focus of this debate -
my country is convinced of the need to include
protection activities in the mandates of United Nations
missions. However, the Secretary-General's report and
the conclusions of the workshop on the subject
organized in January by Australia and Uruguay, stress
the need to develop clearer mandates and to provide
the necessary resources in an efficient and timely
manner. In this respect, interaction with components on
the ground is essential to ensuring that the mandates
are not only clear but also and, most importantly,
appropriate to the circumstances the mission will face.

As to the integration of the components, it is
important to ensure the necessary structure to
guarantee the protection of women, especially from
sexual violence. At the same time, we must also take
into account the need to protect children, and in
particular to prevent the recruitment of girls and boys
and to rehabilitate child soldiers.

Another important aspect of the protection of
civilians is to guarantee civilian access to humanitarian
assistance. If, due to inability or to a lack of political
will, the parties to a conflict do not fulfil their
obligations under international humanitarian law, they
must at least do their best to guarantee civilian access
to shipments, materials and emergency care. Likewise,
persons fleeing combat zones must be allowed to travel
safely to areas where they will not be harmed.

My country believes that justice plays a
fundamental role. Individuals who have committed war
crimes, genocide or crimes against humanity are
responsible for very serious violations of the law and
must therefore be held criminally accountable before
the law.

This Council established two ad hoc international
tribunals, one for the former Yugoslavia and one for
Rwanda, and the International Criminal Court is now
fully functional. I recall that the International Criminal
Court does not replace national justice systems, but
operates to complement such systems when they are
not functioning.
Ensuring accountability for such serious crimes is
more than an obligation for States. It is also in the
interest of the international community, represented at
this Organization, since justice contributes to
mitigating the harm caused by armed conflict and sets
the stage for reconstruction and peace.

I reiterate once more that, pursuant to
international humanitarian law and the Council's
resolutions, any attack on civilians or other protected
persons in situations of armed conflict, including the
restriction of access to humanitarian assistance and the
recruitment of child soldiers, is a violation of
international law. I therefore conclude by calling for
strict compliance with the obligations arising from the
1899 and 1907 Hague Conventions, the four 1949
Geneva Conventions and their 1977 Protocols, and the
decisions of the Security Council.

