Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Ijoin other delegations
in thanking the Secretary-General for his latest report
on the situation in Timor-Leste. Our thanks also go to
Mr. Kamalesh Sharma for today's excellent and very
informative briefing and to him and his team for his
very important and dedicated work.

Germany fully endorses the statement to be made
later in this discussion by Italy as the presidency of the
European Union.

Germany welcomes and fully supports the efforts
of the Government of Timor-Leste under President
Gusmao, assisted by the United Nations, to consolidate
the young political institutions and to ensure and
uphold democratic institutions and the rule of law,
while building the new nation. We note with
appreciation the stabilization of the overall security
environment in Timor-Leste, as confirmed by the
Secretary-General's latest report. In this context, we
welcome the fact that the build-up of the national
police of Timor-Leste is broadly on track and that the
national police, although its capabilities and resources
remain limited, has assumed responsibility for routine
policing in all districts except Dili, where the handover
is scheduled to take place in January 2004. We take this
as confirmation that the downsizing plan, as laid out in
resolution 1473 (2003), has proved to be realistic.

Germany welcomes the continued strengthening
of relations between Timor-Leste and Indonesia,
particularly regarding the important question of
demarcation and regulation of the common border. We
salute the recent joint statement instructing the joint
border committee to finalize agreement on the
international land boundary by 30 November 2003, and
we urge all concerned to ensure that this time line is
met. In our view, the establishment of good-
neighbourly relations with Indonesia is a key
prerequisite for the successful development of the
young State of Timor-Leste.

Germany welcomes the progress made in
strengthening the political and administrative
institutions of Timor-Leste, as outlined in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2003/944). We concur
with the Secretary-General that special focus should be
placed on the speedy resolution of the question of past
serious crimes, and that continued international
assistance is necessary for the building of an effective
civil administration.

We should also like to highlight the importance of
an adequate judicial system and of the enhanced
promotion of the rule of law as essential elements of
the new democracy. We fully share Kamalesh Sharma's
analysis, given to us today. We feel that an adequate
judicial system is the basis for all: for progress in
peace-building and in political, social and economic
development.

In spite of the achievements of the past three
years and in spite of continued progress, there are still
major tasks to be accomplished in the months and years
ahead. Our clear objective remains a stable democratic
Timor-Leste, independent of international assistance.
However, Germany recognizes that even after the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) has successfully concluded its mandate in
May 2004, the international community will have to
provide continued support to Timor-Leste.

Therefore, we fully agree with the Secretary-
General and with Mr. Sharma that it is timely to take
stock of what has been achieved so far and to begin
considering the best means through which the country's
needs can be met after the UNMISET withdrawal and
how best to preserve the success story which Timor-
Leste represents for the international community. In
that respect, we look forward to the Secretary-
General's report and proposals to the Security Council
to be issued in early 2004.

