Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like to thank Ambassador Denisov, Chairman of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), for his
briefing. For the past three months, under his
leadership, the CTC has carried out effective work,
which merits commendation by the Security Council.

During the transitional period of CTC reform, the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) has
been active. Here, we should like to express our
appreciation to Ambassador Ruperez, Director of the
CTED.

We welcome the CTC's fourteenth 90-day work
programme. We hope that the CTED will become fully
operational as soon as possible so that it can implement
the various points agreed by the Council on revitalizing
the CTC. In that connection, I should like to make
three brief points.

First, the CTC should assist in and promote the
formulation of a comprehensive counter-terrorism
strategy. The CTC is one of the Council's most forceful
mechanisms in the field of counter-terrorism; its
authority and legitimacy are widely recognized by all
sides. The CTC should continue to play a central role
in that field, including - in accordance with the
requirements of resolution 1566 (2004) - by
promoting best practices and formulating norms and
regulations in the field of counter-terrorism so as to
help Member States carry out their counter-terrorism
obligations. We support an early commencement of
work by the working group established under
resolution 1566 (2004) so that it can play an important
role in expanding the legal basis of, and common
understanding in, the field of counter-terrorism.

Secondly, the CTC should continue to strengthen
and improve its counter-terrorism assistance efforts by
assessing the assistance needs of Member States and by
serving as a bridge between donor countries and
recipient countries. It has played a beneficial role in
that regard. It should further utilize its advantages and
take practical measures to promote the integration of
resources among donor countries, United Nations
agencies and regional organizations so that counter-
terrorism assistance can have a greater practical result.
We hope that the CTC will carefully plan its first visits
to Member States, making those visits an important
way in which to strengthen its dialogue with Member
States and to meet their assistance needs.

Thirdly, we welcome the CTC's fourth special
meeting with international, regional and subregional
organizations, to be jointly hosted by the
Commonwealth of Independent States and the
Government of Kazakhstan. We hope that that meeting
will further promote cooperation between the CTC and
the relevant organizations in the counter-terrorism
field. We also support continued strengthening of the
coordination and communication among the CTC, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and the 1566 working group.

