Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My country thanks the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea for convening this open meeting to
once again address the deep political, economic, social
and humanitarian crisis in Venezuela. We also thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for the important briefing she
delivered to the Council.
Ecuador reaffirms the right ofallpeoples ofthe world
to democracy and the obligation of their Governments
to promote and defend it. Likewise, we reiterate the
constitutional and democratically elected authority of
the National Assembly of Venezuela, as well as our firm
support for the actions taken to request international
humanitarian aid, the release of political prisoners, the
freezing of the assets of corrupt Government officials
and the provision of guarantees to civilian and military
officials who support the restoration of democracy and
the rule of law in Venezuela.

Ecuador's belief in the urgent need to reach a
political, peaceful and democratic solution to the
crisis in Venezuela has been confirmed by the recent
acts of violence in connection with the blockade of
humanitarian aid shipments. Ecuador rejects the use
of public force and the action of paramilitary groups
against peaceful demonstrators, as well as condemns
that such acts led to the death and injuries suffered
by some of those demonstrators, as was the case of
Venezuelans from the indigenous community of Pemon.

Independent information gives an account of
the urgent needs of a good part of the Venezuelan
population for medicine and food, and of the suffering
resulting from the economic and institutional crisis
that has led more than 3 million to migrate to other
nations. The delivery of essential goods to the poor
should not be prevented by blockades or acts of force
against those who want to facilitate it; on the contrary,
it is necessary to seek channels of coordination that
promote it, regardless of considerations that are not
strictly humanitarian.

The shortages and conflicts in Venezuela demand an
immediate political solution in order to avoid additional
negative effects on its people and the region. Urgent
understandings are required to lead to free elections,
without exclusions of any kind, transparent and with
guarantees of neutrality from transitional authorities
and international observation, within the framework
of Venezuelan law. Only democratic legitimacy will
guarantee the future institutional stability of the
country and restore the economy and social order,
which is the responsibility of Venezuelans and will
require the support of the international community.

Our country has always shown its solidarity with
the Venezuelan people, which is why we have welcomed
more than 240,000 Venezuelans into our territory,
of whom about 101,000 already have a regular-stay
visa, not including international protection visas.
Furthermore, on 8 and 9 April, Ecuador will convene
the third regional meeting on the problem created by
the migration of 3 million Venezuelans, which will
serve to structure a joint work plan to solve the greatest
humanitarian problem in our region.

It should be noted that Ecuador is also the Latin
American country with the highest number of
recognized refugees: 63,537 people from more than
70 countries. Since 2016, Ecuador has received a
significant number of requests for refugee status from
Venezuelan citizens.

Ecuador does not support a military intervention in
Venezuela. The solution to the Venezuelan crisis will be
achieved only through dialogue and consultation. We
call for continued work to ensure that Venezuela has a
peaceful transition to a democratic path that safeguards
and guarantees the integrity, exercise and full respect
for the human rights of its people.

