Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to warmly thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his
briefing, as well as for the excellent work that he and
his team carry out in service of Colombia. I also thank
the Co-Director of the Corporacion de Investigacion
y Accion Social y Economica, Ms. Rosa Emilia
Salamanca, for her and her organization's commitment.
Allow me also to warmly welcome the presence of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, His
Excellency Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo. His presence
here with us is especially important and appreciated.

Colombia is at a turning point in its history. Two
years after the disarmament and political reintegration
of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia-
People's Army (FARC-EP) began, in the context of a
historic peace process for the country, the continent
and the United Nations, it is essential to successfully
complete the reincorporation process.

The Colombian President has repeatedly
reaffirmed publicly his commitment to implement the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, which is, of course, a key
point. We welcome that commitment, as well as the
political will and ambition to build broad consensus,
bringing together all political trends, including political
actors that are sceptical about the 2016 peace agreement.
Success - and dare we say the model - in Colombia
is also a source of expectations from the international
community, which stands firmly at Colombia's side in
that process. Allow me to mention three aspects that are
of importance to us all.

First, it is essential that transitional justice, at the
heart of the Colombian peace process, be preserved.
As such, the early adoption of the statutory law on the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace will help that institution
fully assert its authority. At this juncture, we call on all
political actors to respect the decisions taken by that
Jurisdiction. As the Special Representative mentioned,
significant work has already been done, with several
cases under review that likely involve more than 800,000
victims. Caught between the resentment of part of the
population and feelings of legal and physical insecurity
among former combatants, the Colombian authorities
face the difficult task of maintaining and strengthening
bonds of trust that unite all actors in the peace process.
The success of the Colombian model depends upon
it. Among the issues that may raise concerns, I would
like to mention the constitutional reform process; it is
essential to reiterate it is not retroactive.

Secondly, economic and social reintegration is the
other key to a successful and lasting peace process.
Progress has been made under the leadership of the
National Reintegration Council to approve more
collective and individual projects. The challenge now
is to accelerate the overall implementation of the
reincorporation process and address the issue of access
to land. The plan of the Office of High Counsellor
Archila is therefore to be commended. Clarifications
are also expected on the future of the regrouping
and reintegration areas, which must be decided on
in conjunction with former FARC-EP members.
As I mentioned earlier, bonds of trust, which are
strengthened by such consultations, must be the central
to all efforts.

We also encourage the Colombian Government to
fully integrate the gender equality dimension, as well
as the role of youth, in the reincorporation process. The
peace process will gain legitimacy ifit is representative
of the diversity and vitality of Colombia's civil society,
which Ms. Salamanca perfectly embodies. The projects
carried out by the Verification Mission to implement
the women and peace and security and the youth and
peace and security agendas also contribute to that end.
Finally, and this will be my last point, the fragile
security situation in the former conflict areas must be
an obvious priority. Despite the measures announced
by the Colombian authorities over the past two years,
human rights defenders, particularly women, as well as
former combatants, remain the main targets of criminal
groups. As part of the ongoing efforts of the Colombian
authorities, the deployment of basic State services
appears essential to stabilizing the areas in question.
As the departmental and municipal elections approach
next October, the necessary measures must be taken to
ensure that this democratic exercise is conducted under
the best possible conditions.

I would say to Foreign Minister Trujillo that his
country is taking a new path towards peace and national
reconciliation, which is also a historic chapter in its
history. The courage and ambition that he expresses day
after day is a source of pride for Colombia and a source
of inspiration for the whole world. In that context, we
hope that the challenges that remain to be overcome,
of which I have mentioned three, will be seen in the
near future as great achievements of the Colombian
Government. Whatever the difficulties encountered
on this demanding path, Colombia knows that it can
always count on the fraternal support of France.

