Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay voted in favour of draft resolution S/2016/ 1085.
We are aware of the grave humanitarian, human rights
and security situation that South Sudan is experiencing
as a result of a profound political crisis, and of the
fact that those responsible for that crisis are the main
political and military leaders. We regret that the draft
resolution put to the vote today could not garner the
necessary amount of positive votes for its adoption.
My delegation believes that, given the critical current
situation in the country, the implementation of the
measures provided for in the draft resolution would
have helped to bolster political dialogue and avoid
further loss of civilian lives.

As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said in the
Security Council on Monday, 19 December, an arms
embargo "would diminish the capacity of all sides in
the conflict to wage war" (S/PV. 7846, p. 2). Without
the embargo, South Sudan would continue to be in
permanent confrontation. An arms embargo would
also clearly contribute to stopping the proliferation of
weapons around the country, which, given the current
situation of instability and insecurity, has proven to
be a risk factor and an ongoing threat to the civilian
population. As we have already said, the embargo
would have facilitated dialogue and negotiation and,
moreover, would have allowed the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan to carry out its
work with more guarantees.

Uruguay reiterates that the Government has the
primary responsibility for protecting its own Citizens. It
must provide such protection regardless of its citizens'
ethnic origin or political affiliation. Therefore, the
political leaders of South Sudan must act responsibly
and reject any incitement of violence, while at the same
time committing themselves to the path of dialogue.
On that point, we urge all parties to join in a process
of inclusive and transparent dialogue, with a view to
achieving reconciliation and peace in the country so as
to put an end to the long suffering of its inhabitants.

