Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this important meeting on the humanitarian
situation in my country.

We have repeatedly stated in this Chamber and
beyond that the humanitarian crisis in Syria cannot end
if we do not deal with the root of the problem, which
is the spread of foreign-backed terrorism. That has
to accompany a Syrian-Syrian dialogue under Syrian
leadership, without foreign intervention. That is the
substance of the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), Kofi Annan's six-point plan and what we
achieved at the Geneva II talks, as well as the first
and second Moscow conferences. It is the only serious
path to ending what is called the crisis in Syria and
to improving the humanitarian situation in a tangible,
genuine and sustainable manner.

The people's suffering cannot be completely
alleviated simply by providing some humanitarian aid
in one region or another, although we are fully aware
of the importance of providing such assistance and of
alleviating the suffering in the areas concerned. Recent
developments have proved us right, since despite
the fact that six humanitarian response plans were
adopted in cooperation with the Syrian Government,
taken all together they have still been unable to end
the humanitarian crisis. In fact, we have seen new
humanitarian crises develop in some previously safe
areas in the wake of the incursions by some terrorist
groups, such as we have seen in Palmyra, Idlib, Jisr
Al-Shughur and today in the city of Ariha, in Idlib.
That has resulted in the killing or displacement of a
large number of innocent Syrians and robbed them of
their livelihoods and dignity. It confirms once again
that the humanitarian crisis, including the issues of
internal displacement and refugees, has occurred only
in areas entered by armed terrorist organizations.

It is therefore crucial that the Security Council's
resolutions on fighting terrorism be implemented,
particularly resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and
2199 (2015), along with resolution 1624 (2005), which
prohibits incitement to terrorism, and that they be
implemented in full cooperation and coordination with
the Syrian Government. That would put an end to the
alliance between Turkey, Qatar and Saudi Arabia that
supports, finances and arms the terrorist groups and
which is supported politically and in the media by its
paymasters and foreign sponsors.

But the problem is that some influential States
are not serious about fighting terrorism, especially
terrorism as it is practised by the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria (ISIS) and organizations affiliated with
it. That is used by some countries to exert pressure
to prevent any coordination between Syria and Iraq
in fighting ISIS. That policy was made manifest this
morning when the General Assembly adopted resolution
69/281, on saving Iraqi artifacts. Syria was a sponsor of
that resolution. However, Western countries threatened
Iraq by saying that if Syrian artifacts were mentioned
the draft resolution would not be adopted - as if Iraqi
heritage were different from Syrian heritage, or ISIS in
Syria were different from ISIS in Iraq, and as if those
benefiting were two separate parties with no affiliation
with each other.

That general problem is also confirmed by the fact
that ISIS continues to obtain weapons and attract new
recruits to its ranks. The percentage of foreign fighters
in ISIS increased to 70 per cent after the adoption of
resolution 2178 (2014). That was also the testimony of
the Security Council's Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, established pursuant to resolution
1526 (2004). In paragraph 33 of its recent report on
foreign terrorist fighters (S/2015/358), the Monitoring
Team, the Council's own experts, confirmed that the
primary movement routes of foreign terrorists into
Syria and Iraq ran through Turkey and, to a lesser
degree, Jordan and Lebanon.

Many Council member States often affirm, both
inside and outside the Council - as do the Secretary-
General and the senior staff of the Secretariat - that the
only possible solution to the crisis in Syria is a political
rather than a military one. However, it is obvious that this
is simply a slogan for political and media consumption.

How can we speak of a political solution when, as we
heard only a few days ago, the Turkish Minister for
Foreign Affairs states that his country has an agreement
with the United States to provide air support to terrorist
groups in Syria? How can they claim to be rejecting
a military solution when they are providing support
to terrorists and opening training camps for them in
Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Jordan, in the name
of a moderate Syrian armed opposition? However, the
real question we have for those States and for their
representatives in this Chamber is this: Where is that
moderate armed opposition on the map of Syria? Is it
in Palmyra, in Idlib, in Jisr Al-Shughur or Derizor? Or
maybe in Qalamoun, on our border with Lebanon? And
what is the fate of the weapons and funds supplied to
that moderate armed opposition?

It is no longer possible to continue misleading,
defrauding and hiding behind the slogan of a moderate
armed opposition in order to justify supporting
terrorism. How can Chechen, Australian, British,
French, Moroccan and Libyan citizens be part of a
moderate Syrian opposition? It is very simple. Things
have become crystal clear. There is no lawful terrorism
and sinful terrorism - no halal and haram - just as
there is no moderate and extremist terrorism. There are
terrorist movements on the ground committing atrocious
crimes with the support or acquiescence of some
influential countries within and outside the Council.
There is ISIS, the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist
groups that are allied with those two organizations and
cooperate and work with them.

Was it not ISIS that stormed Palmyra? Was it not the
Al-Nusra Front that stormed Idlib and Jisr Al-Shughur
recently, and the town of Ariha today, using the name
Jaish Al-Fatah? Of course, before it was the Jaish
Al-Fatah it was known as the Al-Shamiya Front. And
before that, it was known as the Syrian Front, the Syrian
Revolutionaries, the Hazam Movement, and so on as in
a Hollywood series in which we see one episode after
another.

Did not the Qatari Al-Jazeera television channel
yesterday invite Al-Julani, the commander of the
terrorist Al-Nusra Front, so that he could inform us that
there is now sharia law in Syria, and so that Qatar, in
turn, could inform us in that interview that the terrorist
Al-Nusra Front is a form of moderate terrorism that
can be "laundered" just as mafia gangs launder dirty
money? And after all that, there are still people who
speak of a moderate armed opposition. Tomorrow we
shall observe some people saying that the Security
Council must remove the Al-Nusra Front from the lists
of terrorist entities. I wager before all of you that this
will happen soon.

Once again, the latest report (S/2015/368) of the
Secretary- General on the implementation of resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) contains
many omissions and serious errors. Today we sent two
identical letters to the President of the Security Council
and to the Secretary-General in that regard. However,
I shall only mention here that all the allegations
contained in the report against the Syrian Government
are based on undisclosed sources. The report uses the
term "reportedly" 15 times when allegations were made
against the Syrian Government, but no information is
provided regarding the source of those reports or their
credibility.

Even worse, the report goes further than that and
makes allegations against the Syrian Government,
including that it uses so-called barrel bombs, without
even once using the term "reportedly", as if that matter
was a proven fact. That is exactly what happened with
regard to crimes in which terrorists, aided by Turkey,
used chemical substances in Khan Al-Assel and other
localities, and when chlorine gas and sarin gas were
used in other areas. How can reports by the Secretary-
General make allegations against the Government of
a State Member of the United Nations without basing
them on reliable sources and without reading, taking
note of or referring to the reports, letters, evidence and
statements submitted by the Syrian Government during
the past four years? This is a very serious precedent
that will undermine what remains of the credibility of
the Secretariat in its handling of humanitarian issues
in Syria, unless it takes the credible and rapid action
required to avoid such a situation.

I should also like to draw attention to the fact that
the report fails to mention that the Turkish Government
has allowed thousands of trucks to enter Syria illegally
through checkpoints used by United Nations convoys
bringing in humanitarian aid, and has used them to
transport terrorists, weapons and dangerous materials
to armed terrorist groups in Syria. That has endangered
the United Nations convoys themselves - as we
warned Ms. Amos when she asked the Security Council
to adopt resolutions 2165 (2014).

Furthermore, the unilateral economic measures
imposed on the Syrian people are yet another cause of
their humanitarian suffering. Those unjust and illegal
measures must therefore be lifted and the funding
gap for humanitarian activities in Syria addressed.
Only 17 per cent of the funding required for the 2015
Strategic Response Plan has been raised. This proves,
once again, that certain countries, including, first and
foremost, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Turkey and certain
Western countries, only want to use the humanitarian
crisis in Syria as a way to traffic commodities, as a
means of political extortion and to further their own
interventionist agendas.

The Syrian Government has cooperated with the
United Nations to facilitate the provision of humanitarian
assistance to all civilians. On 9 April, it agreed to most
of the requests made by the United Nations and other
international organizations to ensure the provision of
aid to certain unstable areas. As of 27 May, that is to
say as of yesterday, even though the Syrian Government
has granted permission forjoint United Nations agency
convoys to transport humanitarian assistance to
difficult-to-reach or unstable areas, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has been able to
provide only 30 per cent of what has been authorized.
The Syrian Government is, moreover, now considering
requests for permission to be granted for more joint
convoys.

Let me say onne final word. I hope this was a
problem of interpretation, but while she was addressing
the Council, I heard the Under-Secretary-General say
"on behalf of the Syrian people". This is what the
interpreter said. On behalf of my Government, I cannot
allow the Under-Secretary-General to address the
Council saying that she is speaking on behalf of the
Syrian people. She is a representative of the Secretariat
and this international Organization. This oversteps
her mandate and the functions of Secretariat staff
members. She is not Syrian and she has no post in Syria
that allows her to speak on behalf of the Syrian people.

