Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2357 (2017). In that
regard, I wish to stress the following points.

First, the resolution that we have just adopted
addresses only one ofthe many challenges facing Libya,
namely, the interception and inspection of ships bearing
illegal shipments of weapons. I note that the security
challenges facing our brother country Libya go far
beyond the issue of arms smuggling to extremist groups
and terrorists. The international community in general,
and the Security Council in particular, must therefore
firmly counter the grave challenges facing Libya, given
the fact that certain States of the region are funding
those terrorist and extremist groups and facilitating the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters to Libya and beyond
to a wider geographical circle, including through the
Mediterranean Sea.

Secondly, we must make further efforts to intercept
and inspect vessels suspected of carrying weapons to
and from Libya. We are confident that the volume of
smuggled weapons is far greater than those which are
intercepted or stopped. We have therefore called for
a more determined and resolute implementation of
the embargo.

Thirdly, we again ask the international community
and the Security Council to lift the arms embargo
imposed on the Libyan armed forces, which have
shown that they are the cornerstone of Libya's defence
against terrorism. The Security Council must therefore
help the Libyan armed forces to fully assume their
responsibilities to protect Libya and their neighbours
and countries further afield.

In conclusion, I reiterate the need to reach a
political solution to the Libyan crisis, including
through the timely convening of a joint committee
of the House of Representatives and the High State
Council to agree the necessary consensus amendments
to the Libyan Political Agreement, and the formation of
a Government of national unity that would represent all
parties in Libya and enjoy the trust of Parliament.

