Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries Albania, Montenegro, the Republic
of North Macedonia and Serbia; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.

Let me start by thanking Mrs. Retno Marsudi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs ofthe Republic oflndonesia,
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, Mr. Peter Mauer,
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, and Mr. Federico Borello, Executive Director of
the Center for Civilians in Conflict.

The protection of civilians remains of the
utmost concern to the EU and its member States.
We welcome the opportunity today to speak on this
important topic. We also welcome the Secretary-
General's report (S/2019/373), along with the practical
recommendations therein.

Looking back at the state of protecting civilians
over the past 20 years, we can identify a number of
achievements. However, it is very clear that fundamental
challenges remain. I would like to address a number of
areas that are of particular concern to us, and where the
EU and its member States have taken steps to advance
protection efforts.

First, the recurrent failure of parties to an armed
conflict to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law continues to be one
of the most critical challenges for the protection of
civilians. That is not merely a catchphrase here in the
Council but it impacts the lives of numerous civilians
worldwide on a daily basis. Indiscriminate attacks
against civilian populations, the recurrence of attacks
against medical facilities, schools and humanitarian
workers, and the arbitrary denial of humanitarian
access to people in need are all unacceptable, yet they
are reported on a nearly daily basis. We recognize
the challenges associated with the use of explosive
weapons in densely populated areas and their impact
on civilians. We call on all parties to armed conflict
to fully comply with the principles and rules of
international humanitarian law. Promoting compliance
with international humanitarian law and respect for
humanitarian principles has always been, and remains,
a top priority for the EU and its member States. The
EU is also especially supporting efforts to safeguard
principled humanitarian assistance with respect to
counter-terrorism measures and sanctions.

It is our collective responsibility to ensure
respect for international law, including international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and to hold
those who violate it accountable. Civilian victims
of unimaginable atrocities need and deserve justice.
That rings particularly true as we reflect on the
seventieth anniversary of the adoption of the 1949
Geneva Conventions. Within the EU, there has been
an increasing number of prosecutions under national
jurisdiction against those who commit grave breaches
of international humanitarian law. The EU also
maintains strong support for international justice and
accountability, including the work of the International
Criminal Court, and urges all States Members of
the United Nations to do the same. Let us bridge the
gap between what is being said in the Council and
everyday practice.

Secondly, as a leading humanitarian donor, the EU
specifically focuses on ensuring that our assistance
extends beyond the material needs of persons to the
broader issues of personal safety and dignity. Many of
the crises of today are indeed crises of protection. That
is why over the past five years, the EU has provided
more than €1 billion for protection activities.

Forced displacement is one of the most common
and severe consequences of armed conflict, causing
multiple humanitarian needs and protection concerns.
Internally displaced persons (IDPs) are among the
most vulnerable and access to persons of concern
is a particular challenge, as IDPs often live in direct
proximity to armed conflicts. In addition, States often
lack the means and laws to protect and help them
rebuild their lives and help those left behind. Apart
from strengthening the protection of and assistance for
the forcibly displaced, increased efforts are needed to
prevent and resolve armed conflicts and other forms
of violence in order to address the root causes of
forced displacement.

Thirdly, as the report of the Secretary-General
highlights, persons with disabilities continue to be
disproportionately affected by humanitarian crises.
The European Union is a key proponent of the rights
of people with disabilities. In past years, we have taken
a number of measures, including the elaboration of a
dedicated guidance document to ensure that the specific
needs of persons with disabilities are adequately
addressed in EU-funded humanitarian assistance.

Fourthly, sexual and gender-based violence
continues to be employed as a tactic of war, terrorism,
torture and repression. It is a common and alarming
trend across various, otherwise diverse crises. The
victims - women and girls, men and boys - are often
those already belonging to the most vulnerable groups.
We therefore welcome the adoption of resolution 2467
(2019) as a step forward in the fight against conflict-
related sexual Violence, in particular the strong
language on criminal accountability, the role of civil
society, as well as a survivor-centred approach. In that
regard, the European Union reaffirms the importance of
the provision of comprehensive sexual and reproductive
health services.

Between 2017 and 2018, the EU allocated
approximately €62 million to prevent and respond
to sexual and gender-based violence. It is absolutely
imperative that a gender perspective be incorporated
into protection efforts, including humanitarian action.
To that end, the EU remains committed, among other
initiatives, to the Call to Action on Protection from
Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies. Today a
specific conference is taking place on the topic in Oslo.
We commend the organizers for drawing attention to
that important topic and we hope that the outcomes
of the conference will improve the prevention and
protection from gender-based violence in emergencies.

The European Union is a leader in the promotion,
protection and fulfilment of the rights of the child,
including their right to education. In 2019, 10 per cent
of EU humanitarian aid will support children with safe
and quality education activities. The EU is strongly
committed to the protection of schools and education
in situations of conflict and welcomes initiatives, such
as the Safe Schools Declaration and the Guidelines for
Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use
during Armed Conflict, in that regard.

Finally, we continue to underscore that the protection
ofcivilians must be at the core ofpeacekeeping mandates,
in line with the Kigali Principles on the Protection of
Civilians. Peacekeepers must protect civilians and
be able and prepared to use force when civilians are
under threat of physical violence, consistent with clear
mandates, while operations must be equipped with
the necessary tools in that regard. That includes but is
not limited to the necessary equipment, as well as the
necessary training.

Peacekeepers also play a critical role in protecting
children in armed conflict. Well-trained child protection
focal points and their cooperation with civilian child
protection advisers are essential to ensuring not
only the effective monitoring and reporting of grave
violations, but also that children associated with armed
forces and groups are treated with special consideration
for their status as children. In that context, we would
like to emphasize the importance of strengthening
the recording of casualties through United Nations
operations in order to support evidence-based advocacy
with parties to conflict and to identify factors that
contribute to civilian casualties.

Additionally, Member States should strive to
improve the gender balance in all components of
peacekeeping operations in order to achieve a more
equitable gender representation and to improve the
capacity ofmissions to reach all segments ofthe civilian
population. We therefore welcome all efforts in that
direction, in particular the United Nations system-wide
strategy on gender parity and the recently approved
Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy 2018-2028.

