Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I thank all the briefers for their participation
in this meeting and for their valuable contributions to
today's discussion.

Our delegation fully shares concerns over the
unprecedented damage done to cultural heritage by
supporters of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS), Jabhat Al-Nusra and other terrorist groups
operating in Iraq, Syria, Libya and other conflict zones.
We believe that stamping out barbaric terrorism should
be the specific goal of the international community in
this sphere. Proceeds from the trade in cultural heritage
remain one of the main sources ofISIS financing.

Over the past two years, the Council has made
significant progress in developing instruments to
combat the financing of terrorism. Resolutions 2199
(2015) and 2253 (2015), prepared with the very active
participation of our own delegation, touched on the
issue of cultural heritage. At Russia's request, changes
were made to the universal Financial Action Task Force
standards on combating financing of terrorism, in
line with those Security Council resolutions, which is
welcomed in resolution 2347 (2017), adopted today.

However, the international community has
not yet been able to fully cut off ISIS financing.
In those circumstances, further work is needed
to create a system that fully rules out any kind of
economic cooperation with terrorists and establishes
a comprehensive embargo on trade with ISIS. In the
resolution just adopted, provisions are included, inter
alia, on sanctions against persons and entities that aid
and abet the trade in cultural heritage. We again call
on all States to immediately submit to the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, any information that they have on sources of
funding for terrorists, including evidence of acquisition
of artefacts from territory under the control of ISIS and
Jabhat Al-Nusra.

Urgent measures are needed to maintain for future
generations the priceless treasure of culture in areas
where terrorists and radicals are active. This issue
is perhaps most pressing in Syria. The symbol of the
trials and tribulations of the long-suffering people of
that country was the ancient city of Palmyra, a jewel
of human civilization. That city, which was seized and
destroyed by terrorists, has now been liberated. It is our
duty to help restore and give that monument back to the
Syrians and the entire world.

The first step in that regard must be erasing the
footprints of those who turned Palmyra into an arena for
the demonstration of their inhumane, futile ideology,
and a place of torture and crime. Palmyra is literally
sown with mines and unexploded ordinance, preventing
a genuine assessment of the destruction and attempts
at restoration. Russia is already working to address
this task, and those efforts would be helped by the
creation of an international coalition on the demining
of Syrian territory. We urge all partners involved in
maintaining historical heritage to set aside their well-
known differences and to do their part in a common
undertaking, which will require, inter alia, significant
financial investment. It is vitally important that today
the Council has called on Member States, United Nations
specialized agencies and other international structures
to provide assistance in demining places of cultural
heritage. We expect to see the active involvement of the
United Nations Secretariat, UNESCO and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in such
efforts in Palmyra.

A leading role in the preservation og cultural
heritage is played by UNESCO. We support the Strategy
for Reinforcing UNESCO's Action for the Protection of
Culture and the Promotion of Cultural Pluralism in the
Event of Armed Conflict. In developing this document
at the fourth Saint Petersburg Cultural Forum, we
adopted a declaration on the protection of culture in
armed conflict zones. It is necessary to pull together
and forge coordination among the various international
initiatives on protecting cultural heritage, thereby
ensuring full effectiveness, including through a proper
division of labour. For example, we need to avoid a
situation whereby the international fund to safeguard
endangered cultural heritage in areas of armed
conflict, as announced in Abu Dhabi, would duplicate
or even compete with the work of the UNESCO World
Heritage Fund.

Once again, the scale of illegal trade in cultural
heritage is testament to the links between terrorists and
organized crime groups. The resolution just adopted
again addresses this problem by building on the
relevant provisions of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 2195
(2014). It also reflects important elements from General
Assembly resolution 69/281 with regard to preventing
illegal trade in cultural heritage. We support the
strengthening and active use of the scientific analytical
capacities of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) in this sphere, including the provision
of specialized technical assistance to States. We note
the contribution of UNODC in combating crimes
against cultural heritage.

Once again, we wish to reiterate Russia's
commitment to combating international terrorism and
our willingness to develop specialized cooperation
with all interested parties in combating the destruction
of and illegal trade in cultural heritage.

In accordance with tradition, I must say a few
words following the statement delivered by the
Ukranian delegation. It showed that Ukraine used
this discussion in the Council of a noble task - the
protection of cultural heritage - just as it has always
used discussions on any topic in a multilateral setting
to continue its information propaganda war against
Russia. This is a source of grave concern and we shall
not respond to the inappropriate remarks they made.

