Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): The
United States welcomes today's open debate, and we
thank Ambassador Perceval for her diligent work as
Chair of the Council's Informal Working Group on
Documentation and other Procedural Questions.

Our discussions of the working methods of the
Council are important to ensuring that this body
remains able to address the challenges of the twenty-
first century. On behalf ofthe membership ofthe United
Nations, the Council has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security. It
is essential that, in carrying out that role, its work be as
effective, efficient and transparent as possible. Article
30 of the Charter mandates the Council to adopt its own
rules of procedure. In doing so, we must recognize the
need for other Member States, which play a vital role in
supporting and enforcing our decisions, to be informed
of and appropriately involved in the Council's work.

Peacekeeping is one of the most important tools
that the international community has at its disposal, and
we recognize the importance of close cooperation with
troop- and police-contributing countries. We therefore
welcome the fact that the Informal Working Group
recently considered ways in which such cooperation
could be strengthened. We continue to urge both
Council members and troop- and police-contributing
countries to take full advantage of the private meetings
the Council holds in advance of each mandate renewal.
In addition to formal meetings, the Council may
need at times to meet informally with troop- and
police-contributing countries to discuss urgent issues
that may arise. The Council didjust that in May when the
troop contributors to the United Nations Diseangement
Observer Force (UNDOF) met with Council members
to discuss the deteriorating security environment in
UNDOF's area of operations and threats to United
Nations peacekeepers there. That productive exchange
contributed to the development of solutions to overcome
the new challenges that UNDOF peacekeepers faced.
We should consider such meetings in future for other
peacekeeping operations, when appropriate.

Increased cooperation with regional and other
relevant organizations has been a hallmark of our work
during the past 12 months. Yesterday's ministerial-level
meeting on strengthening cooperation with the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (see S/PV.7050)
marked a deepening of the Council's ties with that
important organization. On Yemen, the Secretary-
General of the Gulf Cooperation Council briefed
the Security Council on the implementation of the
transition plan at a high-level meeting in September
(see S/PV.7037). Finally, the open debate in August
presided over by President Fernandez of Argentina
(see S/PV.70lS) allowed Member States to discuss the
Council's cooperation with a range of regional and
subregional organizations. The presidential statement
adopted during that meeting (S/PRST/2013/l2) is a
useful compilation of the Council's practice in this area.

The Council has continued to welcome the Chairs
of the various country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission to participate in Council
meetings. The United States has consistently pushed
for greater transparency in the work of subsidiary
bodies. The Counter-Terrorism Committee has held
more open meetings and has increased its interaction
with civil society during the past year. Sanctions
Committee Chairs have also organized open briefings
for the broader United Nations membership to discuss
sanctions regime objectives and committee activities.
The Council's continued use ofArria Formula meetings
and its extension of invitations to non-governmental
organizations and expert briefers, such as the important
meeting in July with the members of the Syrian
opposition coalition, are an important tool for us to
better hear views beyond those of Member States. We
should take advantage of opportunities to make greater
use of that format.

As President of the Security Council in July,
the United States was responsible for preparing the
Council's general report to the General Assembly
(A/68/2), which is scheduled for adoption tomorrow. In
summarizing the Council's work over the course of the
year, we aim to strike a careful balance to maintain a
useful amount of substance while also keeping the report
as concise and legible as possible. We hope the report
will be a useful tool for those interested in reviewing
the Council's work. In the same vein, my delegation
organized a briefing at the end of our presidency to
share the highlights of the month with Member States.
We believe that such informal briefings offer the
greatest opportunity for a meaningful discussion of the
Council's work with the broader membership.

A more effective Security Council must remain our
collective goal. Increased transparency by the Council
and engagement with the broader United Nations
membership can support that goal. But proposals must
be carefully assessed to ensure that transparency and
effectiveness are mutually reinforcing and not at cross-
purposes.

