Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I,
too, should like to thank the High Representative,
Valentin Inzko, for his briefing, as well as, of course,
his longstanding work for all Bosnians. I welcome
also the presence here among us of the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Luxembourg wishes to associate itself with the
statement to be made later by the observer of the
European Union.

The security situation remained calm and stable
during the period covered by the report of the High
Representative (S/2014/777). Bosnia's authorities were
able to preserve that secure environment. The European
Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR) did not have to intervene to restore peace.
This has been the case for a long time now, and this is
something that all of us should welcome.
However, we regret the fact that the Bosnian
authorities and political leaders were not able to
move forward a whole set of reforms, including the
setting up of the necessary conditions to ensure
that the country is able to progress on the path to
Euro-Atlantic integration. We are also concerned by the
separatist rhetoric - rhetoric likely to sow the seeds
of division - that continues to be heard from several
political leaders, especially those of the Republika
Srpska.

The successful holding of elections on 12 October
presents an opportunity to give renewed impetus to the
reforms that will be crucial to the country's sustainable
development. The top priority should be continuing
talks between the political leaders with a view to
forming a new Government, capable of responding to
the legitimate concerns of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
citizens, as soon as possible.

The challenges are many. The people expect their
elected officials to take the necessary measures to
improve the country's socioeconomic situation, which
was weakened even more by the severe floods that hit
Bosnia and Herzegovina in May. The international
community as a whole, and the European Union
in particular, have been standing by Bosnia and
Herzegovina through their provision of significant aid
aimed at dealing with the flood damage, including mine
clearance, and supporting the country at the economic
level, especially through the Compact for Growth
launched in Sarajevo in May.

The newly elected representatives will also have
to enact the institutional reforms that Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs in order to make progress towards
Euro-Atlantic integration, a pathway that corresponds
to the desires of the great majority of Bosnians. In that
regard, implementing the decision of the European
Court of Human Rights in the Sejdie-Finci case will be
particularly significant, since it ensures the equality of
all citizens before the law. Euro-Atlantic integration is
part and parcel of the international community's strategy
aimed at ensuring Bosnia and Herzegovina's integrity,
stability and prosperity, which has been consistently
shared and reaffirmed by the country's political
leaders at every level, including the presidency. In that
context, the European Union is providing Bosnia and
Herzegovina's institutions and citizens with ongoing,
concrete and multifaceted support in the areas of the
rule of law, institutional reform designed to establish
an effective system of governance, the maintenance of
public order and security, and economic reform.

With today's adoption of resolution 2183 (2014),
which extends the mandate of the European-led
peacekeeping force's Operation Althea for 12 months,
the Security Council has reaffirmed the international
community's support for the European Union's active
involvement in promoting Bosnia and Herzegovina's
stability and security, with the close cooperation of the
Office of the High Representative and the international
community.

Throughout its tenure as a member of the Security
Council, Luxembourg has reaffirmed its conviction that
Bosnia and Herzegovina's future as a united, sovereign,
multi-ethnic, stable, prosperous State, enjoying full
territorial integrity, does indeed lie within the European
Union. It can continue to count on Luxembourg's
support in the future in achieving its European destiny.

