Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation
congratulates you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month and
pays tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Kishore
Mahbubani of Singapore, for his outstanding leadership
ofthe Council last month.

We commend you on your timely initiative in
convening this meeting of the Council on this
important subject, coinciding with the fourth high-level
meeting at United Nations Headquarters between the
United Nations and regional organizations. I trust that
our deliberations today will provide useful inputs to
this high-level meeting, particularly in the context of
the supportive but important roles of regional
organizations vis-a-vis the United Nations in the area
of peace-building.

We all recognize the integral relationship between
the maintenance of international peace and security, on
the one hand, and peace-building, on the other. There is
clearly a need for a more integrated, holistic approach
in dealing with the two processes. Indeed, in a
fragmented approach to dealing with peacemaking,
peacekeeping, economic development, humanitarian
assistance, refugees and institution-building - which
are all important aspects of peace-building - the
various components can sometimes work at cross
purposes with each other, resulting in petty
bureaucratic rivalries and jealousies and turf battles,
when none should exist at all. These components must
be glued together through a coordination of efforts and
a pooling of resources if they are to make a real impact
on the ground.

Not just the Security Council, but the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council
(ECOSOC) also have their own important roles in the
area of peace-building. Given the comprehensive
nature of peace and the integral relationship between
peacekeeping, peacemaking and peace-building, there
should be increased consultations and coordination
between the Council, the Assembly and ECOSOC,
without prejudice to the competence of other organs
and agencies ofthe United Nations. We are encouraged
by this trend, as shown in the case of the United
Nations involvement in Haiti that evolved from the
United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti to the
International Civilian Support Mission in Haiti, which
we hope will be a model for United Nations
involvement in other conflict situations in the future.

A concrete action by the Council in the area of
peace-building is, obviously, to strengthen further the
post-conflict peace-building components of
peacekeeping operations, thereby increasing the
multidimensional character of these operations by co-
opting expertise and resources not only from troop-
contributing countries, but also from relevant United
Nations and other international agencies, including
non-governmental organizations operating in the area
of peace-building and related activities. This could be
more effectively done through consultations between
the Council and all other relevant organs of the United
Nations, such as ECOSOC, and other relevant
international agencies such as the World Bank, when a
peacekeeping operation is being designed or revised, in
much the same way the Council traditionally consults
with troop-contributing countries.

During these consultations there will be
identification of areas of responsibility between the
core elements of peacekeeping that belong to the
Council, and the equally important elements of peace-
building, particularly in the post-conflict period, that
more appropriately belong to other United Nations
organs, such as ECOSOC. Such close consultations
will allow for enhanced coordination oftheir respective
programmes and activities on the ground and a
seamless transition from one phase of the international
presence to another.

We believe the Security Council can be a catalyst
in enhancing interest in, and securing commitment to,
peace-building, particularly post-conflict peace-
building, by convening more open meetings in this
Chamber focusing on, inter alia, peace-building efforts
in conflict situations. Indeed, this has been done on a
number of occasions in the past. My delegation would
encourage further such meetings, focusing not only on
the need for sustained political/diplomatic support for
the peace process in a specific conflict situation, but
also on the peace-building needs of the war-ravaged
country concerned. Such an open meeting would afford
the opportunity for the international community to
appreciate the pressing needs of the people concerned
directly from their representative, the Secretariat and
the relevant United Nations agencies, as well as from
other international agencies that may be invited to
participate in these meetings.

Such meetings in the Council relating to aspects
of peace-building need not be at the expense of other
United Nations organs, as similar deliberations on
specific situations could take place in the General
Assembly or ECOSOC, perhaps in close coordination
with, and including appropriate inputs from, the
Security Council, thereby making more tangible the
cooperation among these important organs of the
United Nations.

Consultations and coordination between the
Security Council and ECOSOC in particular could
perhaps be effected through joint meetings of their
respective working groups. Indeed, on appropriate
occasions, it may not be inconceivable to have joint
meetings of the two Councils themselves to effect even
greater cooperation between them, if their rules of
procedure could be made more flexible. After all, they
are masters of their own procedures. Indeed, the basis
for close cooperation and interaction between the
Security Council and ECOSOC already exists in
Article 65 of the Charter, which we feel should be
more frequently invoked. The United Nations must find
creative and innovative ways of doing its work and not
allow itself to be constrained by restrictive procedures
or antiquated ways of doing things.

Coordinating peacekeeping and peace-building
activities and assisting a country by moving it from a
conflict situation to peace-building require strong and
effective leadership on the part of the United Nations.
The overall coordinator, of course, is the Secretary-
General himself, but he needs to be assisted by a
number of special representatives, coordinators,
transitional administrators or other high representatives
who he entrusts to carry out important tasks in the
field.
Clearly, in the face of more complex operations in
the field, this system must be further strengthened with
adequate resources, through the appointment of highly
competent and skilled United Nations officials to assist
the Secretary-General in dealing with the various
important actors. These would include the
Governments concerned, the relevant United Nations
agencies, the World Bank and other international
financial and funding institutions, as well as non-
governmental organizations and the private sector that
have programmes on the ground. Clearly, there is a role
here for skilful personal diplomacy on the part of the
Secretary-General, as well as on the part of the
representatives he appoints; hence the importance of
these appointments.

Peacekeeping operations alone do not guarantee
peace-building, which requires an integrated and
multifaceted approach. While peacekeeping operations
are aimed at creating an atmosphere of stability in the
short term, it is imperative that other measures be
instituted to address the post-conflict situation in the
medium and longer terms.

An important measure, which has now become an
indispensable component of current peacekeeping
operations, is the programme to disarm, demobilize and
reintegrate former combatants. Without the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, or DDR for short, there is always the risk
of a return to conflict when the presence of alienated
and disgruntled ex-combatants and easy availability of
arms can create a highly volatile situation. Some
aspects of DDR go beyond traditional peacekeeping;
hence the importance of an integrated approach to
peacekeeping operations and the need to co-opt other
actors in the broader context of peace-building.

The DDR programme is a potent instrument for
peace-building in that, when successfully implemented,
it will prevent a slide back to conflict. It should
therefore be strongly supported and strengthened with
the necessary funding by the international community.
Indeed, with DDR, as with all other aspects of
peacekeeping and peace-building, adequate funding is
crucial to the entire exercise. The issue of funding
therefore must be seriously addressed by all concerned.

It is not easy to draw a distinction between
peacekeeping and peace-building. In addition, while
some peace-building activities might occur only after a
peacekeeping operation ends, they also might well be
part of the peace accord which the peacekeeping
mission is intended to support. Peace-building does not
always start where peacekeeping stops. Peace-building
is a long-term process, lasting many years after a
conflict has ended. There is always a grey area or an
unavoidable overlap between them; hence the
importance of close coordination between the two
processes.

The lack of continuity between the different
stages of international action after a conflict can do
great damage to the effectiveness of peace-building
actions, in particular following the completion of an
operation's mandate. An appropriate transition must be
planned when the Security Council decides on the
ending of an operation. This strategy must be in place
in order to avoid an interruption of programmes or the
substitution of new partners that have a different
approach from that which was followed previously.
The Security Council had this in mind when it
deliberated on the topic "No exit without strategy"
under the presidency ofthe Netherlands last year.

In conclusion, my delegation looks forward to
concrete follow-up actions to this debate if we are
serious about making peace-building an important
business of the United Nations. Many ideas have been
discussed and suggestions made today; many other
ideas were offered by the Secretary-General in his
statement this morning, in addition to those in reports
that he has submitted to the Security Council and the
General Assembly. The time has come for us to take up
the challenge and to move from generalities to concrete
action. If this happens soon, this open meeting of the
Council, under your presidency, Sir, will have served
its purpose. Otherwise, this debate, like some others in
the past, will add to the burden of inaction which, I am
sorry to say, has sometimes characterized the workings
of our Organization.

