Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Once again, I am pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over
this important meeting, just as you did the other day on
an another item of tremendous relevance to you and to
all of us.

The Council's programme of work will surely be
considerably enriched by this debate; by the
contributions of all delegations and Council members;
by the very important statements of Ambassador
Simonovie, speaking on behalf of the Economic and
Social Council, and Ambassador Kebe, speaking on
behalf of the Organization of African Unity (OAU);
and, most especially, by all the efforts of the ad hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa, under the guidance of Ambassador Koonjul.

Following the agreed procedure for this meeting,
I wish to refer to some of the points raised today. First
of all, it has been made quite clear by the vast majority
of speakers that the Council devotes a very significant
share of its time to addressing problems of peace and
security in Africa. I should like to note the emphasis
that has been placed on the quantitative aspect of our
work on African issues, whereas it seems to me that the
qualitative dimension of our work has yet to be defined
and agreed. This leads me to conclude that today's
debate and the activities of the Working Group may
serve to redress the deficit in the quality of the
attention dedicated to the African agenda by the
Council, which stands to be improved.

Secondly, we note and have heard a number of
references to the fact that the other main organs of the
United Nations, each in its own field, are developing
initiatives linking peace and security to development
problems in Africa. The General Assembly is soon to
hold a final review and appraisal of the United Nations
New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the
19905. The working group of the Economic and Social
Council has also continued to function. The Economic
and Social Council dedicated a segment of its annual
session on coordination to the question of Africa in
1999. It later dedicated a high-level ministerial
segment to Africa. The creation of this new advisory
body on countries emerging from conflicts is a new
contribution. Lately, the Secretariat has concentrated
on giving validity and effectiveness to the regional
focus in the resolution of conflicts, starting by applying
this concept - attributed to Ambassador Fall - to
West Africa, where he will be working.

Nevertheless - it must be frequently repeated -
we feel that this broad effort will not lead to
conclusions and recommendations that can be easily
coordinated in the Council's work of seeking to
maintain international peace and security. Often, one
has the impression that the General Assembly or the
Economic and Social Council or even the Secretariat
belonged to an organization separate from the United
Nations based on their contribution to the work of the
Security Council. In other words, this lack of
conceptual and operational cohesiveness in the
treatment of African issues among the various principal
organs of the United Nations should be resolved.
Therefore, it is important, as several delegations have
mentioned, that the various contacts and the meetings
on Africa of the main organs and even the subsidiary
organs, whether in the Security Council or the General
Assembly, should be mutually reinforcing. The
Working Group is very important in this respect.

I wished to refer to one of the points of the
programme of work as described by Ambassador
Koonjul at the start of the meeting and in the support
documentation. There is general agreement on the
relevance of those points. There is unanimous
agreement, in particular, on the question of cooperation
of the Security Council with the Organization of
African Unity and with the subregional organizations.
As for the functioning of groups of friends for specific
conflict situations, those groups should include African
and non-African countries. I listened with interest to
the remarks on the prudence with which the Working
Group should proceed in studying the electoral
processes, precisely because of the risk that it might
weaken the competencies of the General Assembly or
the Secretariat in that field. In general, we believe that
the United Nations should advocate the formation of a
greater regional capacity for electoral monitoring, so
that it can be present in the African continent, where
the electoral process will ultimately be managed most,
and thus strengthen democracy in the African
continent.

Finally, my delegation wishes to support the
recommendation expressed by Assistant Secretary-
General Fall, supported by various speakers, to include
the issue of the proliferation of and trade in small arms
in the agenda of the ad hoc Working Group. He
mentioned that it was necessary to more strictly
enforce the moratoriums and regional actions to
prevent the proliferation of arms. It must also be said,
on the issue of the trade in small arms, that it is
indispensable that we expend greater efforts. It is well
known that there are well-organized and even well-
known criminal organizations that continue to function
without the Council deciding to confront them in a
more direct manner. Mr. Fall mentioned the importance
of going to the sources of the weapons. In that context,
he mentioned that the Chairman of the Working Group
could meet with the weapons-manufacturing countries
to request their greater contribution to the solution of
this problem, which is overwhelming many countries
and destroys thousands of lives in Africa and in many
parts of the world. It is therefore an important issue.
We will well consider that point in order to elaborate
on the suggestion of Mr. Fall in the programme of
work.

Recently, we have spoken of the importance of
the Security Council building collective positions on
the question of Africa. I wish to say that the need of
building collective positions exists at the level of the
overall system of the United Nations. That is why I
believe that this Working Group can contribute to the
creation of such collective positions in the United
Nations system.

