Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
should like to join colleagues in expressing the
condolences of the British Government to the
Government of Bangladesh. We should never forget
that, day in and day out, it is the peacekeepers, it is
United Nations personnel who are actually on the front
line of our efforts to establish better international peace
and security.

Like other colleagues, I am grateful to the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for his
briefing and, indeed, to his Mission for the work they
carry out. It is also a pleasure to welcome back to the
Council the Foreign Minister of Timor-Leste.

The representative of Luxembourg will shortly
make a statement on behalf of the European Union. I
should like to align the United Kingdom with that
position.

As the Secretary-General's report makes clear,
the Government and the people of Timor-Leste, with
the assistance of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET), continue to make
progress on the road towards self-reliance and self-
sufficiency. But we agree with the assessment of the
Secretary-General that significant challenges remain -
we have heard those set out this morning - and that
the provision of international assistance will therefore
continue to be crucial. It is incumbent on us all to
provide such assistance - be it from the United
Nations, be it regional, be it bilateral.

The United Kingdom very much supports a
continued United Nations presence in Timor-Leste
beyond the end of UNMISET's mandate this May.
What we would like to see is a successor which is
small, which is tightly focused, and which is
essentially a political mission concentrating on
institutional capacity-building and with a clear and
achievable exit strategy. I think that is the right way to
go to take us in transition from the present
arrangements towards a situation which East Timor
very much hopes for, which is that they be able to do
this entirely themselves. Until we get there, we need a
Mission.

We welcome the continuing evolution of the
relationship between Indonesia and Timor-Leste,
including through the establishment, to which the
Foreign Minister referred earlier, of the bilateral Truth
and Friendship Commission. We welcome the
substantial progress which is being made on the
question of border demarcation, and we encourage both
Governments, if indeed only 4 per cent is now
outstanding, to resolve the outstanding 4 per cent as
soon as possible.

Finally, I should like to reiterate our support for
the commission of experts established by the
Secretary-General to assess the progress made -
especially how to tackle the issue of justice - and we
look forward to a recommendation covering human
rights and enduring, sustainable justice for Timor-
Leste.

