The President (interpretation from Chinese): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as representative of
China.

China is very much concerned about current
developments on the question of Iraq. We support the
tireless efforts of the Secretary-General and the parties
concerned for a proper solution to this problem. We have
all along supported the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) in the performance of its
inspections as mandated by the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. In our view, the resolutions of the
Security Council on Iraq should be implemented
comprehensively and in earnest. China has made
constructive efforts in this regard and has time and again
called upon Iraq to resume its cooperation with the United
Nations as soon as possible and to fully carry out its
relevant obligations.

At the same time, we have always been of the view
that Iraq's sovereignty, territorial integrity and legitimate
concerns for its own security should be respected. The
progress achieved by Iraq in the past few years in its
cooperation with UNSCOM. should receive an objective
and fair assessment.

In our view, three feet of ice could not have been
accumulated as a result of just one day's cold weather.
The causes of the current crisis are multifaceted and
complex. The Security Council should hear the views of
UNSCOM. and Iraq on the question of inspections in

 

order to make a fair and reasonable judgement on progress
achieved in inspections. Problems that have come up in the
course of inspections should be appropriately settled
through dialogue and cooperation. We are opposed to the
use or the threat of force or any actions that might further
exacerbate tensions. We hope that the parties concerned
will exercise restraint and find a proper solution to the
problem through cooperation and dialogue and avoid the
escalation of tensions. In particular, the occurrence of
armed conflict must be avoided.

In our View, in order to achieve a solution to the
problems, the most urgent task is to persevere in diplomatic
efforts, to promote cooperation between Iraq and the
Special Commission and not to complicate further the
problem and increase the difficulty of resolving them.

We hope that resolution 1137 (1997) will be
conducive to promoting an appropriate settlement of the
problems. Therefore, with a view to advancing a proper
solution to this question, we voted in favour of the
resolution. At the same time, I also wish to point out that
our vote in favour of the resolution does not imply any
change in our position on the question of sanctions.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage

of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 2.50 p.m.
