Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Ihave
the honour to speak on behalf of the 15 States members
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). I welcome the excellent report by the
Secretary-General on the situation in Guinea-Bissau,
contained in document S/2014/105, dated 14 February
2014.

First of all, as this is the first time that my
delegation takes the floor in the month of February,
allow me, Madam President, to convey my delegation's
warm congratulations on Lithuania's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this moth.

I would like to thank His Excellency Prime
Minister Jose' Ramos-Horta, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his excellent briefing
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau and, above all, for
his leadership in managing the crisis in that country. I
should likewise like to thank all those who spoke before
me - Ambassador Patriota, Ambassador Da Gama and
Ambassador Gumende, on behalf of the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries. The Economic
Community of West African States shares their view
that, since the holding of the Council's previous
meeting on Guinea-Bissau (see S/PV.7070), the political
situation in the country has continued to be marked
by the uncertainty generated by the reluctance on the
part of the leadership of the Transitional Government
to carry out general elections to mark the end of the
transition, in line with the decision taken by the
ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government.

The Transitional Government has justified its
inability to meet the transition calendar for a number
of reasons. They include a lack of funds to compile
electoral and voter registration lists and the issue of
district boundaries, which they claim impeded the
holding of the elections under optimal conditions by
the set date of 24 November 2013. That environment
has been aggravated by the interaction among political
actors that led to the breakdown of consensus on the
timing of the transition.

Nevertheless, ECOWAS States members, working
in close cooperation with the West African Economic
and Monetary Union and other members of the
international community, were able to secure the
necessary funding for the proper conduct of elections.
The process of fundraising was concluded in December
2013, which required the extension of the transition
period by the National People's Assembly, following
extensive consultations among the main political
actors. That extension was subsequently endorsed by
the transitional authorities and communicated to the
Chairman of the ECOWAS Conference of Heads of
State and Government in December 2013. It is for that
reason that the date of 16 March 2014 that has been set
for the holding of the elections does not seem realistic.
I should point out that this is the second time that the
deadline for a return to constitutional order has been
moved.

General elections are now being proposed for
13 April 2014. In that regard, it should be recalled that
voter registration was completed on 8 February, and
the voters' list will be available on 4 March. However,
according to the Constitution, the elections should take
place two months after the publication of the voter
list. In addition, two key domestic issues continue
unresolved, and they should be addressed urgently in
order to avoid derailing the electoral process.

First, according to news reports and sources close
to committed members of the African Party for the
Independence of Guinea and Cabo Verde (PAIGC), the
former Prime Minister has returned to Bissau. Such
rumors fuel the palpable unease among the population,
certain political circles and the military level, which
suggests that his safety cannot be guaranteed.

Secondly, we note that the PAIGC neither held
its congress nor appointed a presidential candidate
before the end of the period set by the National
Electoral Commission. Moreover, some members of
the Transitional Government have indicated interest in
standing as presidential candidates.

Given those circumstances, and because of
the slow pace of the efforts under way to hold the
elections, it is clear that more time is needed for the
transitional authorities to conduct truly credible and
transparent elections. In any event, I would suggest that
ECOWAS provide technical assistance to the National
Electoral Commission and the directorate-general
for technical support to the electoral process office,
within the Ministry of Administration of Guinea-
Bissau. In that regard, an ECOWAS technical team
has provided assistance in organizing meetings with
key stakeholders, setting up a timetable, revising
the budget for the elections, supervising registration
activities and training regional staff of the Electoral
Commission. In addition, the team has contributed
to greater coordination, collaboration and synergy
between the National Commission and the directorate,
including organizing technical coordination meetings
to exchange ideas on improving the electoral process
in the country.

I would like to point out that ECOWAS also
provides assistance to Guinea-Bissau in the context
of reform of the security and defence sectors. The
ECOWAS team on that front, made up of a coordinator
and six other experts, was deployed in Guinea-Bissau
at the end of December 2013. The team has both short-
and long-term objectives that are aimed at modernizing
the defence and security sectors by improving the legal
framework and through capacity-building with regard
to human and material resources.

With regard to the status of defence and security-
sector reform, a completion rate of 18 per cent with
respect to the rehabilitation of selected barracks has
been achieved. Discussions are continuing on the
implementation of a pension scheme and a stipend
for veterans and retirees. Training needs have been
identified, with training having been provided at
ECOWAS training centres of excellence on the basis of
the needs of the restructured armed forces of Guinea-
Bissau.

I would also like to point out that ECOWAS is
committed to supporting Guinea-Bissau to ensure
security for the upcoming elections. In that regard, the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) held
coordination meetings on the issue of security with the
Chairman and Commissioners of the National Electoral
Commission, alongside other security agencies.

In addition, in cooperation with local authorities
and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau, ECOMIB is supporting local
authorities to ensure the security of election materials
and escort election materials from the central warehouse
to the various regions and sectors, in collaboration with
the National Electoral Commission, the United Nations

Development Programme and local security agencies.
ECOMIB is also helping to generate mobile emergency
teams to intervene in polling stations where individuals
or groups of individuals attempt to interfere with the
proper conduct of elections. It is also helping to ensure
the safety of election observers from ECOWAS, the
African Union, the European Union, the United Nations
and other agencies that request it, without prejudice to
the responsibility of the authorities of Guinea-Bissau.
ECOMIB is working to deploy sectoral mobile teams
to report in real time - every 30 minutes - on the
situation on the ground at their respective locations so
as to provide alerts on any incident that could disturb
public order or threaten the success ofthe elections. It is
also helping to identify and arrest individuals or groups
who plan or attempt to disrupt the elections, so as to
transfer such individuals to the nearest police station or
National Guard office.

I want to conclude by inviting the international
community to join their efforts with those of ECOWAS
in order to help Guinea-Bissau to hold, in the best of
conditions, free, fair, transparent and credible elections
so as to enable the country to finally experience
stability and lasting peace.

