Mr. Stagno Ugarte (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Given the current military conflict in Iraq, it
is the chief concern of the Costa Rican Government to
plead for respect for human rights, above and beyond
any other consideration. We wish to speak out for
children, fathers and mothers, older persons, the
displaced and the wounded - that is to say, the real
victims of war, whatever their allegiance. Costa Rica
calls on the warring parties to respect Iraq's territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence, in
conformity with the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

Moreover, at the end of the armed conflict, the
parties maintaining troops on Iraqi territory must
continue to comply with their obligations, in
conformity with international humanitarian law,
particularly the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. For
that reason, Costa Rica urges that the civilian
population's security and inalienable human rights -
particularly their right to life and personal integrity -
be guaranteed. We demand that all warring parties
comply scrupulously with their obligations under
international humanitarian law, particularly their
obligations arising out of the four Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and the Additional Protocols of 1977.

Likewise, my delegation demands full respect for
international humanitarian law and international
refugee law, with a view to providing the broadest
possible protection for all refugees, internally displaced
persons and other victims of the hostilities. We appeal
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to devote immediate attention to the
situation of such persons. The fundamental rights of
prisoners of war, irregular combatants and all other
detained persons must be fully respected, in conformity
with the norms of international law governing armed
conflict.

In my country, we are convinced that legitimate,
lasting and sustainable peace in Iraq can be built only
through multilateral action within the framework of the
United Nations. For that reason, we consider it
essential to establish a temporary administrative
structure in Iraq at the end of the armed conflict, under
United Nations monitoring and administration, with a
view to ensuring a climate of stability and to creating
the conditions necessary for lasting peace and respect
for human rights.

Throughout the rebuilding phase, we must bear in
mind that Iraq must comply fully with all its
disarmament obligations, must be free of weapons of
mass destruction and must not become a refuge for
international terrorist organizations. In that context, we
regard the role of the United Nations as essential in the
definition, elaboration and implementation of the
principal objectives of Iraq's reconstruction. Moreover,
with a view to providing humanitarian relief to the
most vulnerable populations and to financing
reconstruction, the Organization must administer Iraq's
natural resources - particularly oil - in conformity
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and
bearing in mind, above all, the Iraqi people's best
interests.

My delegation invites the Secretary-General and
the United Nations Development Programme to take a
detailed inventory of the war's economic effects and to
assess needs for international cooperation for
reconstruction. In parallel, we call on the international
community - in particular the warring States - to
cooperate with Iraq in repairing the pernicious
environmental effects of the conflict.

Finally, Costa Rica reaffirms its full support for
United Nations specialized agencies charged with
monitoring respect for and implementation of
humanitarian law and human rights in situations of
armed conflict and after conflicts. We express our firm
resolve to contribute to the extent of our ability -
together with international humanitarian assistance
bodies, including the International Committee of the
Red Cross and United Nations specialized agencies -
to programmes aimed at the rebuilding of Iraq.

