Mr. Heusgen (Germany): First of all, let me convey
the condolences of the Government and the people of
Germany for the tragic bus accident involving many
victims from Uzbekistan.

I thank you, Sir, for convening today's debate and
for allowing Germany to speak. I would like to commend
the Kazakh presidency for including this topic on the
agenda of the Security Council. I recall that this is
Kazakhstan's third initiative in this regard: an Arria
Formula meeting, which Afghanistan and Germany
co-hosted, was held last November; a trip to Kabul
by the Council took place last week, whose outcome
was very interesting; and today we hold a ministerial
debate, in which a number of high-ranking Ministers
are participating. I therefore again congratulate the
Kazakh presidency for having put regional partnership
with Afghanistan on the agenda.

I would like to underscore what the majority of
speakers have stated - when we consider today's
debate, a common thread emerges with regard to
support for an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
and political process, which is very important. As my
French colleague stated earlier, elections are the main
priority in the political process. They must be Afghan-
owned, take place as scheduled and be legitimate so
that all Afghans can participate. The concept of an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process will not work
without international support. In that regard, if I may,
Mr. President, I would like to commend you on the
regional cooperation that Kazakhstan and other Central
Asian countries have promoted. I believe that such
cooperation is very encouraging. It is clear that it fully
embraces Afghanistan as part of the C5+1. According
to the Central Asian countries, they provide a great deal
of support to Afghanistan. They assist many Afghan
students by offering scholarships for various initiatives,
such as for the Tashkent Conference, as I learned today
for the first time. Support was provided, but it was
Afghan-led.

Germany has always supported the regional
approach in the European Union (EU), such as when
we held the presidency in 2007. We launched an EU and
Central Asia cooperation agreement, whose renewal
we are now supporting and which we expect in 2019.
However, I do not want to pre-empt the statement of the
observer of the European Union, with which Germany,
as I said, fully aligns itself.

Iwouldlike to make one lastpoint about international
support and the United Nations. I listened intently to
the statement made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Kazakhstan with regard to the important role played
by the United Nations. I fully agree with the fact
that there should be greater coordination among the
various United Nations activities. That also reflects
the proposals of the Secretary-General with regard to
stronger United Nations cohesion abroad. I would also
like to underscore the importance of the Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy in Central Asia, whose head
is in attendance today. I agree with the remarks made
by the representative of Ethiopia about the Regional
Centre, which Germany fully supports.

When individual countries and regions state that
they support Afghanistan, it is very important that
they adopt a coherent approach that is based on the
understanding of the links among the humanitarian,
peace and development dimensions. I found it very
encouraging that almost everyone at today's meeting
stated that without security there can be no development.
That notion was explained best by our Swedish colleague
when he highlighted the important link between
development and security. I agree with his statement.
I thought that his remarks were encouraging, and I
believe everyone supports them. The Russian Foreign
Minister also mentioned the importance of sustained
economic and social development in Afghanistan.

The Secretary-General highlighted the scope of
such development. I would like to express my support
for water cooperation in the region, while taking into
consideration climate change and temperature rise.
Water, energy and infrastructure - with its various
initiatives - are all key. Economic development
and trade are key to eliminating and providing an
alternative to opium production, which leads to
devastating consequences.

Germany has supported Afghanistan for many
years. Our civilian support in recent years, including the
past year, totalled more than €400 million. Afghanistan
is one of our main economic partners and will remain
so. However, it is also true that without security it is
likely that there will be no development. From the start,
Germany has supported NATO as the second largest
troop-contributing country. We are focusing on the
north of Afghanistan. We try to stabilize it and help
our Afghan friends by providing training, advice and
assistance to the Afghan security forces. We also chair
the International Contact Group on Afghanistan and
strive to enhance international cohesion with regard to
peace and stability in the region.

At the same time, we know that there is no military
solution to the Afghan crisis. Therefore, we fully support
the intra-Afghan peace process, which must be Afghan-
led. We support the meeting in Kabul on 28 February.
However, with regard to an agreement - and we all
hope for a political agreement to be reached - I agree
with the remarks made by both the Deputy Secretary
of State of the United States and the Vice-Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, who stated that the
agreement must not be at the expense of progress made
thus far.

We heard very impressive statistics with regard
to the number of girls attending school and the role
of women. I think that it is very encouraging that our
colleagues brought along some Afghan women to prove
that progress has been made. It must be maintained.

Following today's meeting, I am totally convinced
that Kazakhstan will ensure that the issue of regional
partnership in Afghanistan will remain on the Council's
agenda. Germany will always support it.

