Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful to Mr. Hedi Annabi for the extremely complete
and precise information he has provided us with today
on the situation in Kosovo and the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK).

Like most members of the Council, Mexico
cannot fail to express its sorrow and distress at the
news ofthe murder ofthe Stolic family that occurred in
the town of Obilic, Kosovo, on 4 June. As was rightly
stated by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Michael Steiner, that act was a direct
attack on the efforts to build a multi-ethnic Kosovo.
My delegation is profoundly concerned that this
murder could delay the process of community
reconciliation and coexistence and have a negative
impact on the sustainable return of displaced persons to
that and other towns of Kosovo.

This type of crime must be energetically
repudiated, not only by the UNMIK authorities, but
also and above all by Kosovo's elected representatives.
In this regard, we take note of the statements made by
the main elected representatives of Kosovo, who
immediately condemned the crime and called for the
perpetrators to be brought to justice. We join those
voices of condemnation and trust that the crime will be
investigated and that those guilty will be punished. We
hope that UNMIK and the Kosovo Force will do their
utmost to provide greater security and protection to the
Serb families and to other minorities in Obilic, who
are, quite naturally, extremely fearful at the moment.

My delegation also expresses its concern at this
weekend's attack in Pristina, in which several persons
were wounded by an explosive device. The incidents of
violence that are occurring with increasing frequency
in various areas of Kosovo - be they acts of political
violence, ethnicity-based attacks or simply cases of
organized crime - undoubtedly threaten the stability
of Kosovo.

Furthermore, we appeal to the elected
representatives of the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government, in particular the representatives of the
Albanian majority, to avoid in the future promoting any
initiative that runs counter to the spirit of resolution
1244 (1999) and the Constitutional Framework, as well
as to the objective of making Kosovo a multi-ethnic,
pluralistic and tolerant society. The most recent
example of such initiatives is the resolution adopted by
the Kosovo Assembly on 15 May regarding the 1998-
1999 conflict.

At the same time, my delegation considers that
the elected representatives of the ethnic minorities in
the Assembly, in particular the Serb representatives,
would achieve better results and greater benefits for
their electorate if they were to adopt a more
participative attitude, instead of withdrawing from the
legislature when they encounter a difficult situation.

We would also request the Secretariat to provide
us - perhaps at a special meeting convened for that
purpose - with further information on and, above all,
a more detailed analysis of the privatization process in
Kosovo and other related aspects, such as the
legislation on the transformation of the right of use to
socially-owned immovable property. It is vital that this
process of privatization be undertaken transparently,
since it will have a broad, long-term impact.

In conclusion, four years after the adoption of
resolution 1244 (1999), Mexico reiterates its support
for the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and all the personnel of UNMIK in the work that lies
ahead.

