Mr. Jonah (Sierra Leone): It is a great pleasure for
my delegation to see you, Mr. President, in the Chair.
Chile and Sierra Leone enjoy very cordial relations, and
I personally have known you for a number of years and
have come to appreciate your diplomatic skill, tact and
human qualities. It is therefore a pleasure for me to be
here today.

May I also take this opportunity to express our
sincere thanks to the Permanent Representative of the
United States for the way he conducted the Council's
activities last month.

Let me also say that I want to thank all the members
of the Security Council for agreeing that my delegation
should participate in the Council's deliberations.

 

This is the first time I have had the privilege of
addressing the Security Council. For over a quarter of a
century, as a member of the United Nations Secretariat, I
participated in the activities of the Council and witnessed
how the Council wrestled with a number of acute
international crises. I am therefore grateful that the Council
should find the time to devote to consideration of the
problem in Sierra Leone.

May I also take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to the delegation of the United Kingdom. I
know that the draft resolution before the Council was
initiated under the presidency of the United Kingdom.

Sierra Leoneans are fully aware that in our history
Queen Victoria often referred to Sierra Leone as "ancient
and loyal Sierra Leone". Sierra Leoneans everywhere today
understand and appreciate that the United Kingdom is today
our loyal friend at this hour of crisis.

I do not think I should elaborate on the plight of the
people of Sierra Leone. President Tejan Kabbah, on 1
October, gave a full explanation before the General
Assembly of the crisis in my country since the coup d'etat.
In fact, we consider this meeting of the Security Council a
response to his appeal that the world community should
come to the rescue of Sierra Leone.

We have seen the draft resolution (S/ 1997/777). And
may I also thank our African colleagues in the Security
Council for what they have done to help make it possible
for the Council to meet today. I must say quite frankly that
the draft resolution, as it stands, far exceeds our
expectations. We want to thank all of you.

Our concern is to what extent the military junta in
Freetown will take seriously what will happen soon in the
Council. The military junta has shown a high degree of
recklessness in dealing with the international community.
This may be due, perhaps, to the fact that since the
coup d'etat they have come under the spell of discredited
politicians and so-called elder statesmen who have
consistently misled them. For example, they have been told
that the Security Council will reject the sanctions of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
They have been told that the Security Council will not call
for the restoration of the legitimate Government of Sierra
Leone. I hope when they read the draft resolution which the
Council is about to adopt, perhaps they will see the reality.
So our principal concern is that the junta should respect the
institutional integrity of the Council.

The Council knows, as I think my President made
very clear, that we are not very sanguine about talks. We
have wasted over four months talking to the military junta
and they have shown no inclination to agree to the
restoration of the legitimate Government in Sierra Leone.
We believe that the draft resolution before the Council, if
it is adopted, will perhaps make a new beginning a

 
new reality - which will enable them to know that the
world community is serious and wants the legitimate
Government to be restored.

That is all I wish to say. Once more, I thank all
those who have worked so laboriously in the past weeks
and days. Let us hope that this draft resolution, when
adopted - together with the talks which might start
soon - will bring a new era in Sierra Leone, and one
which, as President Kabbah said, is not one of
recrimination, but of reconciliation. We know that many
of the rebels, even though they have done tremendous
harm to our country, are Sierra Leoneans. And we hope
that the day will come when we will all walk together to
build a strong and stable Sierra Leone.

May I end by saying that my delegation is in full
agreement with the Secretary-General's statement that
what we have today in Sierra Leone is a matter of very
serious principle, in which a Government was elected by
the people under the rule of law. We very much hope that
the Security Council will not allow them to not only
frustrate the will of the people of Sierra Leone, but to
defy the world community.

