Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia wishes to thank Ms. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, for her briefing
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union.

In that connection, I would like to affirm that the
aim of international cooperation, as established in
Article 1.3 of the Charter of the United Nations, is to
solve international problems of an economic, social,
cultural, or humanitarian character and to do so
through multilateralism. On this point, we agree with
the statement in the foreward of the European Union
Global Strategy for Foreign and Security Policy that we
must work together, but we must be more than merely
inclusive in our efforts. We must do so under the principle
of sovereign equality, which responds to the common
good of our people. In that sense, it is imperative to
work to strengthen multilateralism in strict compliance
with the Charter of the United Nations.

Regional and subregional organizations are critical
to ensuring stability and security in their roles as
natural mediators with appropriate inputs to address
specific matters, thereby creating conditions conducive
to lasting solutions on the basis of the mutual benefit
of States and the principles of international law, in line
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
and General Assembly resolution 65/276, regarding
cooperation between the European Union and the
United Nations.

In that respect, Bolivia maintains relations with the
European Union, framed in institutionalized dialogue
with the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, to agree policies and actions in the international
context that will allow us to move towards mutually
beneficial goals, facing such challenges as the global
food crisis, climate change and terrorism, among
others. We therefore hope that cooperation between the
organizations will continue in that direction, for the
common good.

We express our solidarity with the families and
Governments of the victims of the terrorist attacks
that have affected the European Union. We regret the
increase in such attacks and commend the efforts of
the European Union to overcome that scourge. We
condemn terrorism and encourage the Organization to
pursue its efforts to enhance cooperation and exchange
of information, in respect for human rights.

With respect to conflicts or disputes between
States, Bolivia stresses the importance for all Member
States to observe, respect, apply and comply with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. In that understanding, it is necessary
encourage the peaceful settlement of disputes through
dialogue, mediation, negotiation orjudicial mechanisms
established by the Charter, such as the International
Criminal Court.

Bolivia believes that the European Union is an
essential global actor at the political and economic levels
that contributes to the peaceful settlement of disputes,
and we commend it for its work throughout the planet.
Also in that regard, we consider that the diplomatic
preventive measures and mechanisms of regional
organizations should be coordinated and oriented
towards the identification of potential crises and the
exchange of impartial information. In that regard, we
favour cooperation with that regional organization,
based on the principles of non-intervention in the
internal affairs of States, the non-use of force or the
threat of use of force, and the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence of States.

Bolivia recognizes the work of the European Union
on various issues with which the Security Council is
seized, such as the Iranian nuclear issue, on which
the European Union has played a very important role,
and the settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
through the establishment of two States within the pre-
1967 frontiers and with East Jerusalem as the capital of
the State of Palestine.

We also appreciate the work of the European Union
in Africa, where security is a factor ofgreat importance,
in financing the African Union Mission in Somalia and
contributing to the development and training of the
Somali National Army through its military training
mission in Somalia and its Naval Force Operation
Atalanta, which is fighting piracy. We further
commend the work of the European Union in Mali,
through the training of that country's armed forces,
and in the Central African Republic, in cooperation
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.

The world is suffering the worst crisis of inequality
in its history. Eight individuals own half the planet's
wealth. The world is also experiencing its worst
humanitarian crisis since 1945. Some 128 million
people require humanitarian assistance in 33 countries.
Moreover, we are going through a severe financial crisis,
because we have not resolved such structural causes as
the phenomenon of external debt. We are in a serious
energy crisis - 2.9 billion people use wood or stoves
for heat or cooking. As Ms. Mogherini affirmed, we are
in serious climate, food and international institutional
crises, the latter due to the fact that the Organization
has been unable to reform itself for decades. But
the worst of all are the wars being waged across the
world, prompted in many cases by interventionism,
regime change policies and the flouting of the norms of
international law.

All these crises prove that there is no such thing
as a first world or a third world. There is only one
world, one house for the human family, one home with
differentiated responsibilities among its members.
We believe that the European Union can and must
play a critical role in resolving all these crises, on
the basis of international law and of strict respect for
multilateralism, without double standards, resorting
first and foremost to policy and diplomacy in all cases.

