Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on the excellent way in which
you have carried the duties of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his progress
report (S/2006/24) on the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) for the period 16 August 2005
to 13 January 2006. My delegation also appreciates the
comprehensive briefing by Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste. We thank him for his leadership in the
implementation of UNOTIL's mandate.

Before proceeding, allow me to join previous
speakers in welcoming Yang Mulia Bapak, President
Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao of Timor-Leste and Foreign
Minister Jose Ramos-Horta. President Gusmao has
highlighted his perspective on the issue of justice vis-
a-vis the people of Timor-Leste in dealing with the
past. The wisdom, leadership and statesmanship of
President Xanana Gusmao in bringing his people out of
the difficult past and into a healthier and more
prosperous future are inspiring. His strong
determination to foster reconciliation among Timorese
is also admirable. Among other things, that
determination was reflected in his attempt last
December, which my Government was pleased to
facilitate, to once again reach out to fellow Timorese
residing in West Timor. My delegation also wishes to
commend his lucid presentation on the current
developments in his country, the challenges that the
Timorese people face today, their ongoing needs and
expectation as regards the international community,
which we believe deserve positive consideration by the
Council.

My delegation is pleased that the Government of
Timor-Leste, as recognized in the report of the
Secretary-General, has made further progress in
establishing effective democratic governance in the
country. Thanks to its wise and brave leaders, that new
State has become a peaceful, stable and politically
dynamic nation.

We are also gratified at the equally important fact
that, as President Gusmao also stated earlier, the
relationship between Timor-Leste and Indonesia has
continued to grow. In that regard, allow me to stress
that, as Timor-Leste remains a major priority in
Indonesia's foreign policy, those excellent bilateral ties
continue to be marked by a close rapport at the highest
level between leaders of the two countries.

In that connection, we affirm that bilateral
cooperation has further deepened and expanded. Under
the mechanism of the annual meetings of the
Indonesia-Timor-Leste Joint Ministerial Commission
for Bilateral Cooperation, we continue to make
progress in various fields, including those pertaining to
border issues; legal matters; trade, investment and
finance; health; transport and communications; and the
social, educational and cultural fields. That progress
also includes assistance to Timor-Leste in various areas
of institutional capacity-building.

The maturity of our bilateral ties has allowed our
two countries to deal comfortably and effectively with
any common issue and problem that may arise on a
bilateral basis, including matters relating to the
difficult episode of our shared history as well as border
issues. As pointed out earlier by President Gusmao, our
two countries have reached agreement on 99 per cent
of our common land border, with the remaining 1 per
cent to be resolved in the very near future.

Notwithstanding that progress, it is deeply
regrettable that border incidents - such as the one
that, as mentioned in the Secretary-General's report,
took place on 6 January, which resulted in the deaths of
three people - continue to take place. As the joint
commission of investigation is moving towards
establishing the facts surrounding the incident, we
should refrain from making prejudicial conclusions.
The two countries indeed agree that those were isolated
incidents that do not in any way affect our excellent
bilateral relations. We also agree that those incidents
underline the need to strengthen cooperation and
coordination between the border authorities of both
countries, in order that such incidents not occur again.
In that regard, we look forward to the completion of a
new border-management framework in the near future.

My delegation notes with interest that, as the
report of the Secretary-General points out and pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1599 (2005), UNOTIL
continues to focus on the coordination of donor
assistance, to encourage the implementation of projects
towards sustainable and long-term development in
Timor-Leste and ensure a smooth transition from
UNOTIL to a development assistance framework.
Some progress has been made during the period under
review, including UNOTIL's efforts to hand over
responsibility to the Government and to development
partners. As of October 2005, UNOTIL's Civilian
Support Group and the United Nations Development
Programme's Institutional Capacity Building Support
Programme have been fully integrated within the
Government's Capacity Development Coordination
Unit, under the Office of the Prime Minister. We agree
that the latter will facilitate the eventual takeover by
the Government of all functions related to the
management and coordination of assistance
programmes. In that regard, we hope that the
appointment of a new United Nations resident
coordinator in Dili, who will assume his duties next
month, will further facilitate the process.

Another important development is the planned
Development Partners' Conference in April. It will
provide an important opportunity for the international
community to demonstrate its continued commitment
to Timor-Leste and for commitments already made to
be translated soon into concrete action.

We really look forward to a successful conclusion
of UNOTIL's mandate on 20 May. However, we share
the Secretary-General's assessment, as contained in his
report, that, while the future of the country rests with
the Timorese people and their Government, the
international community should remain engaged in
Timor-Leste beyond 20 May, when UNOTIL's mandate
expires.

The forthcoming presidential and parliamentary
elections, which will take place for the first time in
Timor-Leste in 2007, constitute a major challenge
facing the country in the near future. It is important
that the international community continue to assist
Timor-Leste to face the challenge and to meet some of
its needs in critical areas, as set out by President
Gusmao earlier, inter alia in the justice and finance
sectors, as well as in police training.

For its part, Indonesia will fulfil its bilateral
support on the basis of the forward-looking and
reconciliatory principles established by the leaders of
both nations. We have always applauded the role of the
international community in helping the process of
development in Timor-Leste, recognizing at the same
time that, as the only nation that shares a land border
and has specific historical ties with Timor-Leste, we
have a special obligation to discharge.

