Mr. Hoscheit (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. the acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania,
the candidate countries Turkey and Croatia and the
European Free Trade Association countries Iceland and
Norway, members of the European Economic Area,
align themselves with this statement.

Let me begin by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen, for his
briefing and for his work, and by reiterating the
European Union's full support for his work.

Since the Secretary-General and the Special
Representative last reported to the Council on the
situation in Kosovo in February, significant progress
has been achieved. Most important, we note that the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government have
shown an encouraging and demonstrable level of
commitment to move forward in the implementation of
the standards.

The security situation during the period under
review was generally calm. We commend the political
leaders for their stance and for the mature manner in
which they handled the announcement by the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia of the indictment of the former Prime
Minister, as well as for the fairly smooth process
leading to the appointment of a new Prime Minister.
For the European Union, cooperation with the Tribunal
has always been, and remains, a key issue in Kosovo
and in the region as a whole, as it has direct impact on
progress towards its European ambitions.

The European Union attaches great importance to
the establishment of a direct and sustained high-level
dialogue among all Kosovo communities, as well as
between Belgrade and Pristina. It notes with interest
that meetings between the respective Presidents and
Prime Ministers might take place soon. It furthermore
calls upon all communities to actively participate in the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and in all
ongoing processes. In that context, the European Union
welcomes the participation this week, for the first time,
of Kosovo Serb representatives at the meeting of the
working group on decentralization, and it calls upon
Belgrade to encourage further Kosovo Serb
participation in the political life of Kosovo.

The European Union shares the Secretary-
General's assessment that, given the commitment of
the Provisional Institutions and the progress being
achieved in what were identified as priority areas, and
assuming that such progress will continue
uninterrupted, the comprehensive review foreseen in
the Security Council presidential statement of
12 December 2003 (S/PRST/2003/26) should take
place this summer. We therefore support the Secretary-
General's intention to appoint a Special Envoy to
conduct that review in the near future, and we welcome
the openness and broad scope of the review process.

Despite the assessment that sufficient progress
has been made to justify the start of an exhaustive
evaluation at this point, the European Union recognizes
that none of the eight standards has been fully
implemented, and that deficiencies remain in key
priority areas.

The Provisional Institutions and Kosovo's
political leaders should therefore be aware that neither
the outcome of the review process nor the initiation of
any further steps thereafter is not a foregone
conclusion. The implementation of the standards is a
long-term endeavour and is expected to continue
throughout the evaluation process and beyond.

When I had the opportunity to address the
Council on this issue in February (see S/PV.5130), I
said that the protection of minority communities, the
return of refugees and displaced persons, freedom of
movement and decentralization were areas that needed
particular attention, given their direct link to our
common goal of a democratic and multi-ethnic
Kosovo. In his report, the Secretary-General notes
some measure of improvement in all of those areas
except the central issue of local government reform
and, in particular, decentralization, where progress has
been lacking.

As the Secretary-General points out in
paragraph 9 of his report (S/2005/335),

"achieving concrete results in the local
government reform process will influence
prospects for the political process to determine
Kosovo's future status".
It is thus essential to move forward rapidly in the
implementation of pilot projects, including those in
areas where Kosovo Serbs form the majority.

Despite the many justified caveats, the Secretary-
General's recommendation to initiate a critical and
comprehensive review of standards implementation
this summer is a momentous event for the people of
Kosovo. That recommendation should be interpreted as
both a recognition by the international community of
progress already achieved and a powerful incentive to
maintain and increase the momentum of ongoing
reforms. The European Union will continue to support
a democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo, characterized
by the protection that it provides to its minorities, as it
endeavours to translate into reality its European
aspirations, regardless of its future status.

