Mr. Bouah-Kamon (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): The Security Council has just unanimously
adopted resolutions 2283 (2016) and 2284 (2016)
in which, respectively, it lifts the sanctions regime
concerning my country and extends the mandate of the
United Nations Operation in cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) for
a final term, until June 2017.

My delegation welcomes the adoption of these two
resolutions, and sees them as a recognition of the many
efforts made by the Ivorian Government since the end
of the Ivorian crisis in 2011. In them, we also see the
effectiveness of the resolute commitment of the United
Nations and the entire international community to
Cote d'Ivoire. My Government takes this opportunity
to express its gratitude to the United Nations, and
through it to the Secretary-General, the Presidents and
members of the Council, the successive chairs of the
sanctions committee, the troop-contributing countries
and France, a great country whose support for my
country has never been lacking.
With the lifting of the sanctions regime, to which
my country was subject since 2004, the Government
will henceforth devote itself, among other things, to
addressing important issues related to security and
the implementation of laws overhauling its military
and security structures, with a view to modernizing
them and making them more effective. My country is
aware of the remaining challenges that still need to be
overcome. In that regard, I would like to emphasize
that my country will shoulder all of its responsibilities
commensurate with its commitments and obligations.

In accordance with paragraph 14 ofresolution 2283
(2016), the mandate of the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire will come to a definitive end in June 2017.
My country welcomes the untrammelled success of the
mission and would like to assure the United Nations and
the international community of its firm determination
to continue our exemplary cooperation with UNOCI
so that, by the end of its final mandate, the mission,
which - as we are all aware - has already enjoyed
great success, will be celebrated and go down in the
history of United Nations peacekeeping operations as
a success story to be replicated in other parts of the
world.

The meeting rose at10.35 a.m.
