Mr. Spatafora (Italy): First of all, I would like to
extend a very warm welcome to the Foreign Minister
of Costa Rica, Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte. This is, for
many of us, an opportunity to welcome Mr. Ugarte
back to the Council for a day. As Permanent
Representative of Costa Rica, Bruno Stagno left a very
clear footprint that we are still following today. I think
that, with his statement today, he has also left a deep
footprint.

I also offer a warm welcome to the new
Permanent Representative of Belgium, Ambassador Jan
Grauls. We welcome him among us as a member of the
family.

I wish to express my very sincere thanks to
Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, for his very clear,
focused and appalling briefing.

Let me reiterate Italy's full and strong support for
the International Criminal Court and the work of the
Prosecutor. Italy fully appreciates the very difficult
environmental circumstances in which the Prosecutor
and his staff are conducting their investigation and
wishes to renew its full confidence in him and his staff.

More than three years have elapsed since
resolution 1593 (2005) was adopted, and we are being
told once again that serious crimes continue to be
committed against civilians in Darfur by all parties in a
climate of impunity * total impunity.

Today's briefing is a source of deep concern for
us. On the one hand, it reconfirms the need for a more
robust and effective approach to the conflict in Darfur
encompassing the humanitarian, security, political and
rule of law dimensions. However, the pursuit of such a
comprehensive approach cannot be grounds for further
postponing full compliance with resolution 1593
(2005). We share the Prosecutor's view that bringing to
justice those who are responsible for serious and
continued violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law will greatly contribute to peace
in Darfur.
Peace and justice are precisely what the victims
are seeking and what the population of Darfur is
expecting after more than 40 years of conflict. We can
no longer fail to heed their call.

What is at stake is our credibility as an
Organization and as States Members of the
Organization. What is at stake is our responsibility.
What is at stake is our accountability. Today, now, a
few hundred yards from here, a round table is taking
place that has been organized by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women on resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security. They are
addressing the accountability gap, but to whom are we
accountable? We are accountable to the women who
are subject to the crimes that the Prosecutor has
described. We are accountable to the children. We are
accountable to those who suffer, as the Prosecutor has
told us. It is therefore a question of consistency with
the principles to which we have subscribed in the
Charter of the United Nations, in the preamble of
which we reaffirm our faith in the dignity and worth of
the human person. As the Prosecutor said, given our
responsibility and accountability, we have to move
from principle to action. Therefore, we have here, in
the words of the Prosecutor, an historic opportunity.

Since the establishment of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, the
Security Council has consistently made it clear that
massive human rights violations are per se a threat to
peace that must be addressed by punishing individual
perpetrators, as Foreign Minister Stagno Ugarte has so
eloquently recalled. On that basis, as we know, the
Council referred the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court under resolution 1593
(2005) in March 2005. That resolution must be fully
implemented - and of this there has to be a strong
awareness - including its provision that

"the Government of the Sudan and all other
parties to the conflict in Darfur shall cooperate
fully with and provide any necessary assistance to
the Court and the Prosecutor pursuant to this
resolution". (para. 2)
We are strongly concerned by the report we heard
of continued lack of cooperation and by the fact that
the arrest warrants have not yet been executed.
Moreover, one of the individuals on the investigations
still holds a prominent position in the Government.

08-3674}
As recalled by my Belgian colleague, on
31 March the European Union issued a declaration on
the occasion of the third anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1593 (2005), calling on the Government of
Sudan to cooperate unconditionally with the
International Criminal Court and to surrender the two
individuals for whom it has issued arrest warrants.

Italy too calls on the Government of Sudan and
all other parties to the conflict in Darfur to comply
with their obligations under all Council resolutions.
Members will not be surprised if I recall here
Article 25 of the Charter, which says; "The Members
of the United Nations agree to accept and carry out the
decisions of the Security Council in accordance with
the present Charter". What I ask myself - and what I
think all of us have to ask ourselves - is whether we
are in the process of modifying the United Nations
Charter by acquiescence, because what is now at stake
is a modification of Article 25, an erosion day by day
through acquiescence. And we know that acquiescence
is a source of international law. So let us not be
responsible for such an erosion.

Fighting impunity has rightly become one of the
priorities of the international community, but that
principle, which is at the core of the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court, has yet to be
translated into consistent practice. Darfur is a major
test case of our ability, as I said before, to pass from
words to actions, and I call on all stakeholders to make
sure that this opportunity is not missed.

Finally, Italy fully supports a response by the
Council to the Prosecutor's briefing in the form of the
draft presidential statement presented by Costa Rica,
which reaffirms resolution 1593 (2005) and the duty of
all parties to the conflict in Darfur to cooperate fully
with the ICC. We fully support that draft text.

