Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, let me
thank Special Representative Staffan de Mistura for his
briefing this morning and, more generally, for his
strong leadership of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), which he has
displayed since taking office. I would also like to
express to him my condolences for the death of his
staff member, who apparently fell victim to a terrorist
attack this morning.

Germany fully aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the representative of the European Union.

My country enjoys a close relationship with
Afghanistan and its people. We are a major contributor
to the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF),
as well as of development assistance to Afghanistan. I
should like to highlight three issues that are key to any
further development in Afghanistan. They are the
Kabul Conference, the Peace Jirga and the role of
UNAMA.

The upcoming Kabul Conference will be an
important next step to review implementation and
agree on further specific implementation steps, in
particular in the field of economic and social
development. The improvement of basic services and
governance will be a focus of the Conference. At the
same time, the future of Afghanistan will depend as
much on a stable regional situation as on a genuine
domestic reform process. The relationship between
Afghanistan and Pakistan remains key to regional
stability. We therefore welcome the fact that regional
cooperation will also be a key topic in Kabul. We
believe that emphasis on Afghan ownership and the
concept of transition of responsibility should be
guiding principles. We welcome the fact that, for the
first time, an international Afghanistan conference will
be held in the country itself.

Germany believes that reintegration and
reconciliation are cornerstones for a political solution
to further positive development in Afghanistan. The
Peace Jirga was an important first step. We should all
focus our efforts on proper implementation, which is
likely to remain a challenge. That process needs to be
Afghan-led. The international community can provide
only a supporting role. Germany is ready to work
constructively towards that.

The reconstruction process in Afghanistan has
more than one component. My country has sought a
comprehensive civilian-military approach all along. We
therefore welcome ISAF's new strategy of focusing
counterinsurgency operations on the civilian
population, with a view to further enabling the Afghan
National Security Forces to operate and improving
governance and development.

Let me conclude by highlighting that under the
umbrella of the United Nations my country will
continue to contribute substantially to the efforts of the
international community in Afghanistan. We will
double our civilian assistance to about $550 million per
year, support the reintegration trust fund, further
strengthen our training efforts for the Afghan Security
Forces by providing 1,400 soldiers to train the army
and, in the light of a tense security situation, continue
to focus on training Afghan National Security Forces in
joint operations. We are also sending 260 police
trainers to the country to train the Afghan Police.

With the new UNAMA leadership team
appointed, the budget increase approved and the
granting of special delegation of recruitment authority
to the Mission, important parameters have been set that
pave the way for re-energizing UNAMA on the ground.
At the same time, our expectations should remain
realistic and focused on key priorities.

