Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks New Zealand for convening this debate
on Afghanistan. We welcome Minister for Foreign
Affairs McCully to the Security Council and thank
him for presiding over the meeting earlier today. We
also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
for his briefing, and the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan, Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal, for
his statement.

Recently, the Afghan National Unity Government
has made unremitting efforts at maintaining national
stability, promoting national reconciliation and pushing
ahead with economic development. Nevertheless,
Afghanistan still faces grave challenges in the political,
economic and security spheres. All communities in
Afghanistan should step up their unity and join forces
in promoting national reconstruction. The international
community should also continue its assistance in support
of Afghanistan and push for the early achievement
of peace, stability and development in Afghanistan. I
would like to emphasize the following points.

First, it is imperative to remain unwavering in
the commitment to the general direction of national
reconciliation. Achieving national reconciliation is
the master key to addressing the problems facing
Afghanistan. All parties in Afghanistan should focus
on national development and the interests of the people
by restarting peace talks. The international community
should continue to step up its efforts and go all-out
in support of an Afghan-led and -owned inclusive
reconciliation process and make substantive efforts for
the achievement of reconciliation in the country.

Secondly, it is crucial to ensure the irreversibility
of the security situation in Afghanistan. Maintaining a
stable Afghanistan in terms of security is of paramount
importance to the development and prosperity of
country. The armed conflicts inside Afghanistan and
the terrorist activities by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham and by Al-Qaida, among others, pose a serious
threat to the security and stability of Afghanistan. The
international community should support Afghanistan's
national security forces in capacity-building, while
beefing up their independent capacity for self-defence
and counter-terrorism, and safeguarding Afghanistan's
security and stability.

Thirdly, it is absolutely indispensable to help
Afghanistan bolster its governance without let up.
Matters relating to Afghanistan should ultimately be
determined by the Afghans themselves. Currently,
Afghanistan is engaged in preparing its new National
Peace and Development framework. The international
community should, on the basis of the development
strategy determined by the Afghans and the specific
needs help the Government, improve administrative
capability and consolidate the fruits of national
reconstruction. All political parties and factions in
Afghanistan should be committed to defusing their
differences through dialogue and consultation andjoin
hands in advancing the peaceful reconstruction process
in Afghanistan.

Fourthly, it is imperative to ensure that the
development process in Afghanistan makes further
progress without backtracking. Promoting economic
and social development is vital to safeguarding a
stable Afghanistan. The international community should
encourage and support Afghanistan in fully leveraging
its advantages in resources and geographical location
and push for progress in building infrastructure and
developing trade and investment, among other areas.
Meanwhile, it should also promote the development of
friendly relations and cooperation for mutual benefit
between Afghanistan and its neighbours, as well as
Afghanistan's participation in regional linkages and
communication and economic cooperation, so as to
achieve full integration in regional development.

China is a good neighbour and good friend of
Afghanistan. China supports an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned reconciliation process in the country.
China has taken an active part in various mechanisms,
such as the Quadrilateral Coordination Group made up
of Afghanistan, Pakistan, China and the United States
of America, in an effort to create enabling external
environments for the achievement of reconciliation. We
are ready to link up China's One Belt, One Road initiative
with the Afghanistan National Development Strategy.
China is also hoping that the related international
assistance mechanisms for Afghanistan will continue
to contribute positively to the achievement of lasting
peace and sustainable development in Afghanistan.

