Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico is grateful to Poland for convening
this important debate on respect for international
law in the context of maintaining international peace
and security.

International law is the essential foundation on
which cooperative and friendly relations between
States Members of the United Nations are based. It is
enshrined as part of the first principle of the Charter
of the United Nations; it is fully valid and we are all
obligated to observe it. Given the scope of the issue, I
will limit my statement to a few main aspects.

We are witnessing unacceptable suffering among
civil populations in armed conflicts around the world.
International law, international humanitarian law
and human rights law have been developed by the
international community so that those situations would
not occur, and if they did take place, so that those
responsible would be brought to justice. Effective
accountability for violations of international law,
closing spaces to impunity, must be a central objective
of the Organization. There can be no sustainable peace
without justice.

We have enough machinery to make those goals
a reality. The International Criminal Court (ICC) is
one of the most comprehensive achievements of the
international community, one that we must strengthen
and perfect. The relationship between the Council and
the ICC should be strengthened with the establishment
of a structured dialogue, for example in order to generate
broader support from the Council when the Office of
the Prosecutor reports the challenges it faces in cases
subject to referral under article 16 of the Rome Statute.

There should be closer cooperation between the
Security Council's Sanctions Committees and the
ICC, given how useful the adoption of some selective
measures can be in executing arrest warrants and for
reparations to victims. It is also essential to have timely
and objective information on violations of international
law in the field. Independent, impartial investigative
mechanisms have been shown to be viable options for
shedding light on events and possible accountability.

As Mexico has indicated on numerous occasions,
we must avoid having the Security Council, when faced
with atrocity crimes, becoming paralysed and its work
irrelevant. That is why we have developed an initiative
with France that has the support of over 100 States, as
has been mentioned already today. In that same spirit,
some States 4 certainly a majority of Members 4 have
found ourselves forced to find alternative solutions
for the enforcement of international humanitarian
law. We call on the Council, and on the membership
in general, to support the work of those alternative
mechanisms, particularly the International, Impartial
and Independent Mechanism for the Syrian Arab
Republic established by the General Assembly.

The premises of the Council's presidential statement
S/PRST/2009/8, which highlighted the importance of
encouraging mediation and the peaceful settlement of
conflicts, continue to be valid. Among them, we note
the encouragement of the participation of more women
in mediation processes and of a stronger mediation
capacity for parties to conflicts. We urge the Council
to continue supporting those actions, which strengthen
sustainable peace, a concept enshrined by the Council
in resolution 2282 (2016).

The Secretary-General can also play an active
role in this area. We note, for example, his recent
decision to recommend that a dispute between Guyana
and Venezuela be referred to the International Court
of Justice. The Council could also resort to the good
offices of the Secretary-General more frequently.

The positive trend of frequently consulting the
International Court of Justice continues. However, its
potential has not been fully taken advantage of, and
the Court's advisory competence could be even further
used as a preventive tool. The Council should use
this advisory option more often, as that would help to
strengthen international law.

It is important to recall that the Council also has the
ability to carry out the judgments of the International
Court of Justice in cases of non-compliance, as
was mentioned by Judge Owada this morning in an
express reference to the Case concerning Avena and
Other Mexican Nationals (Mexico V. United States of America). The permanent members of the Security
Council should be the first to carry out the judgments
of the International Court of Justice and thereby
strengthen the international justice regime.

The Security Council has a crucial role to play in
efforts to guarantee the rule of law at the international
level. Nevertheless, the effectiveness of its decisions
is seriously undermined if there is no consistency
between what the Council says and what it does. The
Council should participate more actively in analysing
the responsibilities of States under the Charter. Recent
justifications presented by some States for using force
in legitimate self-defence, for example, show the need
to consider the limits imposed by Article 51 of the
Charter and the inherent right of States to self-defence.
A lack of rigour in interpreting Article 51 could lead to
abuse, putting international peace and security at risk.

Of particular concern is the authorization of the
use of force against non-State actors, due to a lack
of legal clarity in that regard. It is equally important
for the decisions and actions of the Council to be
correctly based on and driven by international law.
That would reaffirm the legitimacy and consistency of
this organ, thereby avoiding actions that could lead to
new conflicts.

The Security Council should be reformed to become
truly democratic, transparent, effective and efficient in
compliance with its mandate. To that end, we need a
compromise formula that is realistic and accessible,
such as the one we are promoting with the Uniting for
Consensus movement.

As previously mentioned, the French-Mexican
initiative on the restriction of the use of the veto in
situations of war crimes, crimes against humanity or
genocide should be considered in all seriousness when
the Security Council is reformed. The use of the veto
in situations where mass atrocities are committed
is an abuse of the law that can trigger international
responsibility for the State committing them and an
abuse that leaves the Organization under the sad shadow
of paralysis and irrelevance.

The quest for justice and the rule of international
law is an essential purpose of the United Nations that we
should not forget. Inaction and indifference to human
suffering have no place in the Organization. That is why
we see greater viability every day in the adoption of
alternative solutions when we are faced with stagnation
in the Security Council, such as General Assembly
resolution 377 (V), on Uniting for Peace 4 a legal
mechanism established by the Assembly so that the
light ofjustice, the rule oflaw and effective compliance
with the Charter return to the United Nations.

