Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Spain would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized this meeting, which we frankly
find very useful. We would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Ladsous and the three Force
Commanders - of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
(UNTSO) - for their briefings.
Spain would like to take this opportunity once again
to reiterate its appreciation of the work done by the
peacekeeping missions. We also thank the contingents
and the troop-contributing countries for their generosity
and commitment to maintaining international peace and
security. This year is particularly important because
of the review of peacekeeping operations that is being
conducted, to which Spain has contributed with a view
to strengthening the missions and improving their
effectiveness and security. I should like to make three
general comments.

First, we must work together to prevent a gulf from
opening between the mandates and their implementation
on the ground. To that end, we must not only be
extremely careful in defining the mandates but also
try and improve the effectiveness with which they are
implemented, since the failure of such implementation
fosters doubts and affects the credibility of the missions
themselves.

Secondly, mandates must always go hand in hand
with the necessary capabilities. Contingents must
receive adequate, specific training, equipment and
resources to increase their reaction capability, their
mobility and the use of new technologies.

Thirdly, for Spain, the work being done by
peacekeeping operations to protect civilians is essential,
although we must not forget that such protection is
principally the responsibility ofthe States. MINUSMA
is operating in extremely difficult conditions
paradigmatic of the new volatile environments in
which missions are operating today. I can assure Major
General Lollesgaard that MINUSMA is the subject of
the Security Council's constant concern and attention.
One of his predecessors, Major General Kazura, stated
that MINUSMA was operating

"in a terrorist-fighting situation without an
anti-terrorist mandate or adequate training,
equipment, logistics or intelligence to deal with
such a situation" (S/PV. 7275, p. 33).

Subsequently, in November 2014, the Security
Council held an interactive dialogue to address the
appropriateness of the mandate of MINUSMA in view
of the asymmetric attacks on the Mission. The concept
of operations, which dated from 2013, was revised to
take into account the new political and security climate,
and a series of measures was taken to purge elements
that we might describe as irregular.

Fourthly, the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2015/426) includes proposals to improve the
flexibility, reaction capability and effectiveness of the
Mission in an environment that is, let us remember,
asymmetric. In other words, far from being inactive,
the Security Council has been very attentive to
developments on the ground. Unfortunately, however,
the number of casualties and victims among the Blue
Helmets of MINUSMA remains very high and the
difficulties faced by the Mission in carrying out its
mandate are enormous. Spain wishes to condemn the
intentional attacks on the Mission's staff, a situation that
we consider absolutely unacceptable. We must explore
accountability mechanisms and the Government of Mali
must cooperate with us on this matter. As we all know,
the main challenge remains the discrepancy between
the diagnosis of the situation, which is that ofa political
crisis, and the reality of an asymmetric environment
characterized by jihadi terrorism, organized crime
networks and, above all, the overwhelming isolation of
MINUSMA in the north of the country.

We need to find a balance between the security
of the contingents and the fulfilment of the mandates,
but all involved are obliged to ensure that the staff can
carry out their functions with security standards that
are appropriate given the threats and circumstances
and allow them to implement their mandate. The
introduction of new technologies is essential for the
effective performance of these tasks and the security of
the contingents themselves.

With regard to UNMISS, we wish to reiterate our
support for a Mission that has also been operating in a
very complex environment since last year. The work done
to provide shelter for 118,000 refugees and internally
displaced persons is extraordinary and has defined the
Mission's day-to-day situation. Although each United
Nations operation is a separate world, as Mr. Ladsous
pointed out in his briefing, we must recognize that the

shift from essentially a peace consolidation operation
to one focused on protecting civilians represents a
radical change that poses tremendous challenges. In
our opinion, the joint efforts of the Secretary-General's
Special Representative for South Sudan, the Force
Commander and the troop-contributing countries must
be evaluated to make the Mission more proactive and
robust. At the same time, we must seek to improve
the Mission's effectiveness in the implementation of
its mandate, including the projection of its presence
outside the refugee camps.

Let us remember that UNMISS is an integrated
Mission and that coordination and coherence among all
of its components is therefore supposed to exist. Without
such coordination and coherence, the Mission will fail.
It is very important that the United Nations continue
monitoring and observing the human rights situation in
South Sudan. I would recall that, when the mandate of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was renewed,
the Security Council took an important step forward by
requesting the Secretary-General to provide updates on
the ways in which the Mission was fulfilling its mandate
to protect civilians and on the measures it was taking
to transform itself and perform its mandates more
efficiently and effectively. At the proposal of Spain,
such a requirement was also introduced for UNMISS
because we consider it a good practice that should be
followed in all the other missions.

With regard to UNTSO and the question of caveats,
we believe that the troop-contributing countries can
legitimately impose caveats on the deployment of
their troops under certain conditions, provided that
such caveats are expressed in the appropriate way and
with the appropriate respect for the chain of command.
It is precisely when a peacekeeping operation is
obliged to operate in a crisis situation - in a hostile
environment - that the maintenance of the chain
of command acquires critical importance and must
be respected without interference from the national
authorities involved.

Even when caveats are worded in compliance with
the established procedures, however, they can of course
complicate the fulfilment of mandates, particularly when
an operation is forced to deploy in hostile conditions,
for example when the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) was obliged to withdraw
to the Alpha line in September 2014. Fortunately,
Observer Group Golan, which consists of UNTSO
observers, was able to maintain a number of positions
on the Bravo line in the Mount Hermon area, where,
unless military observers carry on working, it would be
very difficult for UNDOF to continue to implement its
mandate. At their new positions on the Alpha line, the
UNTSO observers continued their work in very difficult
conditions, illustrated by various incidents in late April
and early May that resulted in four of the contingent

being injured and the evacuation of observation post
51. I would like to thank Major General Finn and all
the UNTSO observers deployed with UNDOF for the
admirable work they continue to do in very difficult
conditions. Today the ability to patrol with guarantees
or deploying to agreed observation points continues to
be far from reality. That is producing violations of the
terms of resolution 350 (1974) for both sides. Armed
groups, including the Al-Nusra Front, which is on the
list ofterrorist groups, are present in the area. That may
be the greatest violation of the separation agreements,
but it is not the only one.

I would like to ask Major General Finn, can the
UNTSO observers carry out their tasks in their present
positions while complying with the minimum levels of
operability?

