Allow me to join other Council members in thanking the briefers for their insightful briefings. Indonesia acknowledges the progress that has been made in the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, including on the allocation of state- and county-level Government positions. Despite that progress, the humanitarian situation and persistent intercommunal violence remain very concerning. Against that backdrop, I would like to emphasize three points. First, we need an immediate response to the humanitarian situation. With more than 1.6 million people internally displaced and more than | million affected by heavy rains and floods, humanitarian assistance is critical. The current situation makes the persistent attacks on humanitarian and aid workers all the more worrisome. Indonesia condemns such attacks and calls on the authorities and the United Nations MissioninSouthSudan(UNMISS)tosafeguardall humanitarian workers and facilities. We also note with concern the increase in violations of the status-of-forces agreement. Indonesia calls on all parties to respect the freedom of movement of UNMISS personnel, especially in delivering humanitarian assistance. We urge the Government of South Sudan to enhance its cooperation with UNMISS to ensure the effective provision of humanitarian assistance for the people of South Sudan. Secondly, progress must be made in the political process. As the Secretary- General says in his report (S/2020/1180), the increasing intercommunal clashes are closely linked to the stalled political process, especially the implementation of the transitional security arrangements. All stakeholders, especially UNMISS, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the African Union, should step up their efforts to support the Government of South Sudan in broadening dialogue and championing compromises to advance the stalled process. Indonesia commends the tireless efforts by UNMISS to exercise its good offices to engage all stakeholders in pushing for the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement. With the possible reconfiguration of its mandate, we emphasize the importance of strengthening the role of UNMISS in facilitating dialogue as well as community engagement. My third point is on the sanctions benchmarking process. Indonesia firmly believes that the sanctions regime should be aimed only at creating a conducive and sustainable environment in support of the peace process. Sanctions should never exist as a punitive measure but should be employed strictly as one of the well-thought- out ways whereby the peace process can clearly be seen to progress. Concerning benchmarks on South Sudan's sanctions, we emphasize that the role of sanctions in facilitating the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement should remain the primary element of the benchmarks. Moreover, we want to highlight the importance of engaging the region to ensure the effectiveness of sanctions in supporting the peace process. In conclusion, this is indeed a critical time in South Sudan's journey to peace. All the relevant parties must play their role effectively to ensure that the progress achieved is sustained and built upon. Indonesia remains committed to working with South Sudan on its journey towards a lasting peace.
