Mr. Kolby (Norway): Mr. President, it is an
honour and a pleasure to see you presiding over this
important meeting. It is also a testimony to
Bangladesh's persistent efforts to prevent conflict and
promote a culture of peace.

Norway welcomes the Secretary-General's report
on conflict prevention. We share his vision that we
need to move the United Nations system from a
"culture of reaction to a culture of prevention."

In paragraph 165 of the report the Secretary-
General states:

"Most of the factors that stopped the United
Nations intervening to prevent genocide in
Rwanda remain present today."

We find this fact deeply disturbing. It provides a clear
rationale for why conflict prevention must continue to
be high on the Council's agenda. There is a need to act
more decisively to address looming conflicts where the
United Nations can work in concert with regional
organizations and initiatives. Too often the signs of
escalating conflict are clear to the world community,
but action is withheld.

In the following I will provide Norway's views
on some of the principal issues in the report. We will
comment further on the report during the announced
meetings in the General Assembly. Allow me to stress,
however, that conflict prevention has to be approached
in a comprehensive manner. It is therefore important
that while the report is being discussed both in the
Council and in the Assembly, it is vital that we do not
end up with a United Nations that reacts in a piece-
meal manner to issues that are complex and intertwined
in the field.

An understanding of the local and underlying
causes of each conflict is a fundamental premise for
successful prevention. The United Nations presence at
the country level is important for the early prevention
of conflict. It is also important in ensuring that
preventive strategies are based on local initiatives and
participation. In our view, there is a need to clarify
roles, responsibilities and lines of communication for
work in the United Nations system at the country level,
in order to secure the best use of existing resources for
conflict prevention. The role of the Department of
Political Affairs as focal point in the United Nations
system for prevention and peace-building makes it
paramount that the Department coordinate and
cooperate with other departments, funds and agencies.
We are pleased to note that the report presents this as
an area of priority for the Department.

We agree that preventive action should be
initiated at the earliest possible stage of a conflict cycle
in order for it to be effective. The role of the funds,
programmes and other specialized agencies is crucial in
that respect.

The Security Council needs to address conflict
prevention in a more systematic manner. We support
the recommendation that more active use be made of
preventive deployment, and that peace-building
components be included in peacekeeping operations.

Timing is key in operational conflict prevention.
Financial resources must be available to act swiftly.
Norway has supported the Trust Fund for Preventive
Action, and we would like to use this opportunity to
appeal to other donor countries to provide financial
resources to the Fund.

Regional and subregional organizations, such as
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the
Economic Community of West African States, are
developing their capacity for conflict prevention. These
are measures that should be actively supported by the
international community. Norway has provided support
to the OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution. Within the broad mandate
of Chapter VIII of the Charter, the United Nations
should seek to strengthen its cooperation with regional
organizations on conflict prevention.

A wide range of cooperative measures are at hand
for the United Nations system, such as preventive
diplomacy and support for democratic principles,
security sector reform and human rights measures.
These are, and should be, the main components of
preventive strategies. However, those strategies are
effective only when conflicts are driven by grievances
that can be addressed by such measures, and where
there exists a local commitment to peaceful solutions to
conflict. We must not be blind to the fact that economic
ambition and greed drive many conflicts that constitute
a threat to international peace and security. Today,
widespread poverty and armed conflict go hand in hand
in countries that are rich in resources. How can peace
be secured among belligerents that actively seek to
undermine efforts to prevent armed conflict? Reducing
the profits of war is an important preventive measure.
The Council should continue its work to develop more
effective measures targeted at the illegal exploitation of
natural resources and at related factors that fuel armed
conflict. Experience indicates that such measures serve
to strengthen rather than to weaken national
sovereignty.

The profits of war fuel the illegal trade in small
arms. Practical disarmament measures such as
"weapons for development" projects and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration are important tools for
preventing conflict. We appeal to donor countries to
provide the necessary funding for such projects.
Norway has supported a wide range of practical
disarmament measures, and contributed to the
establishment of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) Trust Fund on Small Arms. In our
view, the United Nations should increase its support for
regional measures to curb the illicit trade in small
arms.

The first United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in all its
Aspects will take place at United Nations Headquarters
from 9 to 20 July. It is of prime importance that the
conference agree on a programme of action to curb the
illicit trade in small arms.

With respect to peace operations, Norway agrees
that particular emphasis needs to be placed on the
preventive role of civilian police in peace operations.
In general, the report (S/2000/809) of the Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations chaired by Mr.
Lakhdar Brahimi was a milestone in providing a
unified approach to peace and security. We consider
many of its recommendations as key to strengthening
the work of the United Nations in preventing conflict.
It is of utmost importance that the ongoing
deliberations in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations result in support for
strengthening capacity within the Secretariat.

Finally, we welcome the approach taken by the
Secretary-General in inviting Member States to
participate in developing a road map for the
implementation of the specific recommendations in the
report. In that respect we, in general, support the
proposal for a mechanism under the Security Council
to discuss prevention cases on a continuing basis. We
believe we should first consider the appropriateness of
using existing mechanisms.

As Member States, we need to do more than
express our support for the Secretary-General's vision
of moving from a culture of reaction to a culture of
prevention. We must take ownership. The primary
responsibility for the peaceful settlement of conflict
rests with the national Governments concerned.
Without the will for peace, the options for conflict
prevention are limited. Furthermore, it is through the
leadership of Member States in United Nations organs
and in the governing councils of United Nations funds,
programmes and specialized agencies that that change
can materialize. Ultimately, these questions are linked
to the thorny issues of authority and division of labour
within the United Nations system. As conflict
prevention transcends the boundaries among the
mandates of the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Security Council, we as
Member States have a particular responsibility to
provide for a unified United Nations approach.

