Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes to
echo the words of deep frustration voiced by several
members of the Security Council this afternoon. This
is undoubtedly a collective failure, but those who are
watching can see that it was a predictable result. We all
came here today prepared with our written statements
knowing that we would not reach the needed consensus
for the adoption of a resolution. The Security Council
once again leaves a poor impression of a lack of unity
on such a sensitive topic.

Bolivia reiterates its most firm and categorical
condemnation of the use of chemical agents as weapons.
It is an unjustifiable criminal act wherever, whenever
and by whomsoever it is carried out, as its use is a
serious violation of international law and a threat to
international peace and security. We also note once again
that the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM) must carry out its work in the most methodical,
transparent and fundamentally depoliticized manner so
as to avoid the instrumentalization of its work.

The renewal of the mandate must maintain
the integrity and independence of the Mechanism.
Therefore, we must consider only the purpose for
which it was created through clear working methods
in order to avoid mistakes of the past. Its work must
be carried out in the most methodical, technical and
reliable manner possible, with the help of independent,
impartial, complete and conclusive investigations.

In our most recent meeting on this issue (see S/PV.8090), some delegations expressed certain
technical inconsistencies in the JIM's most recent report
(S/2017/904, annex). We believe that such extremes
must be addressed, resolved and serve as a basis for
improving the work of the Mechanism so as to prevent
them in future investigations. Bolivia voted against
the draft resolution cotnained in document S/2017/962
because it explicitly asked the JIM. and the Fact-finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic to travel to the
scenes of incidents in order to gather more verifiable
evidence in situ so as to ensure a thorough investigation.

We are committed to continuing to work towards
strengthening investigation processes in a more
transparent manner, and for that, we call on the
Council to resolve its differences and unite its efforts
to maintain unity on such an important issue for the
international community.

As we stated at the beginning of this meeting,
within the framework of and in accordance with
article 35 of the Security Council's provisional rules
of procedure, Bolivia supported the draft resolution
(S/2017/933) presented by the Russian Federation and
China. That having been said, my delegation requires
the presidency to put the draft resolution to the vote, as
stipulated in rule 35 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

