Mr. Umemoto (Japan): I am grateful, Mr. President,
that you have chosen a topic that touches upon a
fundamental aspect of international peace and security.
It also prompts our intellectual and academic curiosity.

The current situations in Syria, South Sudan and
the Central African Republic are a clear indication of
the crucial importance of national reconciliation to
the achievement of permanent peace. As shown in the
aforementioned cases, the situation on the ground in
each country is different, requiring deep understanding
of all the characteristics particular to each case so that
we should deliberate on a case by case basis. There is
no one-size-fits-all solution.

The reality of today's world shows that
reconciliation is not an easy task. I therefore believe
that it would not be practical to discuss the issue in the
abstract. In dealing with such an important issue, we
need the wisdom of all Member States, and the Security
Council, with only 15 members, may not be the best
place. What the United Nations and the international
community can do in practical and concrete terms to
build an environment that encourages reconciliation
should be something that the whole membership should
address.

Japan has consistently followed the path of a
peace-loving nation since the end of the Second World
War. During a certain period in the past, Japan caused
tremendous damage and suffering to the people of many
countries, particularly those of Asian nations. The
Government of Japan, squarely facing those historical
facts, has expressed its feelings of deep remorse and
sincere mourning for all victims of the Second World
War, both at home and abroad, and voiced its heartfelt
apology. The entire position outlined by previous
Administrations is maintained by the current Cabinet.

Peace, democracy and human rights constitute an
important part of the Japanese people's identity. Since
the end of the Second World War, Japan has continued
to pursue the path of a peaceful country and it will
never change from that course. That point has been
highlighted in the national security strategy that was
approved by Cabinet decision in December 2013. It is
therefore a pity that specific issues involving Japan and
some neighbouring countries have been raised recently
and during today's open debate. Japan does not believe
that such actions are helpful in reducing tensions and
enhancing stability in the region. Although Japan
doubts that the Security Council is the most appropriate
forum for dealing with those specific issues, let me
clarify our positions on the three issues that were raised
by some delegations today.

First, with regard to the Yasukuni Shrine, the
Shrine is home to approximately 2.5 million souls who,
regardless of their rank, social standing or nationality,
made the ultimate sacrifice for their nation, not just in
the Second World War but also during domestic turmoil
and other wars since 1853. In the statement entitled
"Pledge for everlasting peace", which Prime Minister
Abe issued upon his visit to the Shrine, he underlined
that the purpose of his visit was to renew the pledge that
Japan shall never again wage war. It was by no means
to pay homage to Class A war criminals or to praise
militarism.

Secondly, we are deeply pained to think of the
comfort women who experienced immeasurable pain
and suffering. Japan has extended its sincere apologies
and remorse to all those women on various occasions.
We established the Asian Women's Fund in the 1990s
to offer atonement to former comfort women. At this
juncture, Japan's position is that this issue should not
be politicized or be turned into a diplomatic issue.
Throughout history, women's dignity and basic human
rights have often been infringed upon during the many
wars of the past. The Government of Japan attaches
paramount importance to women's dignity and basic
human rights and is committed to doing its utmost to
ensure that the twenty-first century is free from further
such violations.

Thirdly, Japan has recently revised the commentary
of the courses of study for junior high school and high
school, solely from an educational point of View. We
have done so because, like other countries, Japan also
considers it natural to teach its own children about the
country's territory.

Japan has been manifesting its remorse regarding
the war through concrete actions. Japan wishes to build
a future-oriented and cooperative relationship with
Asian nations, especially China and the Republic of
Korea. Prime Minister Abe has stated that he wishes
to build friendship with China and the Republic of
Korea based on respect, and that he would strongly
welcome direct dialogue with leaders from China and
the Republic of Korea.

As a country that upholds such universal values as
freedom, democracy, respect for fundamental rights
and the rule of law, Japan has actively supported
efforts towards democracy and national reconciliation
in different countries, including those of Asia. One
such action is Japan's support for democratization,
reconciliation and economic development in Myanmar.
Another important case is Sri Lanka, where Japan
has actively engaged in national reconciliation and
establishing lasting peace.

Another project is the initiative called Corridor
for Peace and Prosperity, which was launched in
July 2006. This is an initiative that is aimed at
contributing to creating a viable Palestinian economy
by promoting economic development in the Jordan
valley in cooperation with Israelis, Palestinians and
Jordanians. Furthermore, during the recent second
Geneva Conference on Syria, Japan announced its plan
to extend additional assistance worth $120 million in
total to improve the humanitarian situation in Syria.

Those are concrete recent actions that Japan
has taken to support democratization and national
reconciliation. Japan will continue to be a peace-loving
nation and contribute even more proactively to securing
the peace, stability and prosperity of the international
community, as a proactive contributor to peace and on
the basis of the principle ofinternational cooperation.

Let me finish my remarks by quoting Mr. Nelson
Mandela, former President of the Republic of South
Africa. Madiba said that reconciliation means working
together with your enemy. What the international
community and the United Nations should do is prepare
the ground for such reconciliation. Japan stands ready
to continue to proactively contribute to such endeavours
together with the international community and the
United Nations.

