I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). At the outset, we would like to express our gratitude to the delegation of the Dominican Republic, a fellow country of the Non-Aligned Movement, for having organized this meeting on the theme "Towards the fifth anniversary of the youth and peace and security agenda: accelerating implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018)", and for submitting the concept note on the topic (S/2020/302, annex). We are also grateful to His Excellency Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and other briefers for their statements. The world today is home to the largest generation of young people in history - 1.8 billion. Close to 90 per cent of them live in developing countries, of which the States members of the Non-Aligned Movement constitute an absolute majority. Among civilians, young people account for many of those adversely affected by armed conflict, including as refugees and internally displaced persons. The disruption of their access to education and economic opportunities has a negative impact on durable peace and reconciliation. As the Secretary-General points out in his report on youth and peace and security (S/2020/167), submitted pursuant to resolution 2419 (2018), one in four young people is affected by violence or armed conflict. The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its call on parties to armed conflict to comply with obligations applicable to them under international law relevant to the protection of civilians, including young people. NAM resolutely condemns all acts of violence, attacks and threats against civilian populations, which may amount to war crimes, and stresses the importance of ending impunity for such acts. This year marks the fifth anniversary of resolution 2250 (2015), on youth and peace and security, which for the first time recognized the important and positive contribution of youth to efforts for the maintenance and promotion of peace and security, as well as in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and as a key aspect of the sustainability, inclusiveness and success of peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts. This was reaffirmed in 2419 (2018). Promoting and sustaining international peace is a key issue to the Non- Aligned Movement. The Movement and its member States have historically opposed war and supported peace. The Movement has consistently emphasized the need for the involvement of all segments of society in peace processes, including women and youth, who can play an important role in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, as well as in peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts and in building peaceful and resilient societies. Inclusivity is key to advancing national peacebuilding processes and objectives in order to ensure that the needs of all segments of society are taken into account. At their eighteenth Summit, held in Baku on 25 and 26 October 2019, under the theme "Upholding the Bandung Principles to ensure a concerted and adequate response to the challenges of the contemporary world", the Heads of State and Government of the Non-Aligned Movement considered ways to increase the meaningful and inclusive participation of youth in peacebuilding efforts by creating policies, including in partnership with the private sector, where relevant, that would enhance youth capacities and skills and create youth employment to actively contribute to sustaining peace. The Heads of State and Government of the Movement also reaffirmed the importance of the inclusion of youth in the process of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. On the margins of the NAM Baku Summit, the first-ever NAM Youth Summit was organized upon the initiative of the Republic of Azerbaijan, as an outcome of which the NAM Youth Network was established to enable the youth representatives of NAM member States to exchange ideas, visions and perspectives on current challenges that they face in ensuring sustainable progress and how these difficulties could be overcome through concerted and adequate responses of their States. In conclusion, we would like once again to commend the initiative of the Dominican Republic in convening this meeting to review the implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions, share best practices and lessons learned and discuss further action on the role of young people in relation to peace and security.
