Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): With respect,
Madam President, to your presidency of the Council
this month, I will try to speak in Korean.

(spoke in Korean) (spoke in English)

My delegation feels deep appreciation for the
convening of this meeting marking the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004). We pay
tribute to the work of the Republic of Korea in chairing
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We align ourselves with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union (EU).

The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) 10 years
ago was historic; it was a crucial step in preventing
terrorist groups from gaining access to weapons ofmass
destruction. To realize that important goal, we all must
work together. Even today, the risk that non-State actors
may acquire nuclear, chemical or biological weapons
is real. Effective multilateralism, strong bilateral
partnerships and robust national implementation are
key to achieving our common aim, namely, to prevent
that from happening.

The Netherlands has taken robust measures to
ensure compliance with resolution 1540 (2004). Those
include effective controls to prevent non-State actors
from developing, acquiring or transferring weapons of
mass destruction. We continue to review our policies.
A good example is the current review of our biosecurity
regime. We intend to present that new regime at the
upcoming Meeting ofExperts ofthe Biological Weapons
Convention. We also take innovative measures to
improve chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
safety. For example, Rotterdam, one of the largest
ports in the world, scans all containers for nuclear and
radiological materials, and we share best practices like
those with other countries.
We truly believe in the power of sharing information
and providing assistance to other countries. Therefore
we support other countries in strengthening their legal
and regulatory infrastructure, both on a national basis
and through the EU. We invest in global cooperation
in countering nuclear, chemical and biological threats.
The Netherlands is a strong supporter of effective
multilateral export control regimes and assists other
countries with their implementation. Furthermore,
the Netherlands actively lobbies in favour of making
multilateral treaties truly universal. And of course, my
country and Government hosted the recent Nuclear
Security Summit. We welcome the reference to the
Summit in the presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2014/7).

The Nuclear Security Summit two months
ago contributed to higher awareness and better
implementation of nuclear security worldwide, and
thereby promoted the agenda of resolution 1540
(2004). For my country, it is crucial that the results
of the Nuclear Security Summit not be limited to its
participants. Therefore, we actively share the outcomes.
This afternoon, for example, our Sherpa presented the
achievements here at United Nations Headquarters to
all Member States.

The Summit resulted in The Hague communique,
which was agreed upon by the leaders of the 53
countries and four international organizations that
participated. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon took part.
The participants welcomed the significant contribution
made by the United Nations to strengthening nuclear
security. The participants urged States to fully
implement resolution 1540 (2004) and subsequent
resolutions and to continue to report on such efforts on
a regular basis.

The Netherlands is proud to be one of the
33 countries that signed the joint statement on
resolution 1540 (2004) in The Hague. The group, led
by Canada and the Republic of Korea, committed to
fully implementing resolution 1540 (2004). The main
purpose of the group is better implementation, reporting
and providing assistance within the framework of
resolution 1540 (2004). To strengthen the Nuclear
Security Summit process, we also hosted summits for
industry and for the scientific community. The nuclear
industry summit in particular was of great importance,
because implementation of nuclear security and control
measures very often must be carried out by industry.

Summing up, inspired by spirit of the Nuclear
Security Summit, the Netherlands would like to set the
bar high for the next 10 years. The focus of our work
should further shift from awareness-raising to effective
implementation. Only together can we achieve the
important objectives of resolution 1540 (2004). The
Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue to be an
effective partner for both the United Nations and other
Member States in realizing those goals.

