Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me too welcome the
new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria.
As our Polish colleague just remarked, his briefing
was very clear. He has a very clear methodological
approach, and I can only say that we stand fully behind
the five priorities he presented.

I believe that, on the basis of resolution 2254
(2019) and under United Nations leadership, there
is a window of opportunity to find a solution to this
terrible conflict. Let me also echo what my Belgian
colleague highlighted - that what is key is to gain the
confidence of all of the participants, which is the basis
for Mr. Pedersen's success.

From a German perspective, and as a number
of colleagues from Kuwait, France, Belgium
and Poland have added, there needs to be a fifth
priority - accountability. Reconciliation in Syria will
not be possible without accountability. Germany is now
prosecuting members of the Syrian regime who have
been accused of abhorrent crimes. It is necessary that
we stop impunity, and Germany fully supports the
International Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011. As in other crises
and conflicts, no lasting reconciliation will be possible
without an end to impunity.

Let me also highlight the need at this stage for
confidence-building measures. I believe that the
Special Envoy mentioned the releases of 42 detainees.
The Russian Ambassador also welcomed that. I believe
that Russia will continue to exert pressure on the Syrian
regime so that there are additional releases. With regard
to confidence-building measures, we therefore have
to do more so that additional detainees are released,
those abducted are freed and we enjoy further clarity
concerning missing persons. With regard to returns, we
need those confidence-building measures. People will
come home only if they know that there is no torture,
that there is no use of chemical weapons, that there
will be no forced recruitment and that their homes are
not expropriated.

Among the priorities that the Special Envoy
mentioned, I wanted to highlight the constitutional
committee. I think that that is extremely important. I
agree with my Russian colleague, who, with regard to
the third list, mentioned the unpleasant circumstances
of December 2018. Perhaps, we have a different
interpretation of that. We fully support the decision
made by Staffan de Mistura at that time to reject the
proposals made by the Astana group concerning the
third list. It is very important that, with regard to the
constitutional committee, we have a credible, balanced
and inclusive committee, because we need that as a
basis for the political process. In that context, I wish
the Special Envoy good luck in achieving that goal. I
would also encourage him, in putting the list, together
to ensure that women are represented. Thirty per cent
representation would be a minimal amount, as they
represent 50 per cent of the population. I think that it
should be 50 per cent, but 30 per cent would already be
a positive step. We know, after all, that the women and
children have suffered most in the conflict and that they
have to be represented. We appreciate his mentioning
civil society and that he wants to engage the latter in
finding a political solution.

My last point concerns the humanitarian situation.
Germany is among the largest donors of humanitarian
aid. My Polish colleague just mentioned that the
European Union (EU) has scheduled another donors'
conference for March. The EU is the largest donor of
humanitarian aid and will also potentially be a major
donor in terms of reconstruction. In that regard, we
would have liked to demonstrate to our colleagues in
the Security Council what Brussels can do by taking
a trip there next month. In any case, I can only repeat
what my French and Polish colleagues said, which is
that we will participate in reconstruction only with a
credible and inclusive political process and transition
under way.

