Mr. Mladenov: As we sit here today, the continuing
status quo in the occupied Palestinian territory reduces
the prospect for sustainable and just peace between
Israelis and Palestinians. Rarely have the risks to the
two-State solution been greater than today. How many
times have we said in this Chamber that we must move
past the blatant obstructionism, the false starts and the
perpetual claims that the time is simply not right for
action? Inaction has a cost, one measured in human
lives and suffering. The situation on the ground is
changing steadily - dangerously - as proponents of
Israeli settlement expansion feel emboldened, internal
divisions among Palestinians flare up and the prospect
of a future Palestinian State comes under threats like
never before.

The proponents of the status quo, the critics of
the two-State solution, offer no viable alternative that
meets the legitimate national and historic aspirations
of both Israelis and Palestinians. The alternative is
an open-ended occupation, a perpetual conflict that
breeds anger among the people of Palestine and Israel
and fuels radicals across a Middle East already torn by
ethnic and religious strife.

Socioeconomic despair, underpinned by the
persistent hardships of the occupation and fragile
democratic institutions, is affecting stability in the
West Bank and threatening to erode the achievements
of the Palestinian State-building agenda. The stark
reality is most visible in the Palestine refugee camps,
which remain a symbol of the failure to produce a
sustainable political solution to end the conflict and
Palestinian suffering.

I visited the West Bank city of Nablus twice this
month to meet with the Governor, as well as with
residents and representatives of the Balata refugee
camp. Established in 1950 to serve approximately
5,000 refugees, Balata today is the home of almost
30,000 people, living on just 0.25 square kilometres of
land. Some 50 per cent of its residents are reportedly
unemployed, the majority of them youths. Poverty and
food insecurity rates are the highest in the West Bank.
The harsh conditions, combined with regular Israeli
incursions and the lack of a permanent home, create the
potential for violence.

With growing political tension in the West Bank over
the past months, we have witnessed a series of clashes
between Palestinian security forces and residents of
the camp and the nearby old city. Regrettably, during
recent operations, one woman caught in the crossfire
was killed and 15 people were injured, including four
security personnel.

The Palestinian Authority has an obligation to
maintain law and order, including in the refugee camps,
which they continue to do effectively and professionally
under very challenging circumstances. It is critical
that, should force be used, it be usedjudiciously. Those
charged or arrested must be afforded due judicial
process and treated equally under Palestinian law.

The problems in the camps are a reflection of the
deep social economic and political challenges, the
resolution of which is not in the hands of the vulnerable
Palestine refugees; rather, it is foremost in the hands
of Palestinian and Israeli political leaders. Left
without hope and mired in poverty, Palestine's most
traumatized - its refugees - have seen their needs
outpace the resources available to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA).

Generations of residents have been educated by
UNRWA and thousands have gained employment
and a sense of security through its various activities.
The most destitute have benefitted from its relief
programme. I appeal to the international community to
support UNRWA so that it can carry out its activities
effectively and predictably. I welcome the generous
commitments made by the United Arab Emirates
and Kuwait, in addition to Canada's resumption of
support for UNRWA. That support is indispensable to
maintaining the lives of Palestine refugees and to the
stability of the region.

The situation in the camps, however, is only part of
the story. If current socioeconomic trends continue, the
potential for serious deterioration of the situation in the
West Bank will grow. The Palestinian Authority faces
fiscal difficulties, as international assistance this year
is down by some 30 per cent. The Palestinian Authority
is dependent upon Israel for clearance revenues, and
on the international community for financial support.
Economic development in the West Bank remains
constrained by Israeli restrictions on access to the most
fertile lands, water and mineral resources in Area C,
which constitutes approximately 60 per cent of the
West Bank.

While Israel has made important positive gestures,
including retroactively legalizing two Palestinian
schools and advancing a community outline plan for
a Palestinian village in Area C near Jenin, such steps
are only the beginning. They need to be expanded and
encouraged. I welcome the important discussions being
held between the parties on critical issues, such as
water and electricity, that build on agreements from the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee meeting in September here
in New York.

While progress is being made, it remains slow. It
is critical that these discussions become operational
realities in order to meet the dire needs of the West
Bank and Gaza. It is in no one's interest to allow the
Palestinian economy and stability to crumble. Only
significant policy shifts by Israel and actions by the
Palestinians to strengthen their institutions and the rule
of law can sustainably reverse this cause.

In its July report (see S/2016/595), the Middle East
Quartet underscored the need for Palestinian unity: a
single, democratic and legitimate Government that
unites Gaza and the West Bank. That remains critical
for the fulfilment of Palestinian national aspirations.
Sadly, that unity continues to remain an elusive goal.

On 29 November, Fatah is scheduled to hold its
seventh party conference. That should be used as an
opportunity for promoting unity, for strengthening
the mainstream centre of Palestinian politics and
paving the way for elections. I urge all to conduct the
proceedings in a fully transparent and representational
manner that encourages moderate voices and respects
opposing views.

Recent developments in Israel are increasingly
worrying. Last week, despite strong opposition, the
so-called legalization bill passed a preliminary vote
in the Knesset. If adopted, the bill would enable the
expansion of illegal settlements and outposts on private
Palestinian land. If ratified, it would constitute a breach
of international law and, according to Israel's own
Attorney General, would also be unconstitutional.

Today, the local planning committee in Jerusalem
decided to advance plans for 500 new housing units
in the existing settlement of Ramat Shlomo, further
encroaching into the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of
Beit Hanina. I once again urge Israel to adhere to the
repeated calls to cease illegal settlement construction
in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem.

In recent weeks, Israel has also conducted over
80 demolitions of Palestinian structures in Area C and
East Jerusalem, for a lack of building permits that are
next to impossible to obtain. In this latest round 122
people have been displaced. This year to date, over
1,020 structures have been demolished, which is nearly
twice last year's total.

Let me now turn to Gaza, where I continue to
be deeply concerned by the continuing militant
buildup, smuggling and increased restrictions on
the movement of people and goods in and out of the
Strip. As I briefed the Security Council last month
(see S/PV.7792), the amount of construction materials
entering Gaza is woefully inadequate to meet the vast
reconstruction needs.

Due to limitations by Israel on imports of materials
and approvals of construction projects, the volume of
such building materials - primarily cement - has now
fallen well behind demand. This creates tensions among
approved beneficiaries over the limited availability
in the market. At today's import rates, it would take
at least seven months to clear the current backlog of
33,000 households in Gaza that have been approved to
purchase cement to repair or reconstruct their housees.
Thousands of households have been waiting for months
to access the material they need, and economic activity
in the Gaza strip is slowing ominously.

In October, at least 50 per cent of permit
applications to exit Gaza were denied for national staff
of international aid agencies alone, in sharp contrast to

the average of less than 5 per cent of denials in 2015.
That has significant impacts on the ability ofthe United
Nations and the humanitarian community to deliver and
monitor ongoing programmes. While acknowledging
Israel's security concerns, I urge it to address this
pressing issue without delay.
I also welcome recent Egyptian efforts to relieve
the suffering of the people in Gaza. The opening of the
Rafah Border Crossing for lOcdays this month enabled
thousands of people, including students and those
seeking urgent medical attention, to cross into Egypt,
and over 2,000 Palestinians to return back home to the
Gaza strip.

I now turn briefly to Lebanon. Since the Council
was last briefed, on 10 November, there have been
further signs of the country overcoming its political
crisis. Following the election of President Aoun,
progress has been made towards the formation of a
Government under the leadership of Prime Minister
Saad Hariri. It is hoped that this positive momentum
will translate into a full reactivation of institutions,
including parliamentary elections by May 2017.

The situation in the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area of operations remains
unchanged, mostly quiet with some violations by both
sides. The UNIFIL investigation into a firing incident
across the Blue Line on 26 October near Kafer Kela
is ongoing. In a tripartite meeting, Israel and Lebanon
reaffirmed their commitments to calm and stability
along the Blue Line.

On the Golan, I remain concerned by the current
precarious situation, which undermines the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and clearly
jeopardizes the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian
Arab Republic. I urge both parties to maintain liaison
with the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force and to refrain from any action that could escalate
the situation across the ceasefire line and the already
volatile regional environment.

As the situation in the West Bank continues to
deteriorate, as Gaza's chronic challenges show little
sustainable progress, and as the voices of extremism on
all sides intensify their efforts to destroy any remaining
hope for the two-State solution, I would like to conclude
with a call to both parties and all stakeholders to stand up
to those promoting a hate-driven agenda that threatens
to prolong this conflict. A carefully worded statement
or a well-crafted speech will not reverse the current
trajectory. What people long for is concrete action.
They need to see a plan to rebuild trust and create the
conditions for a return to meaningful negotiations by
focusing on positive changes on the ground and an
engagement with the region. They need the international
community to restate its consensus that the two-State
solution is the only outcome that legitimately meets
the national aspirations of both peoples, and to speak
clearly against the obstacles to peace: settlements, the
taking of land, violence and incitement. They need to
hear from us that development cannot be a substitute
for statehood and that democracy, human rights and the
rule of law must be respected. They need courageous
Israeli and Palestinian leaders who together can chart a
clear strategy to peace and security.

I urge all those who are committed to ending the
conflict, including the Council, to consider carefully
what it will take to advance the prospects for peace, and
to begin, in consultation with the parties, to develop an
agreed path forward. Time is running out. Palestinians
and Israelis deserve to live in peace; we must spare
no effort in helping them reach that goal. As ever,
the United Nations remains committed to advancing
that objective.

