Mr. Musambachime (Zambia): Let me begin by
thanking you, Sir, for assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month. My delegation also wishes to
thank you for agreeing so promptly to Malaysia's
request to hold this very important meeting.

I also wish to commend your predecessor for the
leadership that he provided during his tenure as
President of the Security Council last month.

Your leadership comes at a very critical stage in
the history of the Security Council. This is an
important organ of the United Nations, which has to
decide between the survival and the destruction of a
nation. As an African who is guided by the wisdom of
the elders and who comes from a continent which has
been subjected to a lot of pressure and hardships, I
know that you will remain strong and provide the
steadfast leadership associated with African struggle
and triumph.

Zambia would like to associate itself with the
statements made by Malaysia on behalf of the Non-
Aligned Movement and South Africa in its capacity as
Chair of the African Union, and with the statement that
will be made by Malawi, the Chair of the Group of
African States for this month.

The issue of the disarmament of Iraq concerns all
humankind. Developing and possessing weapons of
mass destruction is not a welcome development, as
these weapons threaten the very existence of mankind.
Iraq's compliance with all the Security Council's
resolutions is therefore cardinal to peace and security
in the region and the world at large.

Since the inspectors resumed inspections in
November 2002, they have briefed this Council on six
occasions. The inspectors have reported progress in
their work. In his latest briefing, Mr. Blix informed the
Security Council that,

"after a period of somewhat reluctant
cooperation, there has been an acceleration of
initiatives from the Iraqi side since the end of
January" (S/PV.47]4, p. 5)

and that the destruction of the Al Samoud 2 missiles
under the supervision of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) constituted "a substantial measure of
disarmament". He further stated that there was still
work to be done and that UNMOVIC would provide
the remaining tasks with a timeline of months, which
will be sufficient to conclude its work in Iraq.

Apart from Mr. Blix, Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), also reported to this Council, as
follows:

"After three months of intrusive inspections, we
have to date found no evidence or plausible
indication of the revival of a nuclear-weapon
programme in Iraq". (ibid, p. 8)

He said, however, that IAEA would continue to
investigate all issues of concern to the Security
Council.

Going by the statements of the inspectors I have
quoted, it is clear that progress has been made and
continues to be made in the disarmament of the Iraqi
regime.

Zambia is a peace-loving country. My country's
policy continues to be based on various principles
enshrined in the United Nations Charter, the
Constitutive Act of the African Union and the position
of the Non-Aligned Movement, such as respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries,
good-neighbourliness, peaceful co-existence and
settlement of disputes, and respect for human rights
and the rule of law. It is on the basis of these principles
that Zambia has for many years mediated in various
conflicts in the region and supported peace efforts,
including the provision of peacekeeping forces in other
parts of the world and in Africa itself.

The African Union, our continental body, and the
Non-Aligned Movement, which held its Summit in
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, last month and in which we
are active members, support the United Nations
inspections programme. This was also clearly stated by
our President Manawasa, who has called on the world
to observe the multilateral agenda. We do not believe
that war is the best approach to resolving the issue.
War does not build. It destroys life and property. We
urge for the peaceful measures provided for in
resolution 1441 (2002) to be continued.

It is in this context that Zambia wishes to appeal
to all members of the Security Council to maintain the
unity of the Council and to confront serious issues with
a united voice. We believe that any military action
would spell disaster for the least developed countries.
Indeed, Africa and other developing regions will suffer
the most. The world today should strive to maintain
peace and to promote economic development for the
benefit of all mankind. We should strive to eradicate
poverty, hunger and disease. The resources spent on
armaments should be channelled to the areas needed
for human survival. This is what should preoccupy us,
the peoples of the world.

