Mr. Sajdik (Austria): It is my honour to speak on
behalf of the Human Security Network, an informal,
cross-regional group of States comprising Chile, Costa
Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama,
Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand and Austria, and South
Africa as an observer.

At the outset, we want to thank the presidency for
having organized today's open debate as well as the
Secretary-General for his presentation, and we would
like to express our support for the recommendations
contained in his report (S/2011/634*).

We welcome the Security Council's important
role in enhancing the rule of law, which is central to
the people-centred, holistic approach to security
advocated by the Human Security Network. Clear and
foreseeable rules, respect for and adherence to those
rules and an effective rules-based multilateral system
to prevent and sanction violations are preconditions for
lasting international peace and security. We encourage
the Council to use the tools at its disposal to ensure
respect for international law and to respond to grave
violations in a systematic and consistent manner.
While the primary responsibility for investigating
and prosecuting international crimes lies with States,
and domestic justice systems are the first resort in the
pursuit of accountability, the international community,
including the Council, undeniably has a key role in
addressing such crimes and in ensuring accountability.
Possible measures at the Council's disposal are diverse
and include referrals of situations to the International
Criminal Court, as with the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya; the
imposition of targeted measures; the establishment of
accountability mechanisms; the mandating of
commissions of inquiry; and, more generally,
mandating support for the rule of law and the
strengthening of justice and security institutions in
peacekeeping operations.

In that regard, let me also mention the great
importance that the Human Security Network attaches
to the role of the Council in the protection of women
and children. We are pleased with the work undertaken
by the Security Council in progressively strengthening
the protection framework for children affected by
armed conflict, as well as with its efforts to prevent
and combat sexual Violence.

We would like to underline the importance of
capacity-building for State institutions and transitional
justice approaches that are victim-centred and gender-
sensitive in order to ensure that the rights of victims, in
particular of women and children, are fully respected
and their interests taken into account.

We fully support the Secretary-General's
recommendation for further attention by the Council to
the rights of victims to reparations. Of the four pillars
of transitional justice, reparation is the one that most
lacks concrete implementation. Over the past two
decades, the Council has supported the development of
national and international judicial mechanisms, the
creation of truth commissions and the implementation
of institutional reforms needed to prevent further
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. We encourage the Council also to
give more attention to the question of reparation.
Reparation programmes, as underlined in General
Assembly resolution 60/147, on reparations, are not
limited to monetary compensation but can also include
symbolic measures, such as social services and
psychological care, that can make an important
contribution to the reconciliation of divided societies,
as well as help to address the economic and social
justice dimensions of the root causes of conflict.

Last but not least, the Human Security Network
would like to express its full support for the new
Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice,
reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence, whose

mandate was recently established by a consensual
resolution of the Human Rights Council. That reflects a
clear acknowledgement that accountability, along with
truth-seeking processes, reparations and institutional
reforms as a means of advancing human security, must
be an integral part of the United Nations transitional
justice efforts. We envision that the new Special
Rapporteur will be able to contribute to a more
comprehensive approach to justice and rule of law
related issues, and hope that the Secretary-General will
take into account, as appropriate, the work of relevant
special procedures within the United Nations system in
his next report presented to the Council on this issue.

Allow me now to address to Council in my
national capacity. It goes without saying that Austria
aligns itself with the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.

The recent events in the Arab world show the
timeliness of discussing the rule of law and transitional
justice. Accountability for serious international crimes
is a crucial aspect of that. Austria therefore calls for
full cooperation by all States with international and
hybrid tribunals established by the United Nations or
with its support. Moreover, all States must abide by
and implement the resolutions adopted by the Council
under Chapter VII, in particular when urged to fully
cooperate with the International Criminal Court,
including with regard to the arrest and surrender of
suspected perpetrators.

Rule of law and transitional justice activities are
now increasingly integrated into Security Council
resolutions. For example, resolution 1894 (2009), on
the protection of civilians, highlighted the importance
of a comprehensive approach to transitional justice
initiatives and acknowledged the important role of
accountability mechanisms, as well as national
reparation programmes for Victims, in the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

As emphasized in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2011/634*) to the Council on the rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies, all rule of law programmes and transitional
justice mechanisms have to be planned and
implemented in a manner sensitive to the specific
needs and rights of women and children. Evaluations
of the specific impact of transitional justice measures
on marginalized groups of society should be conducted
on a more systematic basis. In View of the unique and
disproportionate effects of conflict on women and
children, we must enhance our efforts to ensure
women's access to justice. We also need to provide for
minimum standards for the participation of children in
transitional justice mechanisms. For children who have
been associated with armed groups, for example, the
focus should be on non-judicial, restorative
accountability mechanisms that take the child's interest
into account, as well as on socio-economic
reintegration.

Furthermore, the report rightly highlights the
need for the Security Council itself to adhere to basic
rule of law principles to ensure the legitimacy of its
actions. In that regard, Austria welcomes the
substantial improvements of the procedures within the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime, including the recent
strengthening of the Office of the Ombudsperson, and
encourages the Council to further broaden and enhance
due process, including with regard to other sanctions
regimes.
12-20961

Allow me to conclude by pointing to the high-
level meeting on the rule of law at the national and
international levels, to be held in September. The
meeting could, and should, provide the ideal
opportunity for the launch of a new inclusive global
dialogue forum that brings together all relevant
stakeholders - national authorities, multilateral
bodies, regional organizations, civil society and the
private sector - and help to consolidate the currently
fragmented approach to rule of law assistance.

Finally, I would once again like to thank South
Africa for convening today's meeting. We call on the
Security Council to hold open debates on the rule of
law on a regular basis in the future.

