Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Allow me at the outset to
thank Minister Westerwelle for his presence here to
preside over this important meeting. I also wish to
thank Secretary-General Ban, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Coomaraswamy, and the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Mr. Lake, for their
comprehensive briefings.

Confronted with the dehumanizing effect of
force, children are too often robbed of their childhood.
The front lines of conflict bring them face to face with
the absurd horrors of war and threaten their education,
health care and the most basic human right - the right
to life.

Though notable progress has been made at the
normative level and in some specific contexts, the
overall situation of children in armed conflicts remains
troubling, as outlined in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2011/250). We condemn all indiscriminate
and disproportionate use of force against children, and
we call on all parties in situations of armed conflict to
strictly adhere to international humanitarian law.

Attacks against schools and hospitals are a
growing trend, as evidenced in the Secretary-General's
report. Lebanon had first-hand experience of attacks on
its schools and hospitals during the last war waged by
Israel, in 2006. By introducing a new criterion -
attacks on hospitals and schools - for listing parties to
armed conflicts in the annexes of the Secretary-
General's annual reports, the resolution before us
makes critical progress in the protection of children in
armed conflict. It sends a clear warning to perpetrators
about the serious consequences of committing such
violations.

Targeting schools also has far-reaching and
damaging repercussions on development. Indeed, the
World Bank, in its report on education in the Middle
East and North Africa, argued that the provision of
education, particularly for girls, is the single most
effective intervention that countries can make to
improve human development and to tackle conditions
of fragility.

In a more comprehensive manner, we believe that
the six grave violations enumerated in resolution 1612
(2005) are of equal gravity and should be accorded the
same attention by the Working Group. These are:
killing and maiming of children, recruitment and use of
child soldiers, rape and other forms of sexual violence
against children, abduction of children, attacks against
schools or hospitals, and denial of humanitarian access
to children. We look forward to the day when the
criteria for listing in the annexes of the Secretary-
General's report will be extended to all these six
violations.

Looking ahead, we wish to stress first that the
introduction of new listing criteria will require the
provision of accurate and verifiable information to the
Council - which will further strengthen the reporting
and monitoring mechanism already in place - in close
cooperation with the local authorities. Secondly, we
underscore the importance of a more effective follow-
up to the implementation of the recommendations of
the Working Group and the Group's swift response to
urgent situations in which children are affected on a
large scale. Thirdly, accountability relating to crimes
against children in armed conflicts remains the
exception. The United Nations could play a crucial role
in that respect through providing capacity-building and
coordinated support to fragile States in the field of the
rule of law.

I wish to conclude by recognizing the role that
education can play in fostering the value of peace,
tolerance and inclusiveness as the most effective way
to prevent conflict, protect children and heal them of
the traumas of war.

