Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, let me express our appreciation
to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for his tenth report on
measures taken to investigate the situation in Darfur
under Security Council resolution 1593 (2005) and for
today's briefing. We note that, judging by the report,
the Office of the Prosecutor in its work on Darfur is
paying more and more attention to factors related to
achieving a comprehensive peace in Darfur and in the
Sudan overall, and also to national and regional efforts
to combat impunity. In spite of a few differences in the
assessments in today's briefing, we believe that this
trend will continue to strengthen.

We welcome the report of the African Union
(AU) High Level Panel on Darfur, chaired by former
South African President Mbeki, containing a number of
interesting ideas on the use of national mechanisms to
bring about accountability. We look forward to a
continuation of contacts between the Prosecutor of the
ICC and the High Level Panel for the purposes of
achieving peace, justice and reconciliation in Darfur, as
well as for dealing with the challenges of criminal justice.

We take note of the Prosecutor's assessment of
the state of cooperation between Khartoum and the
ICC. However, we would call on him to carefully
weigh his steps in his work on Darfur and to calibrate
them with the challenges of achieving peace and
improving the humanitarian situation.

We have noted on a number of previous occasions
the need for an objective assessment of the actions of
all parties to the conflict. We are pleased that a number
of measures are being taken to investigate the attack on
AU peacekeepers in Haskanita in September 2007. An
important event in that area was the voluntary
appearance of the rebel leader, Abu Garda, in The
Hague and the start of the trial of his case. We call on
the Prosecutor not to slacken in his attention to the
work in that regard.
The Russian Federation registers its deep regret
and concern regarding information on the ongoing
violence in Darfur. It is clear that A comprehensive
political settlement, with the active assistance of the

African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, is the only way to end it. We support the efforts of
the Joint African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator
on the political process in Darfur, Mr. Bassole, to bring a
broad spectrum of Darfur rebel groups, as well as civil
society leaders, into the negotiating process.

A critical challenge is for the parties to reach
agreement on the cessation of armed hostilities. We are
seriously concerned by the obstinate refusal of the
leaders of such groups as the Justice and Equality
Movement and the Sudan Liberation Movement to
participate in the talks. We consider such conduct on
the part of the rebels to be a major obstacle to a
settlement.

We believe that the Darfur problem should be the
subject of constructive dialogue and cooperation
among the United Nations, the African Union and other
mediators, on the one hand, and the Sudanese
Government on the other. Russia has consistently
helped to establish dialogue in such formats. We
believe that progress in all areas of the settlement
process will be made only on the basis of constructive
and equal dialogue between the international
community and the Government of the Sudan, with
respect for the sovereignty of that country.

