Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Special Representative Martin Kobler and
Ambassador Ramlan Bin Ibrahim for their briefings.
I also take this opportunity to thank Ambassador
Ibrahim for his distinguished service at the helm of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011).

Five years after the Libyan civil war, which
destroyed the country, and one year since the signing of
the Libyan Political Agreement, we must say that - if
we are totally sincere - regrettably there has been no
major progress seen in the political transition process
or in putting together the Government of National
Accord. The support the Government has garnered
within the Libyan political system is minimal, while the
terms set for each new step - such as the presentation
of a revamped list of the members of the Cabinet to
the House of Representatives in Tobruk in order to
secure its long-delayed endorsement - continue to
undermine the chances for stabilizing the country and
putting it back on track towards normalcy. It is essential
that the Presidency Council of the Government of
National Accord expand its base of support among the
population. Otherwise, it will be very difficult for it
to eventually succeed in governing the country under
relatively normal conditions.

Ofthe few news we can highlight is the progress in
the anti-terrorist struggle, which has made it possible
to advance on positions of the Islamic State in Iraq and

Syria, mostly in Sirte and Benghazi.

We continue to be concerned about the serious
humanitarian situation for the Libyan population.
According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, more than 1 million people
are in need of assistance. Migrants continue to face a
desperate situation given the fact that, in spite of the
measures that the Security Council has adopted, the
Mediterranean Sea continues to serve as a grave for
thousands of Libyans and other nationals who try to
cross it for a better future.

We welcome the announcement by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons of the
completion of the elimination of the remaining chemical
weapons in Libya, which have been transferred outside
ofthe country for subsequent destruction, in compliance
with resolution 2298 (2016), which the Council adopted
in July.

We reiterate our support to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and for the
role of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.
We urge them to continue their joint efforts with Prime
Minister Serraj and the Presidency Council of the
Government of National Accord. Their work will be key
to ensuring that the Government of National Accord
can consolidate its legitimacy throughout the country,
which is the only way by which it can urgently address
the major challenges that await it to respond to the
multiple and growing needs facing Libya, as Mr. Kobler
pointed out a few moments ago, including combating
terrorism and the serious humanitarian, economic and
security crises affecting millions of people.

Against that backdrop, we believe that it will be
important to carefully establish a new mandate for
the Mission. We also think that the strategic review
recommended by the Secretary-General, to be carried
out at the beginning of the next year, presents a good
opportunity to harmonize the presence of United
Nations in Libya with the political, operational and
security reality on the ground.

