Ms. Zahir (Maldives): My delegation wishes to
thank the United States of America in its capacity as
President of the Security Council, for convening this
quarterly open debate in connection with the agenda
item on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.

Following the adoption of resolution 2334
(2016) - a significant and welcome step forward
in the Security Council to address the predicament
of the Palestinian people - it is with great concern
that my delegation joins this timely debate. While
resolution 2334 (2016) calls on Israel to take steps to
cease all settlement activities in the occupied territory
of Palestine, the occupying Power, Israel, continues
to blatantly violate international law, including by
disregarding resolutions of this very Council, through
its continued expansion ofillegal settlements, as well as
through its demolitions of structures on a large scale in
the occupied territory of Palestine. By doing so, Israel
is flagrantly hindering the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination, further undermining any
credible solution towards peace.

The Maldives strongly condemns the recent
decision by the occupying Power, Israel, to create a
new settlement in Geulat Tzion. That development is
extremely worrying, as it threatens peace and may
exacerbate tensions on the ground. The Government
of Maldives calls on the occupying Power, Israel, to
respect its international obligations, particularly with
respect to resolution 2334 (2016).

The Maldives also welcomes the recent report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), delivered orally to this Council by the
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nikolay Mladenov (see S/PV.7908), and supports
the call for a substantive written report in support of the
Council's duties to advance the resolution's objectives.
We believe that it is critical to build on the momentum
generated by the resolution and take further concrete
measures to bring an end to the Israeli occupation and
ascertain a peaceful and sustainable resolution of the
conflict, which has continuously overshadowed peace
and security in the region.

The Syrian conflict, the deadliest conflict that the
twenty-first century has witnessed thus far, has now
entered its seventh year. Hundreds of thousands of
people have been killed, millions have fled, hospitals
and basic infrastructure have been annihilated and
cities have been destroyed, along with cultural heritage.
Yet the suffering of the Syrian people does not seem
to be coming to an end. We call on the international
community, as well as the members of the Security
Council, to make progress on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions on issues relating to the
Middle East and to address them in a concrete manner,
in order to maintain the credibility of this Council.

The Maldives would like to reiterate its call for a
two-State solution that recognizes the sovereign and
independent State of Palestine and that is based on
the borders of 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Peace in the Middle East can be achieved only through
political will, international cooperation, tangible
actions and a united Security Council. The Maldives
stands ready to support the collective efforts of the
international community in securing a more peaceful
future for the Middle East and maintaining international
peace and order. The right to life in peace is a right for
each and every individual in such conflicts as much as
it is for each one of us here.

