The President: I thank Mr. Holmberg for
his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia.

For decades, the Blue Helmets have been a distinct
model ofa global partnership, collective leadership and
shared responsibility for peace. However, with today's
new political and security realities, the challenges
facing our peacekeepers are enormous. The incident in
Mali in January brings those realities home.
From the changing nature of conflicts to a lack of
commitment to a political solution; from inadequate
preparation of troops to the possible involvement of
transnational actors, including terrorists and relocated
foreign terrorist fighters, all those impact the safety
and performance of our Blue Helmets. It is important to
keep in mind that the Blue Helmets represent this organ
at work. They represent the face ofthe Security Council
on the ground. The Blue Helmets are the guardians of
peace, protecting millions around the globe.

Moreover, it is often overlooked that a peacekeeping
mission is more efficient than unilateral actions.
Deploying Blue Helmets in a mission is eight times
less expensive than unilaterally deploying forces. For
that reason, Indonesia fully believes in peacekeepers,
in adequately preparing them and in investing in their
performance. Investing in our peacekeepers is investing
in peace.

As conflicts evolve becoming increasingly
multifaceted, our support for peacekeepers must keep
pace with the challenges at hand. In that regard, I wish
to underline some pertinent points.

First, a mission-specific approach is necessary. A
one-size-fits-all approach is not sufficient. From the
perspective of a troop- and police-contributing country,
the success of a mission will depend on adequate
predeployment preparation grounded in the knowledge
of local needs and conditions. That requires improved
consultations among the Council, host countries,
contributing countries and the Secretariat to ensure
better synergy linking mandates, actual needs on the
ground and training.

Secondly, community engagement is crucial.
Let me share a story from one of our peacekeepers,
Major Gembong, who is currently serving in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. He witnessed
families separated by conflicts and took the initiative to
work for family reunification. With his team, they talked
to community leaders, heads of Villages and families
to enable the reintegration of former combatants into
the community. So far, 422 former combatants have
been reunited with their families, and peace prevails.
Indeed, peacekeepers' capability should go beyond
basic soldiering skills and be complemented by soft
skills, such as communication and trust-building.

Thirdly, investing in women equals investing in
peace. Female peacekeepers are more effective in
winning the hearts and minds of the local population and
providing comfort for those traumatized by conflicts.
There is strong evidence that women's participation in
peace processes increases the likelihood of sustained
peace by 20 per cent and contributes to longer-lasting
and more resilient peace. We must therefore make
peacekeeping more conducive to the inclusion of female
peacekeepers by working in partnership.

Indonesia is committed to enhancing the role of
female peacekeepers. For the first time, the number
of our female peacekeepers exceeds 100, and we
are committed to achieving more. Beyond female
peacekeepers, Indonesia is determined to continuously
enhance the role of women as agents of peace. That is
why we organized the Regional Training on Women,
Peace and Security, held in Jakarta last month, for
young female diplomats in the South-East Asian region.

Finally, training requires partnerships. As our
challenges become ever more complex, training should
be adaptive. That requires investment in training and
capacity-building, supported by partnerships among
Member States. Council members may rest assured
that Indonesia stands ready to engage in that regard.
We wish to offer the Indonesian Peacekeeping Training
Center to serve as an international training hub.
Indonesia also sees the benefit of more innovative
approaches in training, such as triangular partnerships.
We will therefore host the Triangular Partnership
Project in 2020 and 2021 to provide quality training for
peacekeepers in South-East Asia and beyond. Another
possible area isjoint training to support co-deployments
between contributing countries. Indonesia is keen to
explore that further.

United Nations Peacekeeping is the portrait of
multilateralism at its best. It is the most legitimate
and effective tool to maintain peace. We are pleased
that the Council has adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2019/4 on that issue - the first document
of the Council focusing on training and capacity-
building that will promote the performance, safety and
security of peacekeepers, in support of the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative of the Secretary-General. Let
us all stand firm behind our Blue Helmets and provide
them with all the support they deserve.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the other members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
