The President: We have reached the end of our
list of speakers, and, in view of the lateness of the hour,
I will certainly adopt the Norwegian formula.

Let me first of all thank all of the participants in
this very useful wrap-up meeting. I recognize that it
has been very difficult for non-members of the Council
to be present here today, in view of the many other
activities that are taking place and of the fact that our
meeting had to start much later than anticipated, since
we had to have earlier consultations, the consultations
having proved extremely useful on the situation in
Afghanistan.

I wish at this time to express my deep
appreciation to the members of the Council for the
considerable cooperation which the Jamaican
delegation received this month. The fact that we were
able to adopt several resolutions on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; counter-terrorism; Afghanistan;
children and armed conflict; Western Sahara; the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force and the
Iraq oil-for-food programme, as well as presidential
statements on Burundi, Kosovo and Angola and a
statement of appreciation to former President Nelson
Mandela certainly indicates the amount of work that we
put in during this month and the fact that all
delegations worked so well together to ensure the
outcome that we had.

I wish to express our appreciation in particular to
the delegations that helped us in coordinating
resolutions and presidential statements and in
providing elements for press statements. This has
always been a cooperative effort, and never more so
than this month.

I also wanted to express our deep appreciation to
the Security Council Secretariat, headed by Assistant
Secretary-General Joseph Stephanides. They provided
tremendous support to the delegation as well as to the
members of the Council.

As far as today's wrap-up session is concerned,
there are many threads which support improving
transparency. I certainly hope that the ideas that have
been expressed in reaction to the note that we
circulated will provide a basis for further action by the
members of the Council. We will certainly take on
board the suggestion of Ambassador Mahbubani that
we do a short analysis of the suggestions and the
recommendations coming out of this meeting, and we
will pass them on to the representatives of Mali when
they take up the presidency tomorrow.

Again, I thank you all very much.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.45 pm.
