Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Iwould
like to thank Under-Secretary General Jeffrey Feltman
and Ms. Fatima Shehu Imam, Director of the Network
of Civil Society Organizations in Borno state, for
their briefings.

France is encouraged by the recent progress that
has been made in the fight against Boko Haram in the
Lake Chad basin region. We commend the joint efforts
of the countries of the region in that regard and the
central role that the Multinational Joint Task Force has
played. However, the terrorist threat continues to weigh
on the countries and peoples of the region, as the tragic
record of the many recent attacks shows. We firmly
condemn the serious human rights Violations that are
being committed against children. Children are killed
and mutilated every day; they are Victims of sexual
violence or of attacks on schools and hospitals; they are
recruited as child soldiers. The growing use of children
in suicide attacks and the use of sexual violence as a
weapon of war are disgusting and a source of concern
and indignation that should haunt our consciences.

The countries of the region continue to mobilize in
response to the terrorists' violence, with the support of
the international community. It is the Security Council's
responsibility to provide support to the African States
that have been uniting at the regional level to fight
terrorism. France is playing a full part in that effort
through the logistical and intelligence support that
Operation Barkhane is giving the Multinational Joint
Task Force. We have also been providing bilateral
support to the armies of the region against Boko
Haram, totalling more than €30 million since 2015,
and we expect the rest of the international community
to take part in that effort as well. The countries of
the region, quite rightly, have major expectations for
United Nations involvement, as we saw last week in
the Council's recent consultations with the African
Union Peace and Security Council, and we must not
disappoint them.

That international support for the efforts of
the countries of the region goes hand in hand with
certain responsibilities. In particular, the fight against
terrorism must not admit violations of human rights
of any kind. We therefore expect the countries of the
Multinational Joint Task Force to act in full respect
for the relevant provisions of international law. The
measures that have already been taken to deal with this
issue are steps in the right direction. Lastly, we deplore
the delay in disbursing the €31 million in funds that
the European Union allocated to the African Union a
year ago. It should be used to equip the regional force
that, owing to inadequate equipment, has been unable
to effectively pursue the Boko Haram fighters who have
taken refuge on the islands of Lake Chad during the
current rainy season.

The response to the crisis in the Lake Chad basin
region is not just a security matter. If we are to achieve
a lasting solution to it, we must pay close attention
to the humanitarian and development challenges and
to the protection of civilians. The first point to make
is that the gravity of the continuing humanitarian
emergency in the region must compel us to strengthen
our efforts to support the countries that are on the front
lines in the fight against terrorism and that are hosting
a considerable number of refugees. Given the size of the
needs to be met, it is crucial to ensure a comprehensive
approach and improve coordination between donors. If
United Nations action is to be truly effective, it can come
only in the form of support to the efforts of the countries
of the region. In that regard, the tripartite mechanism
established between Cameroon, Nigeria and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
is an important step forward that we should welcome.

It is also essential that all the countries concerned
ensure that United Nations and humanitarian personnel
have unhindered, safe access wherever people are in
need of emergency assistance. Lastly, we are particularly
worried about the risk of famine, particularly in north-
eastern Nigeria, where more than 5.2 million people,
including 450,000 children, are suffering from severe
food insecurity. This situation, which is the result of the
insecurity produced by Boko Haram, is not inevitable
and should compel us to take action, which is why
France took the initiative of convening an Arria-formula
meeting on the issue in June, and why the Council has
asked the Secretary-General for a specific briefing on
it in October, under France's presidency of the Council.

The second point I have to make is that the fight
against terrorism must go hand in hand with a tireless
effort to promote the protection of civilians. That
includes ensuring the continued security of populations
dealing with Boko Haram and supporting the voluntary
and lasting return of displaced persons and refugees
where security conditions permit. We also have to
come up with concrete, immediate answers to the issue
of women who are refugees or displaced, about which
they should be fully consulted.

My third and last point is that, in grappling with
the multifaceted security, humanitarian and economic
crisis in this region, the only possible approach is one
that engages with the virtuous circle of development.
If we are to succeed, we must tackle the security,
humanitarian and development challenges head on
and in a complementary way. It would be an illusion
to imagine that we can defeat terrorism without
eradicating extreme poverty and malnutrition or
improving education and employment for young people.
That is why France has maintained its financial effort
by contributing €14.5 million in humanitarian aid in
2017 and implementing a Lake Chad initiative for the
empowerment of refugees and displaced populations
amounting to a commitment of €36 million.

Conversely, it will not be possible to give
development genuine momentum if we do not defeat
Boko Haram. We encourage the States of the region
and the Multinational Joint Task Force to pursue
their coordinated military efforts to combat the two
branches of this terrorist group. Reconciliation must
begin, and we urge States to initiate political processes
aimed at encouraging combatants to surrender by
establishing a clear legal framework and reintegration
programmes. The only way to succeed, therefore, is to
take an approach that combines all the tools available
to the United Nations in the service of a comprehensive
strategy that is fully aligned with the reform of the
Organization that the Secretary-General is working on.

I would like to conclude by reminding the Council
once again that the Lake Chad region has not always
received the attention it deserves from the international
community. The Council's visit to the region in March
enabled us to begin to redress that mistake and initiate
a new dynamic in that regard. It is important that this
issue remain a priority in the long term for both the
Council and the international community, and France
pledges its support in this respect.

