Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): It is a
tremendous pleasure to see you, Mr. Minister, presiding
over the Council today, and also to have heard the
characteristically timely and pertinent statement of the

 

Secretary-General at the beginning of this important debate.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and the delegation
of Bangladesh for having convened this debate on
humanitarian aspects of issues before the Security Council.
We applaud your decision to deal with this important topic
during your presidency, and we recognize Bangladesh's
long and steadfast commitment to humanitarian principles.

The provision of protection and humanitarian
assistance to war-affected populations has been and will
continue to be of central importance to Canada throughout
our Security Council mandate. While implementation of a
comprehensive approach to conflict prevention remains the
best means to protect civilians and to foster sustainable
development, we nonetheless recognize that dozens of
violent conflicts persist, and the Council must be prepared
to respond quickly to situations in which populations are in
grave need. This must be done by supporting their access
to protection and assistance and by identifying political
solutions to resolve the underlying causes of humanitarian
crises.

Indeed, humanitarian action does not respond to the
causes of conflict but to the needs of the victims. It is
therefore essential that humanitarian efforts be matched by
corresponding actions enabling political actors, and in
particular the Security Council, to address and resolve
conflict. These measures are particularly important because
most of the humanitarian action carried out by United
Nations personnel and other humanitarian actors takes place
in the absence of international peacekeeping or peace
support operations or any other form of international
involvement.

(Spoke in English)

Humanitarian action in support of those caught up in
war is rooted in both international humanitarian law and
practice. The right of individuals to physical protection and
humanitarian assistance, based on the principles of
humanity, neutrality and impartiality, is central. The
Security Council has been advised time and again of
instances where parties to a conflict have deliberately
restricted access of humanitarian organizations to provide
life-saving assistance. The Secretary-General has noted that
effective and timely humanitarian action requires
unhindered access to those in need. Canada firmly believes
that the Council must continue, therefore, to be vigilant and
forceful in calling on all parties to ensure full, safe and
unhindered access to affected populations, including
through the negotiation of special arrangements and codes
of conduct. Where negotiations by humanitarian actors with
parties to a conflict fail and the civilian population
continues to be adversely affected, the Council must be
prepared to take further appropriate action, drawing on
the variety of tools at its disposal.

In instances where a decision is made to launch a
United Nations peacekeeping or peace support operation,
coordination between the political, military, humanitarian
and development arms of the United Nations system is
simply essential. The plurality of operators in the field
poses an increasingly difficult challenge, especially when
they come from such varied institutional cultures. We
welcome recent efforts by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political
Affairs and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to enhance their lines of
communication and to increase their information-sharing,
and thus to better define the relationships between the
special representatives of the Secretary-General and
humanitarian coordinators, as well as those between the
human rights and other components of United Nations
missions. Further, we encourage the continuation of steps
to improve collaboration between the United Nations and
other humanitarian practitioners as well as the relevant
regional organizations.

The main challenge is to define structures of
cooperation that promote effective, integrated action and
that also take advantage of the different strengths of the
various players without sacrificing the advantages of
independence, flexibility and specialization. Missions over
the last several years have demonstrated that any
confusion among political, military and humanitarian
mandates can have a negative impact on the perceived
impartiality of humanitarian actors and action. It is
incumbent on the Security Council to ensure that the
components of such complex missions are given clear
mandates with sufficient resources to meet their
objectives - a point which the Secretary-General made
so clearly a moment ago.

Canada strongly supports the reference in the
presidential statement we will issue later today to
ensuring that humanitarian considerations are included in
peace negotiations and agreements. This includes not only
provisions pertaining to prisoners of war, but also, inter
alia, to the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of former combatants, including child soldiers; the return
of refugees and internally displaced persons in safety and
dignity; the protection of minorities and promotion of
human rights; and mechanisms for addressing impunity
and reinforcing good governance. The significance of

 

including such elements has been borne out in recent
experience, including, for example, in Central America,
Cambodia and Mozambique.

Finally, we also concur that full and timely support for
the transition from relief to development is critical for
ensuring that peace is indeed sustainable. Again, the
importance of adopting comprehensive and flexible
approaches that integrate political, humanitarian, human
rights and development dimensions is key. As seen in
Sierra Leone, Kosovo and East Timor, the timing of
interventions is vital, and planning and prioritization among
and between all protagonists - United Nations and
other - must begin immediately and should clearly
delineate responsibilities at the field level. We agree that
bilateral donors, United Nations agencies and international
financial institutions must remain flexible and seize
opportunities to initiate programme planning during
emergencies to facilitate the transition to rehabilitation,
reconstruction and development. We must also identify, tap
and enhance existing local capacities. Grassroots
involvement is simply a sine qua non for sustainable peace
and development, and we must ensure that local voices are
heard. Moreover, we believe that women's full and equal
participation, at all levels and in all phases, from relief to
development, must be continually promoted. Societies must
ultimately have ownership over such initiatives and be
responsible for the management of their own affairs.

