Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting. The Chinese delegation also
thanks you, Ambassador Grauls and Ambassador Jurica
for your briefings on the work of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004). China is grateful to all three
of you for your fruitful work over the past six months.

We are pleased to note that all the activities of the
1267 Committee - including its efforts to iron out the
details for the implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolution 1822 (2008), update the
Committee's guidelines, improve the completeness and
accuracy of the sanctions list, enhance the transparency
of its work and promote exchanges and dialogue with
the relevant international organizations - have
steadily progressed. China believes that the support of
Member States is necessary in order to maintain the
Committee's authority and status. We encourage
Member States to provide, in accordance with
resolution 1822 (2008), the most detailed information
possible and to work with the Committee in reviewing
all the data on the sanctions list so as to improve the
effectiveness and fairness of the sanctions regime.

Since its last briefing, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) has actively advanced its activities,
in compliance with the relevant provisions of
resolution 1805 (2008). The first round of Preliminary
Implementation Assessment has been largely
completed, marking a new chapter in the dialogue and
cooperation between the CTC and Member States. The
review of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) has provided a comprehensive analysis of the
progress and gaps in its work over the past seven years
and served as an effective frame of reference for the
formulation of the Committee's long-term programme
of work.

The CTC has also achieved good results in its
efforts to enhance transparency, facilitate technical
assistance and improve the format of country visits.
Moreover, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) has striven to implement its
organizational plan and achieved marked results in
improving its efficiency and consistency. China
expresses its appreciation for those results and hopes
that the CTC, assisted by CTED, will continue to work
to improve Member States' understanding of the
Preliminary Implementation Assessment, and thus their
ability to cooperate better with a view to ensuring the
smooth drafting and consideration of the Assessment.

Since its creation, the 1540 Committee has played
an important role through its consideration of country
reports and by engaging in outreach activities and
facilitating international assistance. China expresses its
appreciation in that regard. In the coming stage, the
Committee should continue its efforts and, in
accordance with the provisions of resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1810 (2008), formulate a complete and well
balanced programme of work at an early date, so to
promote the comprehensive implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

China attaches importance to the role played by
the 1540 Committee and has taken an active part in the
Committee's work, in a constructive spirit. We are
prepared to continue our support for the work of the
Committee and to contribute to efforts to ensure the
comprehensive and balanced implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), and to promote common
understanding and enhance efforts to prevent
proliferation.

In recent years, despite the tireless efforts of the
international community to combat terrorism, violence
and terrorist acts have increased around the world,
which poses a grave threat to international peace and
security. The United Nations thus has a long way to go
in accomplishing its counter-terrorism mission. China
is of the belief that General Assembly resolution
62/272, recently adopted by consensus, which
mandates an assessment of progress made in the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, fully reflects the great unity and
firm determination of Member States in the fight
against terrorism and is of great significance for the
effective coordination of counter-terrorism efforts
within the United Nations system.

The Security Council has an important and
irreplaceable role to play in combating terrorism.
China appreciates the collaboration among the three
Committees and their expert groups to address the
issue of Member States' late submission of reports.
China hopes that the three Committees will extend into
new areas their efforts to share resources and improve
efficiency, so that the Security Council's counter-
terrorism regime can be constantly improved. China
supports the three Committees in their efforts, within
their respective mandates, to work actively for the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, so that the counter-terrorism efforts
of the Security Council and the General Assembly can
be coordinated and complementary, thus making a
greater contribution to the efforts of the international
community to fight terrorism.

