Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We should like at the
outset to thank the delegation of Egypt for having
convened today's open debate on a matter of such great
importance. This meeting has elicited great interest
within the international community, as evidenced by
the fact that some 70 participants have asked to speak.
It is also taking place concurrently with the General
Assembly's review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy - a most timely juncture.

We also convey our respects to His Excellency
Mr. Sameh Shokry Selim, Minister for Foreign Affairs
ofthe Arab Republic of Egypt, a country that is a friend
to Venezuela. We also thank Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson; Mr. Mohi El-Din Afifi, Secretary-
General of Al Azhar Islamic Research Academy; and
Mr. Steven Crown, Vice-President and Deputy General
Council of Microsoft for their briefings.

Ijoin others in conveying my country's condolences
to those Ministers here present in the light of the recent
terrorist attacks suffered by their people, and express
our unwavering rejection of such actions.

The phenomenon of terrorism is nothing new. It
has appeared throughout history as the most violent
political expression. That said, the subject joining
us together today, as expressed in the concept note
(S/2016/4l6, annex), is the concern that in recent years
we have seen in the Middle East and North Africa
the spread of terrorism and its transformation into a
global phenomenon by way of the terrible attacks by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, the Al-Nusra
Front and Boko Haram, inter alia. We must therefore
ask ourselves why this is happening precisely now and
precisely in those regions. If we do not take the time to
engage in a multidimensional analysis of the root causes
of the phenomenon, we risk overlooking certain key
elements as part of a discussion capable of combating
the extremist and terrorism narrative.

Terrorism, as the most acute expression of Violent
extremism, is the result of accumulated factors that have
impacted the Middle East and North Africa in recent
years. The key factor, in our perspective, is the violent
foreign intervention that took place in Iraq and Libya
and is currently under way in Syria. As a result of such
egregious interventionism, the institutional framework
of those States has collapsed throughout most of their
territory. That has happened not only as a result of the
brutal nature of war, but rather, in many cases, as the
direct objective of the invading and occupying forces.

The State, as the body responsible for all education,
health care, cultural and law enforcement institutions
and the armed forces, is the only entity capable of
containing the spread of terrorism. Its weakening in
those countries prevents it from effectively fulfilling
that containment function. The destruction of the
State's institutional fabric and the resulting vacuum has
allowed religious sectarianism to displace the political
groups that previously supported the Governments of
of the Middle Eastern and North African countries that
suffered foreign military interventionism, particularly
Iraq and Libya, leaving the civilian population at the
mercy of the influence and actions of the terrorist
groups. In some cases, as we are already well aware,
foreign intervention has led to the breakdown of States,
including their de facto and de jure disappearance.

Another aspect to take into account in addressing
the phenomenon of terrorism is the sociological
outcome of the fact that those countries now have a
generation of young people - entire societies - that,
in the past 15 years, have known no other way of life
than war and conflict. That has given rise to societies in
those countries that have been traumatized by violence
and become breeding grounds for young people who
join non-State armed groups, militias or terrorist
groups. Against that backdrop, the lack of opportunity
generated by the destruction of the economy due to
the ravages of interventionist wars and civil conflicts
must be taken into account, as it has a major impact on
young people, who see themselves trapped by poverty,
frustration and despair.

Another factor that must be considered is religion.
Venezuela believes that terrorism cannot and should
not be ascribed with any race, religion or people.
Nonetheless, we are struck by the fact that in various
instances, for political and ideological ends, some
elements have attempted to paint Islam as the religious
and ethical source of terrorism. That is an entirely
false connection and we roundly reject it. In the West,
such erroneous ideas have given rise to the fact that
the Islamic faith is misunderstood and misinterpreted,
which has led to discrimination and persecution in
certain societies.

I also note and denounce, as a basic driver of the
resurgence of terrorism, the linking of terrorism to the
destabilization ofa given region. I refer to the strategies
of various nations that promote and support the
establishment of violent non-State actors, who through
their actions weaken and contribute to the downfall
of Governments that do not please the countries that
back and in many cases finance such actors. Today, we
see many of those violent non-State actors spreading
throughout the region and joined the terrorist groups
that are shedding blood across the Middle East and
North Africa.

The lack of Governments and society's loss of
capacity to come together under institutional control
in the region has resulted in a scenario conducive to
the proliferation of militias and other violent non-State
actors, as well as those who protect, arm and finance
them from abroad. The evidence is clear on that and
we have all seen it. Those violent groups that enjoy
access to a huge arsenal of weapons, financing and
political and ideological backing are transformed into
the terrorist groups.

Unfortunately, the overlap among militias, other
non-State armed groups and terrorist and extremist
groups in the region is becoming increasingly obtuse
and confused within the dynamic of war and death.
We cannot ignore that crucial factor because as long as
there is no explanation as to why such groups dedicate
themselves to terrorism yet enjoy extraordinary
logistical and financial support, in some cases
surpassing the capacities of States. Moreover, there
is a huge quantity of arms that are euphemistically
called "small" and "light" but often include large-bore
weapons that have been hijacked or distributed by
terrorist groups and flow throughout the Middle East
and North Africa, sewing death among civilians.

All of the factors we have just mentioned do not
explain another key aspect of the terrorism narrative.
How have more than 30,000 foreign fighters entered
Syria and Iraq to join the umbrella terrorist groups
operating there? Why do those foreigners, many of
them from Europe or the Middle East, embrace the
cause of terror? What goes on in the minds of such
young people in their home countries that would bring
them to make such a decision? In that regard, we point
to the discrimination and segregation suffered by many
young people of the Muslim minority who have grown
up in European societies.

Alongside all ofthat, we must also take into account
the narrative of some Governments of the West or of the
Middle East that promote propaganda and systematic
attacks against countries that they wish to destabilize
or in which they seek to intervene militarily. This
encourages many young people outside those countries
to feel that joining the Governments undermined by
this narrative is a form of so-called just war in which
they must participate.

Another key element that must be borne in mind is
technology, which allows for the rapid and widespread
dissemination of the messages of extremists and
terrorists. We are stupefied to see how skillfully
terrorists and extremists use the same political tools
and information and communications technology that
some countries use to attack others. They use such tools
in what some theorists have called fourth-generation
warfare - strategies which, I regret to say, have been
applied to many countries in the world. What never
ceases to surprise is how terrorism and extremism
deploy enormous technological and communications
capability to broadcast their extremist messages and
ideologies with political aims and for destabilizing
purposes. In that regard, it is up to technology and
media companies to make efforts to prevent those
platforms for being used as echo chambers for terrorism
and extremism. Statements have been made that this
technology is being used for espionage and political
intervention. As such, the States and actors involved
must assume their responsibilities so that such heinous
practices are not repeated or be made available for
terrorism.

The last aspect of the phenomenon of terrorism has
to do with the nature of its ideology. An ideology of
intolerance and violence, with little regard for life or
the most fundamental values human coexistence, is a
hallmark of these terrorist movements, and we must fight
it in a unified manner. When it comes to this issue there
must be no double standards in the Security Council.
There is no such thing as good and bad terrorists. It is a
matter of concern that somehow, as part of geopolitical
goals on the part of some Powers on the Security
Council, there is tolerance for the raising of the banners
of death and terrorism and imposing a culture of death.
Venezuela reiterates its categorical rejection of acts of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, whatever
the motivations and wherever by whomever such acts
are committed. Such actions are deliberate attacks on
international peace and security, in addition to being
flagrant violations of international law.

In that context, we once again underscore the
importance of prevention in this exceedingly important
fight. It is important to adopt measures aimed at
undermining the clear strategy and ideologies of
extremist groups, which have assigned themselves the
task of fomenting violence and intolerance. Addressing
the root causes of this odious phenomenon and
developing effective and innovative strategies to counter
the extremist narratives of terrorists and stimulate
critical thinking in society with a View to preventing
radicalization, recruitment and the mobilization of
resources, including inappropriate use of information
and communication technologies - that is a battle that
we must wage honestly, for it is one that involves all
countries in the United Nations.

Likewise, we believe that a long-term solution to
the threats we face also requires finding political and
peaceful solutions to the conflicts in countries such as
Syria, Libya and Yemen and to the Palestinian question.
Those prolonged crises further exacerbate conflicts and
serve as a breeding ground for violent extremism and
terrorism, transnational crime, the flow of financial
resources for the recruitment and training of foreign
terrorist fighters, thereby improving the capacity of
terrorist groups to act.

Lastly, we believe that the international community
must continue to develop, implement and strengthen
strategies adapted to each individual case and national
circumstances with a view to eliminate the ability
of terrorist groups to act, all the while with strict
respect for the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. In that regard, we believe that the adoption of
a future convention against terrorism would serve as a
complement to the host of existing international legal
instruments by arriving at a definition that makes it
possible to strengthen consensus in this domain.

