Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General's Special Envoy, Mr. Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed; the United Nations Humanitarian
Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O'Brien; and the World Food
Programme Regional Director, Mr. Muhannad Hadi, for
their briefings and for their work and for their support
of Yemen and its people.

It is now more than a year and a half since the attempt
by Houthi forces to seize control of the Government of
Yemen prompted the collapse of the political transition
and the outbreak of the current conflict. It is now clear
that none of the parties can achieve their aims through
military force.

Today's briefers have underlined just how bad the
situation on the ground has become. Tragically - as
we have been saying for too long - Yemeni civilians
are paying a heavy price for the ongoing hostilities.
More than 10,000 Yemenis have been killed, and most
Yemenis are now in need of humanitarian assistance.

Images of the more 370,000 severely malnourished
children remind us of the fragility of Yemen's food
supply. Although the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism for Yemen continues to play
an essential role in managing food imports, a lack of
port capacity means ships face long delays, further
inflating the cost of food and fuel. This, compounded
by the increasingly serious risk of economic collapse,
threatens to put millions onemenis at risk of starvation.

The collapse of the public health system also
means that millions of Yemenis lack access to even
the most basic medical services. This medical crisis is
compounded by the ban on commercial flights in and
out of Sana'a, which prevents critically injured civilians
from getting medical assistance elsewhere. We call for
this ban to be lifted immediately.

Both sides have also regularly fallen short of their
obligations to protect civilians caught up in this conflict.
The coalition airstrike against a funeral in Sana'a on
8 October was a shocking example of this failure. It
also makes the reports over the weekend of airstrikes
against a Houthi-held prison all the more disturbing.
Urgent steps are needed to provide accountability
for these actions and to ensure that such incidents do
not happen again. We stress once again the need for
all parties fully comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law.
The conflict has created a conducive environment
for terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula and Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
to expand their influence and reach. Recent attacks
on shipping in the Bab-el-Mandeb have further
demonstrated the emergence of other strategic threats
from this conflict.

Ultimately it is only by ending hostilities that we
can restore stability and end the suffering of the Yemeni
people. This must be our central focus and most urgent
priority. In this regard, we are deeply disappointed
at the failure to extend the recent ceasefire brokered
by the United Nations Special Envoy. An enduring
ceasefire is a necessary step towards a more positive
trajectory for Yemen. We urge all parties to agree to a
sustained ceasefire as soon as possible.

For some time we have appeared frustratingly
close to an agreement on how to end this conflict. The
key elements of a deal have been evident for some
months, with the main points of contention being
their sequencing. The parties have been presented
with a credible road map for security and political
arrangements to end the conflict and resume an inclusive
political transition. We recognize that this road map
requires difficult concessions from all parties, but flat-
out rejection is not acceptable.

The alternative is a further prolonging of the
current bloody stalemate that can achieve little other
than heaping further misery on the Yemeni people
and creating longer-term problems for the country and
region.We urge leaders on both sides to put the interests
oftheir people first and accept this road map as the basis
for ending this tragic conflict, and to take it forward in
a spirit of flexibility and compromise. History will not
judge kindly those who seek to delay or derail these
efforts, and neither should the Council.

In the coming weeks, the Council needs to focus
on doing all it can to support the efforts of the United
Nations Special Envoy and others to end the violence. It
must also send a clear signal to the Yemeni parties that
the international community expects them to resume
meaningful negotiations with each other towards
achieving a sustainable end to the conflict, and that that
spoilers will not be tolerated.
We stand ready to work with Council members on
anything that might be useful to add pressure on the
parties to resolve this conflict.

