Mr. Lopez Clemente (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My Government would like to express its appreciation
for the information presented by the Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and by Mr. Javier
Ruperez.

There must be true international cooperation in
the struggle against terrorist acts in all their forms and
manifestations, wherever and by whomever committed,
with Third World countries participating as equals,
transcending political, religious or other differences.
The United Nations should play a central role in that
cooperation.

We can make progress in the struggle against
terrorism only by means of international cooperation,
based on full respect for international law and the
Charter, not by means of extrajudicial executions,
arbitrary detentions of a country's nationals or foreign
citizens, the persecution of immigrants or other
violations of human rights, pre-emptive wars, acts of
aggression or vengeance, covert actions that violate
laws and borders, unilateral sanctions, drawing up
"lists" of countries or singling them out with obscure
political purposes in mind, or other unilateral actions
that will only bring about further violence.

While rejecting the arbitrary inclusion of Cuba in
yet another list of countries that allegedly support
terrorism, as drawn up by the United States, I would
like to take this opportunity to remind the Council that
my country was among the first three countries to
ratify the 12 international instruments on terrorism. It
has promulgated a comprehensive law against terrorist
acts, adopted additional and effective non-legislative
measures and cooperated in good faith with the
Security Council, in particular the CTC, to which it has
submitted four comprehensive reports in a timely
manner.

Cuba has never allowed, nor will it tolerate or
permit, the use of its territory to carry out, plan or
finance acts of terrorism against any State, without
exception.

Cuba supports a definition of terrorism that
distinguishes between terrorism and the legitimate
struggle of peoples for their right to self-determination
and against foreign occupation. Cuba believes the
conclusion in the General Assembly of the draft
international convention for the suppression of acts of
nuclear terrorism and of the draft comprehensive
convention on international terrorism to be an urgent
necessity.

The Council's tendency to legislate under Chapter
VII of the Chanter was demonstrated on 8 October,
when it adopted resolution 1566 (2004). That
resolution is designed to define terrorism - a task that
is rightly the General Assembly's - in a manner that
is biased, and to include under Chapter VII a number
of items and questions that fall within the discretionary
competence of the Assembly, as with negotiations on
the two conventions to which I referred and the
establishment of a fund to assist victims of terrorism.

Furthermore, given the Security Council's double
standards with regard to the fight against terrorism, we
are concerned that the CTC has been granted the
prerogative to establish a monitoring mechanism in
countries by means of visits without having to obtain
the consent of the State involved.

Cuba will comply with its own sovereign laws
and reiterates its readiness to cooperate with all
countries, with full respect for the Charter and
international law. In that spirit, on three occasions the
Cuban Government proposed to the Government of the
United States - unconditionally and in accordance
with the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001) - that
three draft bilateral agreements be drawn up on
cooperation to combat terrorism, illicit drug trafficking
and trafficking in persons, but these were rejected by
the United States on flimsy pretexts.

Yet the United States provides weapons, safe
haven and the use of its territory with full freedom of
movement to groups of the anti-Cuban mob based in
Miami, despite the fact that such groups have been
planning, financing and carrying out terrorist acts
against Cuba for more than four decades, including
bomb attacks, assassination attempts against Cuban
leaders and other actions resulting in harm or death to
thousands of people, as well as in great economic
hardship to my homeland.

Five young Cuban men have been given life - or
very long - sentences by an illegitimate court in
Miami for carrying out observation activities of those
terrorist groups so as to prevent similar attacks against
Cuba and the territory of the United States itself. Those
young men have already been imprisoned for more
than five years in the United States. They are subjected
to excessive and long confinement and isolation, and in
some cases they have had no personal contact with
their wives or other relatives since being imprisoned.

Another recent event has once again provided
evidence of the double standards applied by the
Government of the United States in its alleged war on
terror. On 25 August, the then-President of Panama,
Mireya Moscoso, signed Decree 317, by means of
which four terrorists of Cuban origin were pardoned.
They had been arrested, tried and sentenced in Panama
for planning an assassination attempt on President
Fidel Castro in November 2000.

Mrs. Moscoso's actions, carried out in conspiracy
with the United States Government and the Miami
terrorist mob just one week before the end of her
presidential mandate, was the culmination of a process,
begun in 2001, to make compromises with anti-Cuban
terrorism by protecting those terrorists of Cuban origin.

On 12 September, one day after the
commemoration of the anniversary of the crime
perpetrated on 11 September 2001 in the United States,
the anti-Cuban mob based in Miami publicly celebrated
and welcomed with open arms three of those terrorists,
who had travelled with false documents.

Is not even the promotion and encouragement
through the United States media of confessed terrorists
with long criminal histories, including with the FBI, an
affront to legitimate international efforts to fight the
scourge of terrorism? Luis Posada Carriles, the fourth
and perhaps the most notorious terrorist among those
pardoned by Moscoso, is presumably somewhere in
Central America. Abundant information about our
accusation, including the criminal records of the four
terrorists, may be found in documents S/2002/15 and
S/2004/753 and in our statements in Security Council
open debates on this issue in 2003 (see S/PV.4710) and
earlier this year (see S/PV.4921).

On 4 March 2004, during a debate similar to this
one, we asked once again about the practical actions
the Council was planning to take, particularly in the
CTC framework, regarding the considerable evidence
that has been presented concerning terrorist actions
committed against our country in blatant violation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and other international legally
binding instruments. In view of the lack of action to
date, we would like to ask today whether resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1566 (2004) are not applicable to our
specific accusations with regard to the aforementioned
terrorist acts, which have gone unpunished.

Those who repeatedly proclaim their
determination to fight tirelessly to eradicate
international terrorism, without exceptions or
selectivity, have a clear opportunity to prove that the
Security Council, where some have veto power, is in
fact an instrument capable of addressing the struggle
against international terrorism in an effective, just,
impartial and non-selective manner.

