The President (spoke in Russian): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for his statement and presence at today's
meeting. We also thank the Under-Secretary General,
Mr. Pascoe, for his briefing on the situation in the
Middle East.

Today the Middle East is living through an
especially critical time. The tasks facing the parties to
the peace process are many. They must be resolved in a
situation in which a definitive end to violence
continues to elude us. That is something that we
consider to be an unconditional priority.

Of special concern is the recent situation
concerning the settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli
question. Our utmost efforts should be aimed at ending
the deaths of peaceful Palestinians and Israelis, putting
an end to the firing of rockets at Israeli territory and
lifting the Gaza blockade, which has become
absolutely intolerable.

The Russian Federation provides and will
continue to provide economic and financial assistance
to the Palestinians and is assisting in the strengthening
of the Palestinian security forces. Those topics and
others were addressed during the recent visit by our
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Sergey Lavrov, to the
region.

We consider it especially important that,
regardless of the aforementioned problems
complicating the peace process, President Abbas of the
Palestinian Authority and Prime Minister Olmert
remain committed to furthering dialogue and
implementing the agreements reached at Annapolis and
that they agree, by the end of the year, on the
parameters for a final settlement. No less important is
the parties' strict compliance with the part of the
Annapolis agreement that reaffirms the obligation of
the parties to implement the Road Map, including the
necessity of refraining from any actions that could
undermine the reaching of a final status settlement. In
that context, we are quite clearly disturbed by the
continuing Israeli settlement activity. We call for a
complete freeze on that activity in accordance with the
demands of the Quartet.

Russia is committed to the concepts and
principles of the peace process and is trying to
visualize the Middle East as a region of peace and
stability, where all States, including Israel, live in
security, in conditions that are optimal to resolving
socio-economic problems and in the closest possible
cooperation with one another.

To achieve that objective, the efforts of the
international community to mobilize support for the
Annapolis process and ensure its success must be
stepped up. To that end, we are conducting active
consultations with the Quartet, regional and United
Nations partners and other interested parties to achieve
a preliminary understanding on the convening in
Moscow of an international meeting on the Middle East.
We hope that in the very near future we will be in a
position to determine its conduct, schedule and agenda.

In Annapolis, agreements that enjoyed everyone's
support were adopted. We must now confirm that
support by prompting Israelis and Palestinians to
implement those agreements effectively.

It is also important to create the necessary
conditions to achieve progress on the Syrian and
Lebanese tracks of the Middle East settlements.

When Palestinian and Israeli negotiations lead to
results - and we hope that that will come about very
soon - an unavoidable issue will be how those
agreements will be viewed by all Palestinians. That is
why the restoration of Palestinian unity is something
that we View as especially important, and we welcome
the agreements achieved between Fatah and Hamas
representatives in Sana'a on the resumption of inter-
Palestinian dialogue. It is important that from the very
outset those initial contacts be constructive and focus
on the key problems facing the Palestinian people: how
to restore the political and legal integrity of the
Palestinian territories' and the parameters for the
dialogue process with Israel. We hope that many of
those problems will be discussed in depth and will
possibly be resolved at the upcoming Arab League
summit, to be held in Damascus.

To conclude, I would like to say a few words on
Lebanon, which is again gripped by unrest and where
extremist groups are stepping up their activities and all
political factions are building up their forces. Russia is
a firm champion of unswerving compliance with the
provisions of resolution 1701 (2006) and other Security
Council resolutions that prohibit the supplying of arms
to any irregular groups in Lebanon. We continue to
support the constitutional order of Lebanon and its
legitimate institutions, sovereignty and political
independence. We advocate a speedy election of a new
President. It is our deeply held believe that all
members of the international community should adhere
to such a position.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I have a number of other requests for the floor on
my list of speakers. I therefore intend to suspend this
meeting until 3 p.m.

The meeting was suspended at I p.m.
