Ms. Kang: On behalf of Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
Emergency Relief Coordinator, I have the honour to
deliver the following statement.

Syria is entering its fifth year of conflict
characterized by extreme violence and brutality.
Resolution 2139 (2014) called for an end to the
indiscriminate employment of weapons in populated
areas, including shelling and aerial bombardment and
the use of barrel bombs, But the call continues to be
ignored. The Government has continued to conduct
airstrikes, including barrel bombs, in densely populated
areas. Between 21 and 26 January, Government
airstrikes on East Ghouta in Rural Damascus reportedly
killed nearly 100 people and injured scores more.
Armed opposition groups and designated terrorist
organizations have also continued to use explosive
weapons in populated areas. A barrage of around
50 rockets and mortars killed at least seven and injured
50 in Damascus city on 25 January.
Infrastructure for essential services continues to
come under deliberate and indiscriminate attack. For
example, for nearly two weeks, the Al-Nusra Front has
out water supplies to Idlib city, affecting some 600,000
people. In response, local Government authorities are
preventing the delivery of aid to opposition-controlled
areas.

Hospitals and schools have not been spared.
Physicians for Human Rights documented eight attacks
on medical facilities during December, six of them by
Government forces. They also documented the deaths
of seven medical personnel during the same period,
all killed by Government forces, including three
who were reportedly tortured to death and one who
was executed. At least three schools were reportedly
hit by Government airstrikes in Idlib governorate in
December, killing nine children and injuring many
others.

Meanwhile, the atrocities meted out by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) continued in areas
under its control, including numerous reports of
executions, including by stoning and throwing victims
from buildings. Its brutal subjugation of women and
girls is particularly heinous, and the fate of the women
sold into sexual slavery remains deeply concerning.

The relentless violence and destruction in Syria
has led to one of the worst displacements of people
the world has seen in decades. There are 7.6 million
people displaced within the country. Many have been
displaced multiple times from one unsafe area to the
next. In addition, there are 3.8 million refugees in
neighbouring countries.

Humanitarian organizations continue to strive to
help people in desperate need despite the extremely
difficult and unsafe operating environment inside the
country. Food was distributed to over 3.6 million people
in December, emergency non-food items were provided
to over 500,000, water and sanitation interventions were
provided for approximately 1.5 million and medical
assistance was afforded for over 680,000 persons via
regular, cross-line and cross-border deliveries. In
addition, international and Syrian non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) reached 1.5 million people
across all sectors.

United Nations cross-border deliveries from
Turkey and Jordan into Syria continued to increase. As
of 26 January, 59 shipments had been made under the
terms ofresolutions 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014). Those
deliveries provided food assistance for over 702,000
people, non-food items for over 615,000, water and
sanitation supplies for 311,000 and medical supplies
for over 468,000. The World Food Programme reached
315,000 people in rural parts of Dar'a, Quneitra, Idlib
and eastern Aleppo city in December via cross-border
operations. It plans to scale up further next month, but
needs more funds to do so.

Despite those efforts, the needs continue to outpace
the response. Approximately 4. 8 million people - about
40 per cent of the total 12.2 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance - are residing in areas where
they struggle to receive basic services and staples,
and where humanitarian access remains a significant
challenge. Access to ISIL-controlled Raqqa and Deir
ez-Zor is particularly concerning. United Nations
agencies were unable to deliver food to the entire
caseload of 600,000 people in those two governorates in
December due to lack of agreement with armed groups
on the ground. Many local NGOs in Raqqa have put
humanitarian activities on hold, and in the past week
some humanitarian organizations in the governorate
were closed.

We regret to report that no progress has been
achieved on the inclusion of surgical supplies in cross-
line humanitarian convoys. In December, injectable
medicines and surgical supplies were denied to areas in
eastern Ghouta. In January, despite the support of the
governor of Homs, Government security forces removed
all surgical items, diarrhoea kits, midwifery kits and
reproductive health kits from the interagency convoy to
Al-Wa'er, in breach of international humanitarian law.

Some 212,000 people are still besieged, 185,500
people by Government forces and 26,500 people by
opposition forces, with limited aid reaching only
two locations since 1 December. Beginning on
24 December, some 9,000 people, including children
and sick and wounded civilians, were able to evacuate
towns in eastern Ghouta, some of them reportedly
from besieged areas, as a result of local agreements
between the parties. We have consistently reported on
the severity of conditions inside eastern Ghouta, where
aid deliveries continue to be heavily restricted. In 2014,
16 requests to the Government for interagency convoys
to eastern Ghouta were made, only four of which
were carried out. The remaining 12 were unanswered,
denied or subjected to conditions that could not be
accommodated. This past week, a further four requests
were made to reach the area, and we await a response.

No assistance has reached the Yarmouk camp for
Palestinians since 6 December due to ongoing fighting
inside and around the camp. Previous deliveries were
already sporadic and insufficient to constitute sustained
and adequate coverage of the needs of some 18,000
people inside the camp.

Although one additional international non- governmental
organization was approved in January, there has been no
progress on addressing the administrative constraints
placed on international NGOs by the Government of
Syria. International NGOs have vast experience and
much needed capacity, making them a crucial partner
in the effort to meet the ever-growing needs in Syria.

In order for humanitarian agencies to continue their
work, more funding is urgently required. The Syria
response is now contained in a single plan and appeal
and includes assistance both from within the country
and through cross-border operations. The response to
people inside Syria requires $2.9 billion this year. Last
year, we received 48 per cent of the amount requested.
A lack of funding 4 for example, for the winterization
programme - means that hundreds of thousands of
the 3.3 million people targeted for assistance have
not received assistance during this particularly harsh
winter.

In conclusion, the Council must find a way to
end the conflict in Syria. At the beginning of the
conflict, nearly four years ago, 1 million people needed
humanitarian assistance inside the country. Today, that
figure stands at 12.2 million, and 3.8 million people
have fled to neighbouring countries. We must not
allow the world to forget Syria and the atrocities being
committed against its people.

