Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I would like to join
other delegations in welcoming you, Sir, to the chair of
the Security Council today. I thank your delegation for
convening this important meeting.

I would like to make this statement in addition to
the statement that Greece will deliver later at this
meeting on behalf of the European Union. Germany
fully endorses that forthcoming statement.

Efforts to prevent or remove threats to the peace
and to adjust or settle international disputes by
peaceful means, in conformity with the principles of
justice and international law, are among the first of the
purposes of the United Nations, as defined in Article 1
of the Charter.

Germany is committed to moving the United
Nations, in the words of the Secretary-General, "from a
culture of reaction to a culture of prevention" (A/54/1, para. 61). It is therefore important that the Security
Council periodically revisit its role in the pacific
settlement of disputes - an area in which, pursuant to
Chapter VI of the Charter, the Security Council is
vested with a primary, though not exclusive, role. As
stipulated by the Charter and reaffirmed by the Manila
Declaration, other actors, notably the Secretary-
General, the General Assembly and regional
organizations, as well as judicial institutions and
mechanisms, have an important role to play.

The role of the Security Council in the pacific
settlement of disputes has been outlined in particular
by the provisions of Chapter VI of the Charter. Unlike
situations that fall under Chapter VII, where the
Council is Charter-bound to determine precisely
whether the prerequisites for its invocation are met,
Chapter VI provides the Council with a certain latitude
in the evaluation of a situation and in the use of the
most appropriate means. It goes without saying that the
Council's ability to anticipate emerging disputes and
conflicts, and to react to them in the most appropriate
way, depends to a significant extent on an early and
solid knowledge of the situation. Furthermore, the
importance of early warning for the peaceful settlement
of disputes cannot be overemphasized - although we
realize, of course, that the political will to follow up
early warning with concrete action is equally
indispensable.

When looking at ways and means to enhance the
Council's ability to react in the most appropriate
manner, it is not necessary to reinvent the wheel.
Indeed, certain lessons from the experience of the
United Nations in the field of post-conflict peace-
building may well be suited to being applied also to
pre-conflict situations or to situations of emerging
conflict. The reason is simple: the management of pre-
and post-conflict situations requires some identical
ingredients necessary to produce sustained peace and
stability. Let me give three examples. First, the root
causes of conflicts must be addressed and, whenever
possible, removed. This may not always be an easy
task, as the complex economic and social factors
underlying the conflicts in Western Africa demonstrate.
Regional organizations and States in the region play a
crucial role in assisting the Council in understanding
the root causes of conflict and in advising on the best
ways to cope with a situation. The advice of local
communities is equally important. Addressing the
political and socio-economic root causes of a conflict,
and involving all local stakeholders, has been the
trump card for the United Nations in its more
successful post-conflict management experiences, such
as those in Central America.

Secondly, I would like to point out that the
interrelationship of peace and security, the rule of law,
human rights and the enhancement of the material well-
being of people must be taken into account. The
Millennium Declaration and the goals contained
therein, which address all of those interrelated aspects,
have reaffirmed that holistic view. A few days ago, on
8 May, the African Union reconfirmed this view in the
Kigali Declaration - the document resulting from its
recent human rights conference. The European Union
has been very effective in applying these ideas to the
stabilization and the advancement of South-Eastern
Europe, notably through the Stability Pact. We now
face the challenge of reconstructing a democratic,
human-rights-abiding and peaceful Iraq, whose
authorities should enjoy legitimacy and respond to the
political, social and cultural aspirations of their people.
The guarantees for this project must be provided by the
United Nations, the feasibility by the international
community, and the legitimacy - and thus the
sustainability - by the Iraqi people themselves.

Thirdly, whatever the specific settlement plan for
a dispute may be, it must be endowed with a high
degree of predictability for all parties to the dispute, as
well as with credible guarantees. Such confidence can
be inspired by legitimate national institutions, by
international judicial mechanisms and by an
unequivocal political commitment by the international
community, including, notably, the Council itself. Let
me recall that the idea underlying the road map for the
resolution of the conflict between Israel and the
Palestinians is precisely to give both sides a sense of
predictability on their road to peaceful and harmonious
coexistence. A clear sense of direction may also be a
recipe for success in other situations - and this may
still be true for the situation in Cyprus, in spite of
recent setbacks.

Germany welcomes efforts undertaken by the
President of the General Assembly to consolidate the
various aspects of conflict prevention into a single
resolution. This is a useful and timely exercise that
Germany wholeheartedly supports.

Some of the means available to the Council in
addressing disputes and conflicts have been thoroughly
explored. Others - for example the investigative
powers enshrined in Article 34 of the Charter - might
benefit from some reinvigoration, through the
establishment of special missions or commissions of
investigation, as appropriate. Germany welcomes the
Council's practice of dispatching fact-finding missions
to fragile situations, but believes that this instrument
could benefit from some intensification. Special
missions, either by the Council itself or by appointed
experts, not only convey the clear message that a
situation is under observation and a matter of concern,
but also help to prepare for adequate solutions. They
are a means of both dissuasion and encouragement.

Another dormant Article of the Charter which
may well prove its usefulness in the context of conflict
prevention is Article 26, authorizing the Council, in the
interest of maintaining peace and security, to establish
tailor-made systems for the regulation of armaments.
Germany recognizes that threats posed by terrorism
and excessive armament may constitute a threat to
international peace and security. That is precisely why
Council interventions aimed at reducing excessive
armament, imposed under the Council's prerogative to
maintain peace and security, could be an important
policy tool below the threshold of armed intervention.

A further area that may deserve more attention is
recourse to judicial mechanisms. Here, I fully agree
with Sir Brian Urquhart, quoting Dag Hammarskjold in
his statement. The Charter calls upon parties to a
dispute to seek judicial settlements and encourages the
Council to cooperate with them. No mechanism of
dispute settlement can match the impartiality, and thus
the acceptance, of judicial mechanisms. Against the
backdrop of the widely recognized role played by
judicial mechanisms, in particular the International
Court of Justice and the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea, it is somewhat surprising that the
Council, throughout its history, proceeded only once to
recommend, by virtue of Article 36, paragraph 3, of the
Charter, that the parties refer their case to the
International Court of Justice, while two other
proposals to that effect, presented by Colombia and the
United States respectively, were defeated. It would be
interesting to hear whether Judge Elaraby might have
any suggestions on how to make better use of that
potential tool for the peaceful settlement of conflicts.

Before I conclude, let me stress one more point
that in our view merits further attention: strengthening
cooperation between the Council and regional
organizations in the pacific settlement of disputes. The
Charter confers on such organizations a special role in
this regard by inviting parties to a dispute to resolve
their differences, first of all, by resorting to regional
organizations. Indeed, owing to their closer knowledge
of the political, social and cultural context of a dispute,
regional organizations are particularly well placed to
provide early warning and to maintain political
mechanisms for the settlement of disputes. Experiences
in Europe, Africa and the Americas are encouraging.
Further, judicial mechanisms to resolve existing
disputes can in some instances be found at the regional
level. Another interesting regional contribution to the
prevention of conflicts is the decision by the
Organization of American States to discourage
undemocratic changes of Government by refusing to
recognize them.

Far from attempting to review the issue of this
meeting in an exhaustive manner, I have instead tried
to highlight a few points on which Germany would be
happy to engage in a closer discussion with Council
members, with the United Nations membership in
general and with the invited eminent personalities.

