Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I would like to thank Ambassador Munoz
for his briefing. We have noted with satisfaction that
over the past year, under his excellent leadership, the
Committee has made effective efforts to promote the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1526
(2004). The Committee carefully studied the resolution
and provided written assessments on the country
reports of Member States. It also conducted in-depth
discussions on the effective implementation of
sanctions measures. It revised and improved the
accuracy of the Consolidated List.

The Committee has strengthened its dialogue in
its exchanges with Member States. Ambassador Munoz
has exerted tireless efforts by paying visits to various
countries and regions to learn about and to promote the
implementation of the resolution on the ground. As
Chairman of the 1267 Committee, he and his team
contributed greatly to the Committee's work, and we
would like to express our heartfelt appreciation for
that.

The Committee's Monitoring Team performed its
duties seriously and actively assisted the Committee in
its work this year. Thus we would like to express our

appreciation for the efforts made by the experts on the
Monitoring Team.

The fight against terrorism is a long and arduous
task. China supports the leading role played by the
United Nations in combating international terrorism.
The Security Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the 1267 Committee have made important
contributions to the fight against international
terrorism. We support the Committee's continuing
efforts to improve the sanctions measures, based on
changing circumstances, so that it can be a more
powerful and effective tool in the battle against
international terrorism.

The struggle against the Eastern Turkistan
terrorist organization by the Chinese Government and
people is an important component of the international
community's fight against terrorism and the Al Qaeda
network.

China will continue to implement seriously the
relevant Security Council resolutions, actively
participate in the work of the Council's two
Committees and make its contribution to combating the
Al Qaeda terrorist network.

