Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): I should
like to join my delegation's voice with yours,
Mr. President, in expressing our condolences and
sympathies to the families of the victims of the
accident that just took place in Sierra Leone.

Permit me to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of both International Tribunals for the
exhaustive reports they just presented to us. We have
been able to appreciate the important contributions
they are making to the fight against impunity for war
crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity.

Ten years after the genocide in Rwanda and five
years after the end of the war in the Balkans, the
Security Council can welcome the efforts that have
been made. Those efforts are the best way to prevent
the repetition of or discourage behaviour that might
promote such crimes. We also share the international
community's concern to ensure that both Tribunals
resolutely carry out the completion strategy for their
work within a specific time frame. The Council, in
resolution 1534 (2004), provided clear guidelines for
the assessments required in that regard.

We commend the Tribunals for presenting
convincingly to us the prospects for their future work
within the context of trying cases falling under
international legal jurisdiction, for providing us with
an assessment and for giving us a better idea of the
constraints involved in transferring to national
jurisdictions cases that, by their nature, might fall
under their purview. Thanks to that rigorous
assessment effort, we have a rather clear view of the
advantages that might result from implementation of
the completion strategy and of the bottlenecks that we
face if the appropriate measures advocated by the
Tribunals are not diligently taken.

In that context, my delegation would like to focus
on two points: the factors influencing the strategy's
implementation and the factors bearing on the
Tribunals' capacity to try their cases on time.

On the first point, we share the concerns
expressed by the Tribunals on the recruitment freeze
and on the impossibility of their maintaining qualified
staff. We must also find a solution to the problem of
the salary freeze in the Investigation Section so as not
to further hinder the continuation of proceedings.

We acknowledge that these factors are a serious
handicap to the functioning of the Tribunals. We fully
agree with the Secretary-General's view on this
question. The essentially financial bases of the
situation must be taken into account by the Security
Council. We propose that it appeal urgently to Member
States to show their commitment to the campaign
against impunity by providing the resources necessary
to combating it.

With respect to the ability to bring cases to trial
according to schedule, we have complete trust that the
judges will adopt strategies of their choice in order to
accelerate the trial process. We know, however, that the
quest for speed must not compromise the principles of
equitable international justice. Moreover, we believe
that it is necessary to reconcile the mandates of the
judges with the length of the trials, of course in the
interest of the defendants. Furthermore, the
cooperation of Member States concerned is crucial in
making defendants available to the Tribunals, because
only in that way can we prevent those who are
responsible for serious crimes from evading
international justice.

As to the decision to refer lower-rank accused to
national jurisdictions, we believe that special attention
should be given to strengthening the capacities of the
judicial systems of those countries so as to ensure that
those who are transferred enjoy impartial justice in
accordance with international norms. In that regard, we
support the proposal made by the Tribunals that the
possibility be considered of entrusting trials to
countries that have operational judicial systems.
Furthermore, in the cases of collective crimes, such as
those in Rwanda, the principle of individual
responsibility should be weighed against the promotion
of national reconciliation. The case of genocide in
Rwanda is extremely complex and serious, and should
be addressed with circumspection because, when a
crime is committed on such a large scale, the evil is no
longer individual and becomes societal. Any solution
must seek to help the societies concerned to reconcile
themselves with themselves.

While impunity is intolerable at any level, be it in
Rwanda or the countries of the former Yugoslavia, the
Tribunals should remain aware of the cultural
sensitivities of the populations of those countries and
bear in mind that the principal task is to maintain peace
and to create harmony among the various ethnic groups
that are called on to live together. That is why pardons
and truth and reconciliation commissions should be
considered wherever possible.

In conclusion, I reiterate Benin's support for the
two Tribunals, because the establishment of a lasting
peace in those countries, through their own actions,
will depend to a certain extent on the clear-sightedness,
rigor and flexibility with which they undertake their
mission.

