Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I would like to thank
Ambassador Roman Oyarzun Marchesi of Spain for
his support to the Council as the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006).

Lithuania closely monitors the intensive efforts by
the E3+3 and Iran to reach a final agreement on a Joint
Plan of Action. We remain convinced that the vigorous
system of sanctions and the strong commitment
by Member States to uphold the implementation of
sanctions continue to have a decisive impact in support
of a negotiated solution. Now that negotiations are
in the final stretch, Iran must show flexibility and
willingness to provide the international community
with verifiable guarantees of the exclusively peaceful
nature of its nuclear programme.

Iran's cooperation with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) is another key element in
rebuilding the international community's trust. We
welcome the conclusion by the IAEA that Iran has
been implementing measures agreed in the Joint Plan
of Action, but we call on Iran to increase cooperation
in providing access to all relevant information, sites,
material and personnel.

We thank the Panel of Experts for the final report
(S/2015/401) and welcome its official public release
on 1 June. The report provides a useful overview of
Iran's compliance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and an analysis of reported violations.
We remain concerned that while complying with the
Joint Plan of Action, Iran continues to disregard other
provisions of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
in particular those related to transfers of conventional
weapons and related material. As the negotiations on
the final agreement continue in Vienna, all Security
Council sanctions imposed on Iran remain in full
effect and all Member States must implement them,
including by reporting cases of non-compliance to the
Committee. Furthermore, Iran itself must cooperate
with the Committee, inter alia by providing the
information requested by the Panel during the course
of its investigations.

Finally, let me underscore our hope that the
current talks between the E3+3 and Iran will translate
into a comprehensive and verifiable solution, which
would strengthen long-term international confidence
in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear
programme.

