Mr. Cevik (Turkey): Allow me first of all to express
our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open debate on the Middle East.

The Middle East has been going through a
significant period of transition and change. At the heart
of the challenges that we face in the Middle East lies
the Palestinian question. That issue continues to poison
the prospects for regional cooperation, welfare and
peace. Turkey continues to support a two-State solution
on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
the capital of the State of Palestine, living side by side
in peace and security with Israel and sitting side by side
with us on an equal footing under this roof.

The revival of the Middle East process, which
has been at a deadlock for some time, including the
resumption of comprehensive peace negotiations
between the parties for a just and lasting solution,
has become increasingly crucial. That is especially
important in the face of every passing hour, which
makes a two-State solution less probable. In that
regard, we appreciate the renewed engagement of the
United States Administration in facilitating the peace
process. Turkey, as always, is ready to contribute
to all international efforts towards a just and lasting
settlement.

Israel's illegal settlement activities present serious
obstacles to the resumption of negotiations. It is time
to seriously commit to and to respect the established
parameters of the peace process. As such, the decision
of the Human Rights Council in March to establish
an independent international fact-finding mission to
investigate the implications of Israeli settlements on
the human rights of Palestinian people throughout
the o occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, is noteworthy. The worrying situation of
Palestinian prisoners under Israeli custody continues
to be a great source of concern, which, as also
demonstrated in the past month, has the potential to
derail any desired advancement in the peace talks.

On that note, I would like to reiterate our
position of denouncing violence regardless of the
motives behind it. The illegal blockade on Gaza is
not sustainable. We expect the Israeli Government to
lift the blockade, in accordance with its bilateral and
multilateral commitments. The arbitrary closures of
border crossings and other punitive measures against
the civilian population in Gaza are counterproductive
to what we are trying to achieve.

In the meantime, we shall continue to give our
full support to Palestinian reconciliation, which, we
believe, constitutes one of the pillars for peace in the
Middle East. That important requirement should not be
put on the back burner, behind the peace negotiations.
It is also important that the Palestinian parties
understand that reconciliation will deliver recognition
of their role towards peace. Trusting the leadership of
His Excellency President Mahmoud Abbas, we will
continue to urge the parties for an expedited outcome
to their efforts. The international community should
also be ready to lend its support to a Palestinian unity
Government, followed by the holding of elections.

Turkey will continue to support the peace process,
as well as the rightful aspirations of the Palestinian
people, for an internationally recognized statehood, in
accordance with United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Allow me to touch upon the humanitarian
disaster just across our border with Syria. With more
than 70,000 dead, 1.3 million refugees, 4.5 million
internally displaced and 6 million people in need of
urgent humanitarian assistance, the Syrian crisis is the
fastest growing humanitarian crisis in the world. As we
stated last week in the Chamber (see S/PV.6949), the
international community has the moral responsibility to
support the Syrian people in their struggle. That must be
done urgently, collectively and decisively. The average
number of daily crossings by Syrians into neighbouring
countries has reached 8,000. It is not realistic to expect
those countries to continue to absorb the influx of
Syrian refugees at its current intensity. We believe
that, pending a political solution, the international
community should start to discuss unexplored ways
and means to address the problems and needs of the
internally displaced persons within Syria and to find
alternative destinations for those who choose to leave
their country because they feel insecure.

The foreign ministers of 11 countries of the Group
of Friends of Syria, at its meeting in Istanbul last
Saturday, agreed that immediate action must be taken to
bring the Syrian conflict to an end. On the sidelines of

the meeting, the Syrian National Coalition reiterated its
very important vision of the new Syria 7 a democratic
and pluralistic State based on the rule of law, where
all Syrians, man and woman, will be equal, regardless
of their ethnic, religious and sectarian backgrounds.
Those statements are encouraging only as long as the
international community unites and works hand in
hand for all universal values in which we believe.

Let me conclude by sharing the view that 2013 is
vital for peace in the Middle East. Now is the time for
sincere and concrete action. There is an ever-growing
need for concerted action towards a two-State solution.

