Before I deliver my statement, I would like us to take a moment to reflect on what Mark Lowcock said: "Yemenis are not 'going hungry'. They are being starved." (see annex II) I also want to congratulate David Beasley on receiving the Nobel Peace Prize. The Dominican Republic is not the World Food Programme's (WFP) biggest donor, but it is for sure its biggest supporter. We would like to thank Martin Griffiths, Mark Lowcock, David Beasley and Omer Badokhon for their briefings. At the outset, it is good to emphasize that the progress on the ground is important and welcome. The prisoner exchange that took place last month, the news about the possible composition of a new Yemeni Government and the start of biometric registration of humanitarian assistance beneficiaries are steps that show us some light in the middle of a tunnel that has been very dark for too many years. However, despite this good news, as our briefers have noted, the situation in Yemen is critical. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations-WFP early warning analysis of focal points of acute food insecurity in Yemen warns us that the expansion of the conflict coupled with the issue of access to humanitarian assistance, the deepening of the economic crisis and the increase in food prices could further exacerbate an already critical food security situation, particularly in the governorates of Al-Jawf, Ma'rib, Amran and Al-Mahwit, where a significant part of the population depends exclusively on humanitarian assistance for its survival. And thanks to the most recent analysis of the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification of acute malnutrition, we know that acute malnutrition rates among children under five are the highest ever recorded in some parts of Yemen. Faced with this situation, the international community has the collective responsibility to act. Otherwise, the risk that a number of United Nations programmes will close their operations from January due to a lack of financing will have unimaginable consequences for the future of millions of people. That is why donor countries having pledged but not yet disbursed funds to alleviate the situation must do so with greater urgency. At the same time, we must step up flexible, multi-year humanitarian financing, as well as support and promote early recovery programmes, while ensuring that immediate needs are met. It is important to look to the future, because if we do not solve the humanitarian crisis, the people and youth of Yemen will not have the strength to rebuild their country when the long-awaited peace arrives. At the same time, the economic and health crises also deserve mention, because apart from the conflict, they negatively impact the humanitarian situation. We are referring in particular to the coronavirus disease and the threat of a second wave outbreak of the virus in Yemen, where the health system is on the verge of collapse. We must not let hunger, conflict and the combination of these factors - or worse still, inaction on our part - undermine the future of millions of innocent Yemenis. Among other urgent measures, we recommend providing an economic rescue package for Yemen; promoting income from remittances by creating transfer channels and reducing remittance fees; achieving a long-term agreement for fuel and commercial imports and negotiating an agreement among all parties to establish a centralized and technocratic management plan for the Central Bank of Yemen to address conflicting monetary and fiscal policies. It seems that Yemen is a case of one step forward, two steps back. Lasting peace cannot be attained in this way. The solution is in our hands. Together we can change the course of the situation in Yemen, for the benefit of the Yemeni people, who so yearn for peace.
