Mr. Berger (Germany): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening and personally
presiding over today's meeting. We appreciate Gabon's
initiative to bring the issue of HIV/AIDS and
international security to the attention of the Security
Council again. Germany believes that resolution 1983
(2011), adopted today, is a significant step in tackling
this important issue. I would particularly like to thank
the Secretary-General and Mr. Sidibe, Executive
Director of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS, for their insights.

Eleven years after the adoption of the pioneering
resolution 1308 (2000), HIV/AIDS still constitutes a
threat to international stability. It impacts on whole
societies, and sometimes even regional and
international security. The risk of exposure to the
disease continues to be especially high in conflict and
post-conflict situations, as well as during transition
processes. On the one hand, the epidemic destroys
social structures and networks, thus creating more
misery in already shaken societies and increasing the
potential for social unrest. As a consequence, HIV and
AIDS can be considered as one of the causes of
political weakness, State fragility and conflict
aggravation.

On the other hand, conflict and tensions
exacerbate the problem of HIV and AIDS within
societies. International support, health education,
access to prevention, adequate medication, hospitals
and treatment for HIV patients prove to be difficult or
nearly impossible in some conflict situations, thus
causing more rapid spread of the disease. As a result,
populations are not only directly endangered by
conflict but also indirectly by the spread of diseases
such as HIV.

UNAIDS estimates that the prevalence of
HIV/AIDS is three to four times higher among armed
forces and armed groups than among the general
population. As we know, women and children are often
the main victims of conflict. Rape, which is all too
often used as a weapon of war, also adds to the spread
of HIV among civilians. HIV adds to the stigma and
discrimination that victims of sexual violence
oftentimes face.

In many conflicts, children are recruited and
misused as soldiers, sexually exploited and abused.
Under these conditions they are especially vulnerable
to infection, and are therefore not only traumatized but
often also stigmatized for life. Germany is convinced
that children deserve special protection in armed
conflict and, if needed, must be provided with special
HIV-related health care. We have set up a number of
projects to attend to former child soldiers and girls who
have been sexually exploited by armed groups,
including child mothers, to provide them with HIV
counselling and care - for example in Eastern Congo.

In the post-conflict transitional phase, the
transmission of HIV constitutes a particular danger.
There is high population mobility after conflict, when
displaced persons find refuge in camps, refugees return
home and combatants are demobilized. Infected
persons pose a high risk of contagion to their extended
families and communities. Germany considers it
essential that voluntary testing and counselling be
provided, and anti-retroviral drugs supplied, in order to
prevent the further spread of the disease.

During transition processes, when Government
structures are not yet established or functional, it may
be difficult to apply health programmes or to develop
and implement policies against HIV. An effective
international response in providing and ensuring HIV-
related assistance may have to rely on the
establishment of local health centres that provide direct
assistance to the population. Germany is actively
engaged in fighting HIV and AIDS at the local level
and has established health centres in several African
regions, including in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
Resolution 1308 (2000) focused in particular on
the potential of HIV/AIDS to impact the health of
United Nations peacekeepers. Germany commends the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and UNAIDS
for all the progress they have achieved in addressing
HIV/AIDS among peacekeepers, and uniformed
personnel more generally. However, it is clear that
more needs to be done to reduce the number of

HIV/AIDS-related deaths among peacekeepers. There
has to be a continued emphasis on strengthening
national prevention, counselling and treatment
programmes. We would also encourage Member States
to develop more specific strategies for personnel
participating in peacekeeping operations, including
awareness-raising and voluntary confidential
counselling and testing.

In conclusion, I would like once again to thank
Gabon for having organized this debate, which has
clearly underlined that threats to international peace
and security are multifaceted. We believe that in this,
as in other matters, the Security Council needs to adopt
a broad strategy of conflict prevention that addresses
the root causes of conflict in a comprehensive manner.

