Mr. Kubis: Since I arrived in Baghdad at the end
of March, I have endeavoured to meet as broad a range
of Iraq's political, community and religious leaders
as possible, to hear their views on how Iraq and its
different components can overcome the challenges and
threats the country faces, and to set a steady course
towards unity, cooperation, reconciliation, stability and
development. While major differences of opinion and
approaches exist, there is a general consensus that in
order to successfully counter Iraq's common enemy,
the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), unity and cooperation among all components of
the Iraq society are needed, and that the way forward is
to accelerate the implementation of the Government's
ministerial programme and the national political
agreement to start a process of national reconciliation.

The Iraqi security forces, together with the
Peshmerga, patriots of the popular mobilization
forces and Sunni tribal volunteers, supported by the
international coalition and countries of the region, are
making advances and liberating territory from ISIL. I
salute their bravery and commitment. They are saviours
of Iraq. However, ISIL is far from being defeated and
Government gains remain at times fragile. The ability
to liberate a city or a territory does not necessarily
mean an ability to hold it.

Vast areas of Iraq and millions of Iraqis remain
under the control and influence of ISIL, which
continues to perpetrate horrendous crimes and human
rights violations against the Iraqi people, in particular
women, children and minorities. ISIL recently added
to its crimes the barbaric destruction of Iraq's cultural
and historical heritage in another attempt to destroy its
national identity. Many areas not under ISIL control,
including Baghdad, have been rocked by violence,
terrorist and sectarian. Particularly appalling is
violence against internally displaced persons (IDPs),
who are increasingly targeted and criminalized.

It is important that local fighters and authorities
be properly empowered to take their share of
responsibility for the liberation from ISIL and for
holding and governing their areas. The Government's
efforts to provide the necessary financial and material
support to tribesmen and local authorities need to be
expedited. All of that, and notably military supplies and
assistance, must be coordinated with and sanctioned by
the respective authorities of the State. In that regard,
I welcome the recent establishment of a Government
committee to oversee the implementation of support.
I also welcome the determination of the Government
of Iraq to exert firm control over all elements taking
part in liberation operations across Iraq and to hold to
account those who have committed crimes, as indeed
some opportunistic and criminal elements continue
to engage in atrocities, revenge killings, looting,
expropriation and the destruction of property of the
local population and returning of IDPs. I applaud both
Prime Minister Al Abadi and His Eminence Grand
Ayatollah al-Sistani, who have taken a firm stance
against such transgressions.

In the majority of my meetings with Iraq's political
representatives, I have heard one message - a military
solution alone will not be enough to defeat ISIL. If any
military gains are to be sustainable, the Government
of Iraq must also restore the confidence of disaffected
communities that they will assume a share in governing
their own affairs and in the State's ability to ensure
their protection from violence, deliver justice and
create conditions for their fair participation in society.
Until the majority of IDPs conclude that conditions for
the safe and sustainable return of civilians have been
created, such returns will not happen. And one of the
consequences might be the continuation of involuntary
demographic changes, including in the disputed
territories between Baghdad and Erbil.

As a priority, the Government needs to urgently
continue taking measures to restore civilian
responsibility for security and the rule of law in the
liberated areas. In addition, the Government needs, in
coordination with the local authorities, to restore public
services and rebuild basic infrastructure as soon as
possible so as to facilitate the return of the displaced.
Worryingly, however, Prime Minister Al Abadi has
underscored to me his Government's great difficulties
in responding to these urgent stabilization needs, in
addition to meeting the massive humanitarian needs.
The Government faces serious constraints in terms of
funds and material for stabilization and rehabilitation.
The liberated areas are in urgent need of clearance from
explosive remnants of war. I hope in particular to see
the United Nations Mine Action Service return in force
to Iraq, and that cannot happen without donors' support.
Withdrawing resources from other areas of the country
to meet these stabilization needs would put additional
pressure on the already heavily impacted areas from
the IDPs' influx and beyond.

I strongly urge Security Council members and the
whole international community to support the Iraqi
Government's efforts and to provide funding for the
multitude of needs. Despite being a middle-income
country, Iraq is temporarily unable to cope alone
with the challenges of the security and humanitarian
crisis and the stabilization and rehabilitation efforts.
Unfortunately, however critical the urgency of
continuous and massive support for Iraq may be, the
international community's response has been grossly
insufficient, as if the existence of other old and new
crises were enough to excuse a waning attention to the
plight of Iraq and its people. Lack of support, however,
might eventually mar the existing opportunities to make
Iraq successful in its fight against terrorism and to make
it an example for other parts of the region and beyond,
contrary to some trends prevailing elsewhere. Without
such support, this fragile chance might disappear.

Political processes and national reconciliation
efforts are essential to overcoming the underlying
challenges facing Iraq and its unity, and to creating
sustainable solutions for the peaceful coexistence,
cooperation and development of Iraq's diverse
components. As such, more vigorous and productive
efforts on the part of the Government and the political
forces to adopt priority legislation that will aid national
reconciliation efforts are needed. A draft amnesty law
is with the Prime Minister. Parliament is finalizing
legislation to restore balanced representation in Iraq's
institutions. The national guard law is under discussion.
I urge Iraq's political leaders to work together to find
consensus, while the Government and Parliament of
Iraq need to take the steps necessary to accelerate
the adoption and enactment of these laws. I therefore
welcome the extension of Parliament's session.

These efforts towards political dialogue must also
be accompanied by efforts to promote reconciliation
at the community level. Religious leaders, scholars
and community, tribal and political leaders alike
must promote the principles of non-violence, religious
tolerance, inclusiveness and forgiveness, as well as
accountability for crimes committed. All of these
messages were echoed in my meetings with the
leadership of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq. As the
implementation of the December 2014 joint agreement
on energy exports and revenue-sharing takes hold, so the
relations between both sides strengthen. Prime Minister
Al Abadi's visit to ErbiI on 6 April was a clear expression
of this goodwill to cooperate. I encourage both sides
to continue working together towards resolving open
issues and towards the enactment of the legislation that
will be necessary to secure the sustainable management
and fair distribution of Iraq's natural resources. And
let us not forget that the Kurdistan Region of Iraq also
needs international support. Currently, it contributes in
a major way to the fight against ISIL and hosts over
1 million IDPs within its own estimated population of
above 5 million people.

Prime Minister Al Abadi's determination to
strengthen Iraq's regional ties with its regional partners
in mobilizing their support for Iraq and in the promotion
of a common regional approach to the regional and
global threat of ISIL has been received positively by
Iraq's neighbours. During my recent visit to Kuwait and
Jordan, I heard a clear message that a united, peaceful

and stable Iraq would make for a stable and prosperous
region - a message of support for the Government of
Iraq and of readiness to coordinate closely with it in all
areas.

The unpredictable and unstable security situation
and violence continue to take a terrible toll on the men,
women and children of all Iraq's communities. From
June last year until the end of April 2015, over 44,000
civilian casualties have been reported, including at
least 15,219 killed and 29,493 wounded. The United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) was
also affected when, on 26 April, a UNAMI national
staff member was abducted by unidentified gunmen in
Baquba, in Diyala governorate. The United Nations is
increasingly concerned by the lack of progress on this
issue, and strongly urges the respective authorities of
Iraq to ensure his swift release.

The humanitarian consequences of the conflict are
enormous. The Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Valerie
Amos, will speak on this matter, and I fully support her
analysis and appeal, while commending the work of the
humanitarian community.

Allow me to turn to the sixth report of the Secretary-
General pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution 2107
(2013) (S/2015/298), on the issue of missing Kuwaiti
and third-party persons and property. On 26 April, I
visited Kuwait on my first regional visit, and I had to
conclude that we run the risk that future generations will
continue to carry this burden unless progress is made
after so many years without tangible results, notably
on missing persons. The respective Iraqi authorities are
called upon to urgently take practical steps that will
move this caseload forward. UNAMI will continue to
assist.

With regard to the question of missing Kuwaiti
property, including the national archives, Iraq has
found and turned over some objects such as books and
artefacts belonging to Kuwait, a move that is sincerely
appreciated. However, the issue of the archives remains
one that is difficult to understand. Again, Government
commitment must be urgently translated into action.

To sum up, my first impressions after just several
weeks in Iraq are mixed, but with a positive perspective.
The complexities and complications are enormous, as
are the constraints and risks. Progress is slow, regardless
of a clear vision on the part of the Government and
the political resolve of the Prime Minister. The plight
of Iraq and its people is unjustly and unjustifiably
overshadowed by other developments in the region,
at a time when more support is needed to counter and
degrade the terrorist group Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and to work for the unity of Iraq based on
balancing the rights and interests of its components. Yet
opportunities exist as well. Continuous, long-term and
adequate political, financial and material support for
Iraq, its Government and its people by the international
community, and notably by the countries of the region,
is needed to turn those opportunities into reality for the
benefit of Iraq, the region and beyond.

