I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his insightful briefing and Mr. David Santiago Cano Salazar for sharing his inspiring efforts aimed at supporting the reintegration of former combatants. I welcome the participation of Colombian Foreign Minister Blum in today's meeting. The comprehensive implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace remains the way forward. The commitment demonstrated by the new subnational authorities is a welcome development. We encourage both parties to make full use of the mechanisms for dispute resolution created by the agreement. While the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic raises an additional challenge to the peace process, we are encouraged by the parties' joint efforts to ensure continued implementation. Authorities have shown a strong initial response and are working to prevent the spread of the virus in vulnerable areas where former combatants are reintegrating into society. We welcome the announcement by the Ejercito de Liberacien Nacional of a unilateral ceasefire, which has added to the growing momentum of the Secretary-General's global appeal. We remain very concerned about the consistently high level of violence against human rights defenders, social leaders and former combatants, as highlighted in the recent report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. The safety needs of these individuals is to be guaranteed, and the peace agreement sets up mechanisms to this end. We call for further progress in operationalizing the comprehensive security and protection programme for communities and organizations in the territories. The launch of the action plan for the implementation of the Comprehensive Programme of Safeguards for Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders is an important step, yet resources sufficient for its implementation will be needed. We urge armed groups to refrain from violence. We welcome the efforts aimed at reintegrating former combatants, in particular the progress made in financing and implementing the development programmes with a territorial focus. Rural reform and access to land remain key challenges, as does the shift in focus to the large majority of former combatants now living outside the concentration zones. We also welcome the agreement to make progress in humanitarian mine clearance through a collaboration among the Government, the United Nations and Humanicemos DH, a civil society organization that employs former combatants. We also remain concerned about the precarious situation of the children of former combatants, the recent cases of recruitment and use of children by illegal armed groups in some departments, and the situation of children still living in areas affected by violence. Belgium pays particular attention to the process of transitional justice in Colombia and welcomes the progress in the cases launched by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. To meet the high expectations of victims, it is important that all actors fully contribute to the various components of the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition. In conclusion, we welcome the continued efforts aimed at bringing about peace in Colombia, despite the difficult environment. Belgium is strongly committed to supporting Colombia in addressing the remaining challenges in the implementation of the final peace agreement.
