Mr. Wane: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on
the situation in Darfur. On this tenth anniversary of the
Council's decision to deploy the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), I
would like to draw the attention of Council members
to the joint recommendations of the Secretary-General
and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
on the reconfiguration of the Mission, as submitted
in their joint special report on the strategic review of
UNAMID (S/2017/437).

A decade has elapsed since the Secretary-General,
in his letter dated 5 June 2007 (S/2007/307), proposed the
mandate and the structure of UNAMID to the Security
Council. Since then, significant developments in the
Sudan and the wider region have taken place, and these

require that UNAMID adjust to new realities. With this
in mind, the Secretary-General recommended, in his
letter of28 October 2016 to the President ofthe Security
Council (8/2016/915), that ajoint African Union-United
Nations strategic review of UNAMID be undertaken,
in close consultation with the Government of the
Sudan, in order to provide detailed recommendations to
the Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council on the Mission's priorities and configuration.
The review took place from 5 to 17 March 2017, and the
joint African Union-United Nations recommendations
were consulted with the Government of Sudan and
interested parties. I would like to briefly introduce the
main elements of the proposed reconfiguration.

The report notes that, over the past three years,
the armed conflict that gave rise to the deployment
of UNAMID has markedly changed, following a
successful military campaign by the Government,
which reduced the rebellion to a small presence of the
Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid in Western Jebel
Marra. The number of intercommunal and security
incidents has also decreased as a result of the efforts
of the Government and community leaders, with the
support of UNAMID. In parallel, with the conclusion
of the national dialogue and the inclusion of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur into the Constitution,
progress has been made on the political front.

Yet, as illustrated by an internally displaced
person population of 2.7 million, a number of crucial
grievances at the origin of the conflict and key issues
related to its aftermath are still to be addressed.
While security in the State capitals has improved,
challenges in other parts of Darfur remain. This is due
mainly to the activities of militia groups, unresolved
intercommunal disputes over land and other resources,
the prevalence of weapons and crime, coupled with the
inadequate capacity and effectiveness of the rule of
law institutions.

At present, UNAMID deals with two sets of
issues that are both related to the root causes of the
conflict: first, the continued instability in the greater
Jebel Marra area and the displacement in the Vicinity;
and secondly, intercommunal violence. In View of the
that, the joint report proposes a two-pronged approach
combining peacebuilding and peacekeeping tasks.
Most parts of Darfur require a more peacebuilding-
oriented approach, while in the Jebel Marra area and its
vicinity the Mission's efforts would focus on traditional
peacekeeping tasks and on addressing the emergency
attention arising from the insecurity in the area that
prevents internally displaced persons from returning.

This concept - which includes the closure of
11 team sites, the opening of one temporary operating
base in G010, in the Jebel Marra area, and the withdrawal
of the military from another seven team sites out of a
current total 36 - would enable the Mission to bring
the troop ceiling down to eight battalions, from the
current number of 16 battalions, or to 8,735 troops,
while the police ceiling will be brought down to 2,360,
from a current total of 3,403. This would represent a
reduction of 44 per cent and 30 per cent, respectively,
of the military and police authorized ceilings.

(spoke in French)

The Mission's priorities still address the main issues
at stake and make it possible to contextualize the tasks
UNAMID should undertake and where it has the most
value added. I would indicate, however, that the report
recommends that its priorities be adjusted slightly. In
terms of the political process, a stronger focus should
be put on the effective implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, which, as I pointed out
earlier, is now incorporated in the Constitution and
contains useful provisions to address the underlying
causes of conflict and to create peace dividends for
the population in Darfur. Activities connected with the
protection of civilians in the greater Jebel Marra area,
in collaboration with the humanitarian country team,
will revolve around physical protection and emergency
relief, whereas in the rest of the Darfur states civilian-
protection activities will focus on livelihood issues and
issues related to the police and the capacity to promote
the rule of law capacities.

With regard to intercommunal conflicts, the work
of the Mission should prioritize those intercommunal
conflicts, which have the potential to cause the highest
number of casualties, and derail national political
processes, while a stronger partnership with the
country team is also required to address issues related
to seasonal migration and the extension of rule-of-law
institutions throughout the territory.

I would like to highlight that the developments I
mentioned earlier continue, of course, to be true since
the conclusion of the strategic review. The level of
armed hostilities is significantly lower than in previous
years. The armed movements attempted to reassert their
military presence in North and East Darfur in late May
and early June, but remain unable to conduct sustained
military operations in the face of the military of the
Sudanese Government. In response to intercommunal
conflict during the migration season, Government
authorities at both the local and federal levels, as
well as community leaders, supported by UNAMID,
undertook preventive measures and endeavoured to
reduce the impact of the difficulties encountered,
thereby contributing to reduced Violence as compared
to recent years.

Finally, I would like to say that the reconfiguration
of UNAMID is an important milestone towards
the completion of its mandate. The successful
implementation of that reconfiguration, however,
requires the full support and cooperation of the
Government of the Sudan and its institutions, including
to ensure that there is no administrative or security
vacuum in the areas that will be vacated by UNAMID.
It is also important to continue to work closely with
the country team on issues related to land, the search
for durable solutions for internally displaced persons,
transitional justice and reconciliation.

I will conclude by pointing that out that it is more
necessary than ever that we continue ourjoint efforts to
allow for the achievement of peace and security that the
people of Darfur desire so greatly.

