Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation wishes to associate itself with
the statements just made by the Permanent
Representative of Bahrain and the Permanent
Representative of Cuba.

I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. I also wish to thank your
predecessor for his considerable efforts in guiding the
work of the Council, which culminated in the special
ministerial meeting on the Arab-Israeli conflict held on
21 September 2006 as the result of a joint Arab
initiative. At that meeting, the Secretary-General stated
that "our continued failure to resolve this conflict calls
into question the legitimacy and the effectiveness of
the Security Council itself" (S/PV.5530, p. 2). That
failure becomes even more dangerous when one or two
States prevent the Council from upholding the purposes
and principles of the Charter and from shouldering its
responsibilities in helping to resolve the Arab-Israeli
conflict.

On many occasions over the decades, various
States have assisted the Security Council in adopting
dozens of resolutions - a number of them under
Chapter VII - to help resolve conflicts less dangerous
than the Arab-Israeli conflict and to address crises not
requiring Council involvement. For reasons to which I
have already alluded, the Security Council has often
been unable to ensure the implementation of its own
resolutions providing for the sending of fact-finding
missions or missions to investigate Israeli violations of
international law and humanitarian law in the occupied
Arab territories.

The Arab-Israeli conflict is the longest-running
conflict on the United Nations agenda; indeed, it is as
old as the Organization itself. Decades have passed
since Israel occupied the Arab territories, on 5 June
1967. The Council Chamber has been the scene of the
unanimous adoption of resolutions such as resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) 425 (1978) and 497 (1981).
Those resolutions, however, owe their fame to their
long duration, unimplemented, and to the Council's
inability to apply them to Israel, the occupying Power.

This undermines the credibility of the Council.
Whenever the Council moves in the right direction and
resolves to condemn the Israeli aggressor, the clock in
the Council Chamber stops because of the use of the
veto by one influential State, which allows Israel to
avoid complying with the will of the international
community. Thus, the occupation of our land in
Palestine, Syria and Lebanon continues. In addition,
Violations of our rights and acts of provocation
increase, and our patience and tolerance for injustice,
aggression and repression is further put to the test.

An equitable and just solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict is not impossible, if there is political will to
achieve peace. Such political will, however, must be
based on full, faithful and serious respect for the letter
and spirit of international law. The Arabs have always
contributed constructively in this regard. They have
presented many peace initiatives, which have been
greatly appreciated by the international community, the
most recent of which was adopted at the Beirut Summit
in 2002 - an initiative that Arab foreign ministers
reaffirmed in full more than one month ago here in the
Council.

It is increasingly clear that Israeli military
supremacy cannot guarantee the continuation of the fait
accompli imposed against the will of our people, who
are chafing under the yoke of occupation and the
frustration of their aspirations and rights. There must
be political will to make peace by successive Israeli
Governments and their protectors. Such peace must be
based on justice, must be comprehensive and must
reflect the will of the international community, as
represented in the Council.

This question is not new to the Security Council
or to the United Nations as a whole. It is not new in the
context of international, regional and bilateral
relations. This question has long been discussed; it is
constantly being raised at meetings throughout the
world. Yet the Arab-Israeli conflict has not been
resolved in keeping with the provisions of the Charter
and international law. With the passage of time, this
situation has had tragic repercussions and adverse
consequences for the region.

Our land has long been occupied. The occupation
has been immoral and illegal and has caused great
suffering to millions. Weapons arsenals are growing,
and our region has become a testing ground for a host
of lethal weapons. One case in point is the lethal
weapons used by Israel in its most recent acts of
aggression against Lebanon, in which it dropped
millions of cluster bombs on Lebanon after the Council
adopted resolution 1701 (2006).

In our View, the responsibility for establishing a
just and comprehensive peace is a collective one. No
party should stand in the way of this responsibility. It is
a common responsibility, because the benefits of a just
and comprehensive peace will also be enjoyed in
common. We must therefore talk about a just,
comprehensive and true peace, not about supposed
efforts to achieve peace that are actually unrelated to
genuine peace.

President Bashar Al-Assad has consistently talked
about a peace based on principles, not on manoeuvres,
because only a peace based on principles is founded on
law and on the well-known terms of reference. Thus, a
peace based on principles is the only kind of peace that
can endure. The President of the Syrian Arab Republic
has made many statements about the need for peace in
the region, and the international community has taken a
keen interest in his position and has appreciated it.
Indeed, some distinguished colleagues, including
Mr. De Soto himself, have referred to that position
during this meeting.

What has the Israeli response been to Syria's
peaceful intentions? The Israeli Prime Minister told the
Israeli Knesset that Israel will not withdraw from the
occupied Syrian Golan and that the Golan is part and
parcel of Israel. His statement made no sense; many
Israeli statesmen and many in the Israeli media
strongly criticized him for his lack of political realism,
for his disregard for the reality of the situation and for
ignoring the importance of Syria in establishing peace
in the region. Without the restoration of the occupied
Golan to Syria in accordance with the borders of

4 June 1967, Israel will not enjoy peace. Nobody can
impose an imaginary peace - one that enables Israel
to continue its occupation of our usurped land. Indeed,
the continuation of the occupation simply means the
absence of peace.

The Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom expressed his country's concern about what
he called Syria's role in financing and arming groups
inside Lebanon. He said that we should support the
peace process instead of supporting terrorism, as
terrorism endangers the stability of the Middle East.
That is a distorted reading of the facts on the ground
and does not reflect the numerous reports presented by
the United Nations itself, including reports from the
Security Council and by Secretariat representatives and
envoys, about the positive political role played by
Syria with regard to events in the region. Britain
shoulders the bulk of the moral and political
responsibility for sowing the seeds of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, given its unilateral actions. Those actions
determined the fate of Palestine, which it occupied
until 1948. Britain knows full well the identity of the
real terrorism from which the region is suffering. Many
British nationals fell victim to the explosion of the
King David Hotel in Al-Quds and other Israeli
explosions and killings that included many United
Nations special envoys, such as Count Bernadotte and
others.

Given its long experience in the Security Council,
Britain knows that United Nations records are replete
with official reports that talk about Israeli terrorism in
the region. When it comes to the appeal that we
support the peace process, this runs counter to the fact
of Syria's abiding by the peace process as a strategic
option and its numerous calls for resuming it.

The irrational questioning of our deep belief in
peace affirms the validity of our position that some do
not possess real political will for a just and
comprehensive peace. Numerous speakers today,
particularly Mr. Alvaro de Soto, the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General to the
Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority, stated that Syria is for peace, and the
President of Syria has called for peace many times. The
Israeli response to those initiatives was in the form of
provocations, intransigence, rejection of peace and
unsound declarations.
My country moved part of our border guards
from our border with Iraq to the borders with Lebanon,
in implementation of our commitment to resolution
1701 (2006), despite our reservations over some of its
items. The Secretary-General repeatedly referred to
Syria's fulfilment of its obligations and that it has not
reneged on any of its pledges. This Council knows that
my country requested European technical devices and
equipment to monitor the long border with Lebanon, a
border 351 kilometres-long, two months after adoption
of resolution 1701 (2006). We still wait for the delivery
of the equipment to us.

My country is participating in reconstructing
many Lebanese villages destroyed by Israeli military
machinery. We provide Lebanon with electricity and
we help hundreds of thousands of Lebanese refugees
who fled Israeli attacks. We also have enabled many
Lebanese students whose universities were destroyed
in Lebanon to come to our universities. We placed our
ports and airports at the service of Lebanon when it
was surrounded by Israel, when Israel destroyed its
infrastructure and polluted its coasts and our coasts,
when Israel bombarded the oil station in Lebanon. My
country did not kill any elements of the UNIFIL forces,
nor did it commit war crimes or crimes against
humanity in Palestine or Lebanon. My country did not
carry out the first and second massacres in Qana; my
country did not detain democratically elected ministers
and parliamentarians; my country does not establish a
racist separation wall on occupied land; my country
does not impose a criminal blockade on defenseless
people. State terrorism with regard to Israel is well
known to any fledgling diplomat. Nobody should have
any second thoughts about writing that expression.

