Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the current month. I
express the hope that, during the remaining period of
your presidency, the Council will carry out important
work relating to our region.

I should also like to pay tribute to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Ukraine,
for his work last month.

I should like to make my statement in English.
(spoke in English)

We firmly share the belief that the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is a matter of immense
importance. The interest shown by the Security Council
in this matter is appropriate and necessary, and we
hope that it will continue until the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is adequately ensured and
taken seriously in all cases - and, I would add,
without the selectivity caused by political
considerations that leads to inaction.
We appreciate the second report (S/2001/33l) on
this subject, of 30 March 2001, presented by the
Secretary-General to the Security Council upon the
request of the Council, just as we appreciated the report
(S/l999/957) of 8 September 1999. Both are important
documents. However, we reiterate our comments
during discussion of the first report; we are perplexed
that the two reports fail to make any mention of the
Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territory, or of the
grave and serious breaches of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, Additional Protocol I and the Hague
Regulations being committed by the occupying Power.

We agree with the report that the rising number of
internal armed conflicts around the world is a
phenomenon to which we must direct greater attention.
Nevertheless, there can be no serious consideration of
the subject of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, and no serious attempt to apply international
humanitarian law, without necessary attention being
given to the case of foreign occupation. This is
practically the entire sense of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and Additional Protocol I.

With regard to the specific case of Palestine, the
Secretariat should also have taken into consideration
the longstanding dealings of the United Nations with
the case, from the issue of the Palestine refugees to the
ongoing Israeli occupation since 1967. In this regard, I
refer to, inter alia, the many Security Council
resolutions reaffirming the applicability of the Fourth
Geneva Convention to the occupied Palestinian
territory, including Jerusalem; the existence of several
resolutions specifically dealing with the need to
provide protection to Palestinian civilians; and, finally,
the convening, for the first time in the history of the
four Geneva Conventions, of a Conference of the High
Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention
on the situation, in accordance with calls made at the
tenth emergency special session of the General
Assembly. In addition, significantly, the Statute of the
International Criminal Court - including a part on war
crimes - has now been concluded.

On the other hand, it is very difficult for the
Council itself to assert credibility, or claim success, in
dealing with the protection of civilians in armed
conflict at a time when it has repeatedly failed to
effectively respond to the need of Palestinian civilians
for protection, including the dramatic and urgent
increase in that need during the past several months,
beginning on 28 September 2000. We, together with
many States Members of the United Nations and the
majority of Security Council members, have indeed
been trying to achieve something in this regard, even in
a gradual, initial form - but to no avail.

In this regard, we would like to express our deep
appreciation to the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Mary Robinson, the Special
Rapporteur, and the commission of inquiry, for strongly
underlining the need for a protection mechanism for
Palestinian civilians in their recent reports 4 although,
mysteriously, in her statement today, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights did not even mention
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory.

In his note regarding this debate, the President of
the Council suggested that we remain focused on the
subject matter and make suggestions. Our focus is
clear. It can be summarized in one word: compliance -
compliance with the relevant instruments of
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
and compliance with the Security Council's own
resolutions. I should like to add to that my earlier
comments about the need to avoid selectivity, whether
with regard to enforcing compliance or dealing with
the matter as a whole. This includes ending what has
become a culture of impunity in one specific case.
Without this, we will be speaking honourable and
strong words, but they will remain just that: words.

