The President: I thank Mr. Ihsanoglu for his very
informative briefing.

The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today's meeting. I thank Council members for their
valuable contributions to the statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members
of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Council agree to the statement, which will be issued as
a document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2013/16.

I will now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan.

Today, the Security Council is considering for
the first time the question of cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) in a special meeting. That fact
speaks for itself. The OIC is not only the organization
that represents all Muslim nations; it is the second-
largest intergovernmental organization after the United
Nations, with 57 member States and five observers
from four continents. The beginning of cooperation
between the United Nations and the OIC goes back to
1975, when the General Assembly adopted resolution
3369 (XXX). Since then, the OIC has proved to be an
important partner of the United Nations in promoting
peace and security and fostering a culture of peace at
the global level.

Many ofthe issues on the Security Council's agenda
relate to the Islamic world, and the OIC is naturally
seized ofthem. This fact necessitates closer cooperation
and coordination between the Security Council and the
OIC in order to benefit from global, regional and local
approaches in addressing those issues.

A just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East and the comprehensive resolution of the
Arab-Israeli conflict remain among the most pressing
issues on the agenda of both the United Nations and
the OIC. Azerbaijan welcomes efforts aimed at the
resumption of direct negotiations between Israel and
Palestine. It is imperative that the parties demonstrate
a sense of responsibility in sustaining international
efforts towards achieving the two-State solution and
avoid actions that would undermine this objective, with
the ultimate goal of restoring and enhancing peace,
security and sustainable development in the entire
region.

In June, Azerbaijan hosted the Conference of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation on the establishment of an Islamic
financial safety net in support of Palestine and a donors
conference in support of the city of Al-Quds. The
OIC member States and international organizations
that attended the conferences pledged to contribute to
improving Palestine's economy, infrastructure, health
care and education.

With regard to Syria, we hope that the unanimous
and strong position demonstrated recently by the
Security Council will contribute to finding a political
solution to the conflict in that country, putting an end
to the suffering of the Syrian people and ensuring
compliance by the parties concerned with their
obligations and commitments under international law.

Under the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council is conferred with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Therefore, as a matter of priority,
apart from the Council's credibility and effectiveness,
special attention should be given to the implementation
of its resolutions, in particular those related to the
prevention and settlement of conflicts.

Twenty years ago, in 1993, the Security Council
adopted four resolutions in response to the use of
force against Azerbaijan and the occupation and
ethnic cleansing of about 20 per cent of Azerbaijan's
internationally recognized territory by neighbouring
Armenia, which resulted in the emergence of almost
1 million refugees and internally displaced persons.
This means that every ninth person among the 9 million
Azerbaijanis is either a refugee or a displaced person.

These resolutions - 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874
(1993) and 884 (1993) - reaffirmed respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan
and the inviolability of its international borders, and
demanded the immediate, full and unconditional
withdrawal of the occupying forces from all the
occupied territories. Unfortunately, key Security
Council demands have still not been implemented, and
the mediation efforts conducted for more than 20 years
within the framework of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe have yet to yield results.

Since the eruption of the conflict, the OIC, on the
basis of the aforementioned resolutions of the Security
Council, has explicitly determined the actions of
Armenia on the territory of Azerbaijan as aggression.
A series of OIC decisions aimed at the implementation
of Security Council resolutions have been instrumental
in the occupation of the territories of Azerbaijan being
addressed by the international community, including in
particular within the Security Council and the General
Assembly.

Armenia's annexationist policy has absolutely no
chance of success. Nagorno Karabakh is a historical,
inalienable and integral part of Azerbaij an. The only way
to achieve a settlement of the conflict and to establish
civilized relations between the two neighbouring States
is for Armenia to de-occupy the Azerbaijani territories,
fully re-establish the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Azerbaijan, and immediately provide for
compliance with the inalienable right of refugees and
internally displaced persons to return to their homes. It
is therefore important that in its presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/16, adopted today, the Security Council
emphasizes the common objectives shared by the United
Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
in fostering solutions to conflicts in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

Here, there is a need to emphasize the fundamental
contribution that the Islamic culture has made to global
civilization, world science and education. Islam is the
religion of moderation, and by its very name, which
means "peace", it advocates and implies tolerance and
respect for other religions and faiths. Misperceptions
about Islam and Muslims have become the most
persistent and virulent sources of the phenomenon of
Islamophobia, resulting in prejudicial practices and
incitement against Muslims without distinction.

Attempts to create a conceptual link between Islam
and terror are unacceptable. The war on terrorism
should not be used to target or label any particular
religion or culture. The current state of affairs confirms
a Vital need for joint efforts and dialogue to counter
instances of defamation and misconceptions. It is
therefore critical to persistently stress the importance
of respect and understanding for religious and
cultural diversity throughout the world. The common
commitment of both the United Nations and the OIC to
foster a global dialogue for the promotion of tolerance
and peace and their enhanced cooperation to that end
are indispensable for promoting better understanding
across countries, cultures and civilizations.

The problems that the world is facing today are
so numerous and compound that peace and security
have become not only a military concept, but also an
economic, social, development and multicultural one.

In December, Azerbaijan will complete its
membership of the Security Council. It has been two
years of outstanding experience and great collective
work. I assure all Council members that Azerbaijan will
further remain a reliable partner and genuine friend.

I shall now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floors to the members of the
Security Council.

