Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
the delegation of the United Kingdom and the Egyptian
presidency for initiating and convening this very timely
open briefing. My special gratitude goes to the briefers
for their detailed overview of the current situation in
Aleppo, in particular, and in Syria, in general.

Ukraine strongly condemns the air strikes and
indiscriminate shelling carried out in and around
Aleppo over the recent period, which took the lives
of more than 250 people and left thousands injured
and wounded. Last week's bombardment of Al-Quds
hospital in the innocent Sukkari neighbourhood of
Aleppo led to the death of two doctors, including the
only paediatrician in the city, three medical support
staff and dozens of patients, among them children.
Yesterday and yet another hospital in Aleppo, Al-Dabit
hospital, came under fire. At least three people were
killed and dozens of civilians were wounded.

The escalation of violence has also been observed
in other parts of Syria, for example, in Dar'a, where
heavy fighting and aerial bombardments have resumed.
We commend the Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, for his efforts in bringing the cessation
of hostilities in Syria back on track. But how can that
be achieved when the Government pushes on with
a military offensive in Aleppo, provoking a further
escalation in fighting that leads to the death of scores
of civilians trapped in the city?

We have heard the claims that Al-Nusra was
being targeted. However, it is not acceptable that,
in the process, hospitals and the city's other vital
infrastructure had to be destroyed, leaving thousands
of civilians without water, electricity, medical care and
food. It is hard to believe that such an offensive by the
Syrian regime would be possible without the approval
of if major ally, which poses itself as a mediator in
the negotiating process. Amazingly enough, that very
delegation moments ago tried to convince us that
"recently the situation in Syria has radically improved".

The aerial bombardments must stop. The
indiscriminate attacks against civilians must stop.
Only an immediate recommitment to the cessation of
hostilities, which must include Aleppo, can alleviate
the plight of the Syrian people. Against the backdrop
of the rapidly increasing violence in and around
Aleppo, Ukraine considers the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2286 (2016) on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict to be very timely and an extremely
important step. We call on all sides to fully respect that
resolution's provisions. The failure to do that will lead
to the collapse of the cessation of hostilities and bring
more violence death and destruction, while further
undermining the prospects for finding a negotiated
solution to the Syrian conflict. In this regard, we call
upon all parties to strictly comply with their obligations
under resolution 2268 (2016) on the cessation of
hostilities and resume substantive talks in Geneva on
all aspects stipulated in resolution 2254 (2015).

Finally, I wish to put on record the strong support of
our delegation for the draft press statement circulated
by the United Kingdom just now. It deserves urgent
approval and it does not deserve at all to be labelled
as a propagandistic step, as the Russian delegation
has alleged. We urge other members of the Council to
seriously consider it.

