Mr. Popowski: At the outset, let me congratulate
Rwanda on taking this initiative to bring us together
today. It is a timely initiative, timely not only because
of the challenges we collectively still face, but also
because it is time to measure the progress made
20 years after the genocide and our collective failure
at that time.

The African continent has shown tremendous
resolve in solving the conflicts on its soil. The best
illustration is the role played by the African Union in
conjunction with other regional organizations, such as
the Economic Community of West African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Southern African Development Community. Thanks to
their efforts, most lasting conflicts have been brought
to an end. The continent still hosts half of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations, and their annual
budget represents more than 70 per cent of the global
peacekeeping budget of the Organization.

We appreciate the increased United Nations
cooperation with regional organizations in peace and
security activities under Chapter VIII of the Charter
and the acknowledgment of the role of regional
organizations in peacekeeping. Peacekeepers transform
mandates into concrete actions on the ground and keep
the hope for peace alive. Clearly defined mandates,
adequate resources and reliable command and control
structures are crucial for successful peacekeeping.
They are also crucial for a successful transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding.

We strongly believe in the central importance
of protecting all civilians, particularly women
and children, in armed conflict, and in the central
importance of protecting civilian mandates, where
they exist. That is often decisive for the success and
legitimacy ofa United Nations peacekeeping operation.
Protection often implies taking a more robust approach.
As we know, that of course needs to take into account
resources, mandates and host-State responsibilities. In
that context, we welcome the agreement on the rates
of reimbursement to troop-contributing countries,
although that means, of course, that the global budget
to support peacekeeping operations now surpasses
$8 billion.

Cooperation on peacekeeping between the European
Union (EU) and the United Nations has developed
steadily since the Brahimi report (see S/2000/809)
referred to by the Secretary-General, with the aim of
improving the efficiency of peacekeeping operations
around the world. The engagement of the European
Union in peacekeeping efforts is demonstrated by the
very existence of its Common Security and Defence
Policy, within which Africa, with 10 missions and
operations deployed on the continent, remains a centre
of gravity.

The EU cooperates very closely with the United
Nations at the strategic level, including through joint
consultative mechanisms. Our aim is to enhance
practical support to United Nations peacekeeping,
building on the 2003 Joint United Nations-European
Union Declaration on Crisis Management. We continue
to develop that cooperation, notably through effective
coordination during the assessment and planning phases
and during the conduct of the respective missions and
operations, in line with the agreed EU plan of action
to support United Nations peacekeeping. We are still
exploring various other avenues for cooperation,
such as ways to make available to the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations some of the
military capabilities of EU member States.

The most recent meeting of our EU-United Nations
steering committee on crisis management looked into
progress made in the implementation of the EU Action
Plan, as well as cooperation in theatres of operation
such as the Central African Republic and Afghanistan,
as well as trilateral cooperation with the African
Union and the systemic issue of the so-called DAC-
ability of peacekeeping, which is to say the extent to
which peacekeeping can be regarded as development
assistance. We also cooperate very closely with our
African partners. We welcome the intense participation
by African countries in peace support operations on the
continent, whether it be it in United Nations, hybrid or
African missions, such as the African Union Mission in
Somalia and the International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic.

When African and European leaders met in
Brussels on 2 and 3 April for the Fourth EU-Africa
Summit, they reaffirmed their joint commitment to
peace and security on both our continents in conformity
with the aims and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. The EU has been and will remain an
active partner for Africa with a view to bringing about
peace and stability. We continuously pay attention to
the security and development nexus, including in the
context of the ongoing discussion on the post-2015
sustainable development goals. That is the strength of
the EU, but our focus today is on our role in support of
peacekeeping operations.

Before looking at the different ways in which the
EU has been active operationally, it is important to
stress the significance ofpolitics and political dialogue.
Without political leadership and ownership from the
continent, at the continental, regional and national
levels, it is hard to imagine any progress - hence
the importance of strengthened political partnership
between the European Union and the African Union
and with the regional organizations that I mentioned
before. Joint and coordinated action is essential to
finding political solutions and, more importantly, to
preventing conflict. The more united Africa is in its
peace efforts, the stronger will be its partnership with
the international community.

Looking now at peacekeeping operations and
the role of the EU, apart from the participation of its
individual member States in United Nations missions,
the EU's engagement includes building African
capacity to restore and maintain peace, supporting the
AU and regional organizations to deploy peacekeeping
operations and deploying autonomous EU missions and
operations.

In order to improve the African capacity to predict
and prevent or respond to crises, the EU has been a
strong supporter of the African Peace and Security
Architecture through the capacity-building component
of the African Peace Facility, contributing €100 million
over the past 10 years, which has included support for
early warning systems and the multidimensional African
Standby Force. We also recognize the African capacity
for immediate response to crises as a complementary
tool for further enhancing the capacity of the African
Union to respond to crises.

We increasingly focus on national capacity,
which is the starting point, and on national security
forces, which are capable of maintaining stability
after complex peace processes, tackling increasingly
complex transnational threats and participating in
broader peacekeeping operations That has led to a
number of security sector reform projects and EU
training missions, both military and civilian, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, Mali, the
Niger and the Horn ofAfrica. By 2016, the EU will have
trained more than 10,000 African soldiers. Overall, the
European Union is supporting more than 50 capacity-
building projects in more than 20 countries, using all
available instruments - not only crisis management
instruments but also development cooperation.'

With respect to support for the African Union, the
African Union Mission in Darfur was the first mission
to receive, in 2004, financial support from the EU,
followed by the African Union Mission in Somalia,
the African-led International Support Mission in Mali
and the International Support Mission in the Central
African Republic. For that purpose, we have been using
the African Peace Facility, as mentioned before, which
has played a crucial role in supporting AU operations.
Given its success, the African Peace Facility has been
extended and endowed with €750 million for the next
four years.
Finally, in order to respond to urgent crisis
situations, the EU has deployed autonomous executive
and non-executive missions, including Artemis, the
EU-led Force Congo, the EU-led Force Chad, the EU-
led Force Central African Republic and, for the first
time, a maritime security mission, European Naval
Force Operation Atalanta in the Horn of Africa.
Military missions are generally bridging missions,
designed to preserve a critical environment with a clear
exit strategy and geared towards an eventual takeover
by United Nations peacekeeping operations. As the
Secretary-General mentioned, the transition in the
Central African Republic is well advanced, as I had a
chance to witness during my visit to Bangui on 18 July.

Finally, I think we should also look beyond
peacekeeping. Peacekeeping operations can achieve a
great deal, but they can never substitute for a viable
political process. When there is no clear path towards
peace, crises will inevitably recur. Cooperation should
go beyond fire-fighting. We need to stress prevention and
mediation. Peacekeeping remains the flagship activity
of the United Nations and a crucial tool that paves the
way for the longer-term stability and development of
countries emerging from a crisis. The important work
of all actors in partnership with the United Nations is a
tremendous effort that may not always have been given
due recognition.

We need to focus on policy frameworks, continental
and regional structures, and the tools and mechanisms
to anticipate, prevent, manage and resolve crises, which
is in line with the EU's own comprehensive approach to
crisis situations. Peacekeeping operations must focus on
enabling emergence from crisis and on re-establishing
both the local authorities and the United Nations country
teams at the heart of peacebuilding efforts. Continued
work on the peacekeeping-peacebuilding nexus remains
important. Peacekeepers should provide support to
the host State's authorities, while preserving the goal
of achieving a transition capable of consolidating the
country's emergence from crisis. If a State is fragile
or failing, peacekeepers can help restore the State's
authority and assist it, particularly with disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, along with security
sector reform and justice.

Transitions, whether from the African Union to the
United Nations, as in the case of Mali or the Central
African Republic, or from peacekeeping to other forms
of United Nations presence such as United Nations
country teams or peacebuilding structures, continue to
be pertinent subjects that merit further joint reflection.
It remains very important to get those transitions right.
We need to draw lessons learned from past experiences.

The European Union closely follows the
development and effectiveness of the peacebuilding
structures of the United Nations, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund, and stands
ready to contribute to their improvement during the
next review. The Council should rest assured that the
European Union will continue to look for ways to
enhance its support for United Nations peacekeeping.

