Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to congratulate you, Madam, on your accession
to the presidency of the Council and to thank you
for convening this important meeting to promote the
implementation of the Council's agenda in ensuring
the protection of children affected by armed conflict.
I am also pleased to welcome His Excellency Mr. Jean
Asselborn, Minister for Foreign and European Affairs
of Luxembourg, and thank him for his participation this
morning. I would be remiss not to thank the Secretary-
General; Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict; Mr. Anthony Lake,
Executive Director of UNICEF; and Mr. Alhaji Babah
Sawaneh for their valuable statements this morning.

We continue to face many challenges, including
grave violations against children. Since children are
the most vulnerable group in societes, and given the
continued suffering inflicted upon them in complex
and diverse armed conflicts and the non-compliance
of parties to conflicts with international humanitarian
law, we look to the Security Council to further consider
this issue and take more effective measures to protect
children from violations. In this regard, we commend
the concept paper on the subject submitted by the
President today (S/2014/144, annex). While we reaffirm
our commitment to the frameworks adopted by the
United Nations in this respect, we believe that attention
should not be limited to the conceptual level. Rather,
the recommendations of the Secretary-General and the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict must
be applied to the individual cases considered by the
Council.

The international community is determined to
protect children in times of war and peace alike. The
need for the international community to give priority
to this issue is underscored by more than 25 articles
of the Geneva Conventions and its two additional
protocols that refer to children specifically, as well as
the provisions of the Convention of the Rights of the
Child as universally ratified.

Palestinian children are suffering from injustice
because of ongoing Israeli violations against the
Palestinian people. As indicated by the Secretary-
General in his latest report on children and armed
conflict (S/2013/245), in one year alone 50 Palestinian
children were killed and more than 665 injured by
Israeli forces. Palestinian children, including minors,
are subject to arbitrary arrest by the Israeli authorities
on the pretext of being a security threat. According to
the Secretary-General, more than 194 children were
arrested by Israeli authorities. It is also alarming that
a large number of attacks were made on schools and
educational institutions in the Palestinian occupied
territories, including East Jerusalem, where attacks
on 321 schools were reported, representing a large
proportion of schools in the Palestinian occupied
territories.

The Secretary-General's report on children and
armed conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic (S/2014/31)
describes horrendous situations, including grave
violations against children in particular. The Syrian
regime is primarily responsible for the tragic outcomes
of its policies of oppression and use of force against
the the Syrian people who rose up peacefully to
demand their legitimate rights. The use of excessive
and arbitrary military force by the regime's forces and
militia have killed and maimed countless numbers of
children, with long-term direct and indirect impacts,
such as psychological effects.

The regime's security and military forces do not
spare children from arrest, arbitrary detention, ill
treatment and fatal torture. The violations perpertrated
by the regime include the use of children as human
shields, sexual and physical violence, and massacres of
civilians, including babies. Children, who are especially
vulnerable to hunger and disease, are obviously the
main victims of the regime's policy of starving Syrian
towns and villages. They are also largely affected by
the massive destruction inflicted upon the health-care
sector in Syria. It is alarming, that as a result of the
crisis, polio has re-emerged in Syria.

In addition to all this, it is painful to consider that an
entire generation of Syrian children may be lost because
the lack of access to education, as indicated in a recent
UNICEF report. More than 3,000 schools have been
destroyed and more than 1,000 used as shelters. We are
very concerned about the recurring attacks on schools
and their use as military barracks, operations bases and
detention centres. This is not only a violation of the
civilian nature of such institutions, but it also endangers
children and deprives them of their fundamental right
to education, as mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report as well as in those of other organizations, such as
the latest report on attacks on education issued by the
Global Alliance to Protect Education from Attacks. In
that connection, we commend the efforts of the Global
Alliance to formulate guidelines aimed at protecting
schools and universities from military use.

In conclusion, we are here to day to re-emphasize
the importance of efforts to prevent the recruitment of
children and promote their rehabilitation. We would
like to reaffirm that it is equally important to involve
United Nations peacekeeping operations with a mandate
for the protection of children in armed conflicts and
advisers thereof. We reiterate the importance of paying
sufficient attention to strengthening accountability
for violations against children, combatting impunity
for perpetrators, hold them accountable rapidly and
effectively, and taking targeted measures against
persistent violators.

