Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of the United Arab Emirates, I
congratulate Italy on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and applaud its convening of today's
open debate on human trafficking in conflict situations.
1 would like to thank the Secretary-General and all of
the other briefers that we have heard from today.

The crime of human trafficking extends to all
corners ofthe globe. No country is immune to its impact.
We hope that today's debate will help all countries
better confront the role of conflict and instability in
exacerbating the problem of human trafficking.

Trafficking in persons is a source of concern,
especially in our region, the Middle East, where war
and displacement have torn apart communities and
destroyed social protections. In such fragile contexts,
Da'esh and other extremist and terrorist groups have
horrifically exploited innocent people by making
them combatants and forced labourers. These acts of
terror are fundamentally tied to extremist ideologies.
In exploiting the vulnerable, women and girls are
disproportionately affected. As a global champion
of gender equality and women's empowerment, the
United Arab Emirates believes that this situation is a
cause for grave concern. Women are the cornerstones
of their families and communities. Therefore, crimes
committed against them have ramifications for all
of society.

The United Arab Emirates takes human trafficking
very seriously, both at home and around the world. Since
2007, the United Arab Emirates has developed legal
frameworks, policies and social infrastructure to help
fight human trafficking. Through its comprehensive
strategy, our National Committee to Combat Human
Trafficking tracks rates of incidence and prosecution
so as to hold perpetrators accountable, works with
agencies to aid survivors of human trafficking with
counselling, shelter and residency or resettlement,
trains law enforcement entities on anti-trafficking,
and spreads public awareness of the crime throughout
the Emirates.

In order to truly eradicate the problem, we know
that while we must stop trafficking within our own
borders, we must also cooperate with countries where
trafficking originates. The United Arab Emirates
is working with national Governments to ensure
legitimate migration channels by promoting the rule
of law to protect citizens and by offering economic
opportunities to prevent the circumstances that open the
door for traffickers to exploit individuals. To that end,
the United Arab Emirates has created memorandums
of understanding with five countries - most recently
India - to help address the conditions in countries
of origin.

The United Arab Emirates calls for two actions to
combat human trafficking at the international level and
especially for dealing with the crisis in our region. The
first is integration. Combating human trafficking poses
challenges that are as numerous as they are complex. As
such, addressing human trafficking must be holistically
integrated into any responses to conflicts and crises
around the world, particularly in our region. Integrated
responses can be achieved by advancing cooperation
between the public and private sectors, which should be
facilitated by the United Nations.

Secondly, human trafficking is inherently linked
to the current state of global migration. As such, the
agreement on and adoption of the forthcoming global
compact for safe, regular, and orderly migration must
include provisions that address human trafficking. We
call on Member States to engage in this process in order
to ensure a positive outcome. These actions are aimed
at addressing the problem of human trafficking, but we
must also address its root causes, which is done through
a strategy of prevention that includes sustainable and
inclusive development for all.
