Ms. Citaku: It is my pleasure and honour to stand
in front of the Council today and to discuss the periodic
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/ 833).

Sixteen years ago, Kosovo had no voice in this
Chamber. We were witnessing the darkest moments of
our lives. We were being deported from our homes, we
were being killed, and we were being raped. Our lives
and our dignity were being targeted in the most brutal
way by the Serbian military and paramilitary forces.
Families were being separated, some forever.

Scenes of helpless people being driven away in
trains captured the world's attention. But although
atrocities of that magnitude expose the worst of
humanity, it is in moments like these that we see the
very best that humanity has to offer.

We Kosovars are living proof of the fact that
when there is solidarity among the free nations of the
world, when the world decides to act together against
atrocities, injustice and terror, life wins out over death,
and good prevails over evil. And although we did not
have our own voice in this Chamber, the Council spoke
on our behalf. For that we are grateful.

In the immediate aftermath of the war and
devastation, the United Nations deployed the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
which found a country in ashes and helped rebuild it as
well as our lives. We had to start out again from scratch.
The Serbian forces took with them our civil registry, our
cadastral records and all documentation. It was not an
easy start. Once you are free, you realize that survival
is not the only worry and that freedom is not sufficient.
There are homes to rebuild, roads to pave, schools to
construct, laws to adopt and institutions to build. None
of it is easy, but we have managed it together, with the
help of the Council.

Today, 16 years later, Kosovo is an independent and
sovereign State recognized by a majority of the free
nations of the world. We are a constructive partner in
the region and beyond. We have gone to great lengths
to accommodate minority communities in our young
State. We have taken unprecedented affirmative action,
unlike any other minority in the region, and we are
proud of it. Kosovo has set an example to be followed.

While the political debate back home might
sometimes be fierce and filled with tension, let no
one have any doubts about our collective aspirations
and commitments to Euro-Atlantic values and ideals.
I am honoured to inform the Council that Kosovo's
dedication and hard work were rewarded with the
signing of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
with the European Union (EU). Although that marks
just the first step in our accession process, it is a clear
act that demonstrates that our European future is
irreversible and unstoppable. It is a clear and mutual
commitment. On the one hand, Kosovo institutions
commit to continuing with the reforms at all levels,
and, on the other hand, the European Union commits to
providing a concrete road map to accession.

The Stabilization and Association Agreement will
open our markets, increase and ease the exchange of
goods and ideas, and stimulate growth and competition.
Ultimately, it will make Kosovo a better place to live.
We understand that it will be a long process, and it
will involve lots of difficult and painful reforms, but
we remain committed to it. We also expect a positive
recommendation from the European Commission on
the visa liberalization process. We have delivered on
the criteria; now the European Commission should
deliver on its promises.

While the role of the European Union has become
more important and the level of interaction between
Kosovar institutions and the European Union has
increased, we believe that the time is long overdue to
change the nature and the format of the relationship
between Kosovo and the United Nations in general
and the format of the debate in the Security Council in
particular. From now on, Kosovo will be represented
in the Chamber at the level of an Ambassador. We
also believe that there is no need to meet every three
months to repeat the same old positions and engage in a
discourse that is completely the opposite of what we are
trying to achieve through the Brussels dialogue.

We in Kosovo believe that the Chamber is being
misused and that the Council's valuable time is being
wasted because of desperate attempts from our northern
neighbour to project a picture that does not match the
reality, to artificially inject the idea that somehow
Kosovo's status is not settled, that our independence
is a temporary and unfinished business. I wish to be
very clear: Kosovo is a free, independent and sovereign
State, and we will never negotiate our right to exist as
an equal member of the family of the free world.

That brings me to another point, our aspiration to
join and contribute within international mechanisms.
Kosovo so far has joined several important international
organizations, and we will continue to do so in the
future. The path towards that aspiration will have twists
and turns, but the Council may rest assured that in the
end we will succeed.

I would like say a few words on our unsuccessful
attempt to join UNESCO a few days ago. While
Kosovo waged a very positive and moderate campaign,
focused on our youth and our rich cultural, religious,
and historical heritage, we were faced with a very
brutal, dishonest, factually incorrect and, ultimately,
racist campaign against Kosovo. Waging that kind of
campaign against Kosovo's membership in UNESCO
is a direct violation of the spirit of dialogue and
normalization that we in the region so desperately need.
Spending all that time on disseminating fabricated facts
and untrue stories, with the ultimate goal of preventing
our youth and our culture from being a part ofthe global
family, is unworthy of a country that is a candidate for
membership in the EU.

Furthermore, abusing the Serbian Orthodox
Church and instrumentalizing it for political campaigns
is unacceptable. We have witnessed a Serbia that acts
with total disregard for European values, issuing
threats and warnings against our immediate neighbours
for supporting Kosovo's membership in UNESCO. In
contrast to our positive campaign, the top leadership
of Serbia used hate speech of an unprecedented and
unacceptable kind. They claimed that the overwhelming
majority of the citizens of Kosovo were of a lower class,
and that Kosovo was comparable to the worst extremist
and terrorist organizations. In doing so, many senior
officials became promoters of xenophobic attitudes
towards Kosovo.

But the Council may rest assured that we will not
allow our neighbour's rhetoric and actions to deter
us from our strong commitment to cultivating peace,
dialogue and interfaith tolerance in Kosovo. The
protection and preservation of the Serbian Orthodox
Church in Kosovo is a constitutional issue, as foreseen
within the Ahtisaari plan provisions. That issue will
no longer be open for discussion, nor will it be a topic
in the Brussels dialogue. We will not negotiate with
Serbia and we will not ask for Serbia's permission or
consent to join international organizations. For we
would expect Serbia to act in accordance with the spirit
of the normalization process. We will be working even
harder to join international mechanisms, not because of
vanity, but because it is only by being a member of the
global family and having a seat at the table that we can
provide more opportunities for all citizens of Kosovo,
regardless of their ethnic or religious backgrounds.

On behalf of the Government of Kosovo, I would
like to express my deepest gratitude and appreciation
to the 92 representatives of countries that supported
and voted for Kosovo's membership in UNESCO. I
want to assure the representatives of the countries
that abstained or had doubts or suspicions that we
will provide them with reasons to support us in the
future. We also understand that, as some of them
have told us, their abstentions on our membership in
UNESCO were not related to Kosovo. Finally, we urge
the representatives of the countries that voted against
Kosovo's membership to give us a chance to openly
discuss concerns before our application is again on the
agenda in 2017.

Kosovo's institutions reassure the Council that
we will continue to be proactive and committed to
the inter-State dialogue in Brussels. Solely through
dialogue can we achieve sustainable peace. But we
also need to be honest and to speak in earnest on what
the normalization of relations with Serbia means. For
us in Kosovo, there is no room for ambiguity. While
we commit to implementing all the agreements we
have reached with Serbia, since they are in line with
our Constitution, we also need to see the same level of
commitment from Serbia.

Just yesterday, our Minister of Finance was unable
to visit our customs offices in the northern part of
Kosovo, despite the agreement with Serbia and despite
the fact that Serbia had promised to dismantle the
parallel structures. There is a bridge in Kosovo in the
twenty-first century that does not serve to connect
people, but to divide them, despite the agreement on
the freedom of movement with Serbia. That dualism
must end.

I also want to inform the Council that we have
adopted constitutional changes for the creation of the
special court. We take our international obligations
very seriously. Our Parliament adopted the amendments
and the legislation with a two-thirds majority vote.
Now we are at the final stage of the negotiations with
the Netherlands for the opening of the special chamber
of Kosovo in The Hague. We in Kosovo, more than
anyone else, need to close that chapter. We have always
cooperated with international justice, and we will
continue to do so.

Kosovo has proven itself as an active member of the
global coalition against terrorism. Just a few days ago,
terror in the streets of Paris reminded us that we are
fighting a borderless war. We must all stand together
and be united. Please allow me to voice the solidarity
of the people of Kosovo with France, and to reassure
the Council that we will continue to give our utmost to
fight this global threat.

