Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her semi-annual
briefing to the Council and her efforts to uphold the
international rule of law, justice, transparency and
accountability. We take note of the twenty-eighth report
of the Office of the Prosecutor and would like to make
the following observations.

Kazakhstan welcomes Khartoum's commitment to
stability in Darfur and its strengthened cooperation with
the United Nations and the African Union (AU). These
efforts have resulted in the continued improvement of
the security situation in Darfur, as well as an overall
reduction in intercommunal clashes, criminal activities
and human rights incidents. We note that Khartoum
has been able to consolidate its authority across the
Darfur area and has demonstrated its political will to
sustainably address the challenges in the region. These
positive results would not have been achieved without
respecting the national ownership, sovereignty and
independence of the Sudan.

Kazakhstan is confident that constructive and
inclusive dialogue, in accordance with the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, is the only way to
establish peace, stability and justice in Darfur. We
therefore welcome the signing of a pre-Doha negotiation
agreement between the Government of the Sudan, the
Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi and the Justice
and Equality Movement on 6 December. We encourage
the Government of the Sudan to maintain this positive
movement and continue to work diligently with all
relevant parties towards advancing the peace process,
addressing the root causes of the conflict and achieving
peace and prosperity for the entire Sudanese population.

We also need to acknowledge the Sudan's
constructive efforts to address regional peace and
security issues, including terrorism and human
trafficking. It is commendable that the Sudan has been
playing an important role in advancing the peace process
in South Sudan. Kazakhstan underscores the critical
role of regional cooperation in resolving the crisis in
Darfur and its return to peace, justice and stability. We
therefore suggest that the Court take into consideration
the unified position of the African Union and establish
dialogue with the AU Open-ended Committee of
Ministers of Foreign Affairs on the ICC. We encourage
the Court to join regional and international efforts by
enhancing the Sudan's capacity to promote the rule of
law and protect human rights.

In conclusion, we believe that only joint efforts and
mutual trust between all parties and institutions will
lead to a stable, peaceful and prosperous Sudan.

