Mr. Eick (Germany): I would like to start by
once again expressing Germany's full support for the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and for their invaluable contributions
to the fight against impunity for serious international
crimes. I also thank President Meron and President
Khan, as well as the ICTR and ICTY Prosecutors, for
their reports (see S/2011/7l6 and S/2011/73l) and
commend them on their significant achievements in
recent months. Let me assure them that we have taken
note of their proposals and ideas to improve the
efficiency of the Tribunals and that we stand ready to
support them in those endeavours.

In that context, we share the view of President
Meron that the existing prohibition on the employment
of interns by the Secretariat for a period of six months
after the completion of their internships does not, by its
rationale, apply to a Tribunal that is in the process of
closing down.

We note with concern that, in the course of the
downsizing of the Tribunals in preparation for the
completion of their work, both are facing serious
challenges in retaining staff. That creates an immense
workload and places a heavy burden on remaining
staff. We welcome the Security Council resolutions
adopted in that regard, most recently resolution 1993
(2011), which called upon the relevant United Nations
bodies to intensify cooperation with the Tribunals and
to take a flexible approach in order to find practicable
solutions to address the issue. Although the Tribunals
are approaching the final phase of their respective
completion strategies, we should remain mindful that
important work remains to be done.

The arrest and transfer to The Hague of the long-
sought fugitives Ratko Mladie and Goran HadZic'
heralds the approaching end of impunity for serious
international crimes committed in the former
Yugoslavia. It also proves that the level of influence
and acceptance of the ICTY in the region of the
Balkans is high. It is that acceptance and support that
enables the ICTY to significantly contribute to lasting
peace and reconciliation in the region by bringing
justice to the victims and their families. With regard to
the ICTR, we welcome the judgement delivered this
year in the "Butare" case against six accused.
The cooperation of States is a crucial prerequisite
for the work of the Tribunals. Their support enables the
Tribunals to complete their mandates. The Tribunals
depend on the will and the actions of the States - of
all States - not only those directly concerned because
they have become a harbour for fugitives, but also
those that have access to relevant information and
evidence. We therefore recall the obligation of all
States to fully cooperate with the Tribunals, which is,
and remains, essential for the Tribunals' functioning.

With regard to cooperation between the ICTY and
the region of the Balkans, we appreciate that States
remain committed to meeting their obligations towards
the Tribunal. We note with appreciation the
cooperation of Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Croatia with the ICTY during the reporting period. In
particular, Serbia's efforts to apprehend the last two
fugitives and transfer them to The Hague are a
welcome demonstration of its commitment to the ICTY
and its goals.

It is of the utmost importance to bring to justice
those who have been indicted. Therefore, we also
commend the cooperation of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo with the ICTR, which led to the arrest
and transfer of the long-sought fugitive Bernard
Munyagishari on 25 May. However, it is a matter of
concern that nine accused and internationally sought
persons still remain at large, among them the three
most high-ranking fugitives. Germany calls on the
international community and, in particular, on the
concerned States of the region to ensure that all
possible efforts are made to bring those persons to
justice.

The Security Council, in its resolutions 1503
(2003) and 1534 (2004), emphasized that the transfer
of lower- and mid-level accused to competent national
jurisdictions for trial was an essential prerequisite for
the completion of the work of the Tribunals. The cases
of 13 accused have been referred to national authorities
in the Balkans to date.

Germany welcomes the ongoing efforts of
Rwanda to strengthen both its national legal system
and its ability to adjudicate cases referred by the ICTR.
Germany expresses the hope that the reforms in
Rwanda will ultimately permit the ICTR to refer the
cases of lower-level accused to Rwandan courts for
trial.
With respect to the transition of both Tribunals to
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, we note that both Tribunals are taking the
measures necessary to facilitate a smooth handover. We
commend them for realizing gains from increased
efficiencies in trial management in order to handle the
remaining cases effectively. Although the late capture
and transfer of fugitive indictees may have led to
certain delays, we are confident that the respective
deadlines will be met for the completion of the
transition to the Residual Mechanism. In that context,
we also sincerely acknowledge the contribution that the
Office of Legal has made in order to render the
Residual Mechanism operational.

