Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me join previous
speakers in welcoming His Excellency Mr. Ismail
Omar Guelleh, President of the Republic of Djibouti,
and thank him for his presentation.

I would like to commend Djibouti for its role in
the Horn of Africa and for its efforts to promote peace

and stability in Somalia. President Guelleh's sobering
remarks about the situation in Somalia deserve careful
consideration, especially at a time of rising divisions
within the Transitional Federal Government (TFG).
The upcoming conference on Somalia in Istanbul will
be an opportunity to reflect on how best to reinforce
our actions and strengthen the international community's
assistance to the TFG.

Brazil welcomes Djibouti's commitment to a
peaceful solution of the border conflict with Eritrea, its
continued restraint on the ground, and its full
compliance with the Council's presidential statement
(S/PRST/2008/20) and two resolutions on the issue.
With the African Union, the League of Arab States and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, we call
upon the Eritrean Government to acknowledge the
conflict and engage with Djibouti to effectively find a
mutually acceptable solution.

Brazil is also concerned about the situation of
Djiboutians taken prisoner during the 2008 hostilities.
We urge Eritrea to provide information on their situation
and to grant the International Committee of the Red
Cross access to them. Resolution 1907 (2009), which
imposed sanctions on Eritrea, created an opportunity
for a review of the issue within 180 days of its
adoption. The date is fast approaching. We encourage
Eritrea not to miss that window of opportunity.

The Security Council must take a balanced and
consistent approach to peace, stability and territorial
integrity throughout the Horn of Africa. Without
prejudice to the particular characteristics of each
conflict, we should consider the regional dimensions
and the interplay among the various situations in the
Horn ofAfrica.

That means that the Council needs also to
effectively address the border dispute between Ethiopia
and Eritrea. A solution to that problem has been lacking
for too long. At stake are long-term peace and security
in the region and the credibility of the Council.

