The Secretary-General: Let me first of all
apologize for joining the Council late, but this was my
first day back and I had to tackle some urgent issues. But
I wanted to come to this meeting, to hear Mr. Bildt and
to participate in the briefing.

 

Let me say that what you have heard today from Mr.
Bildt is going to be one in a series of discussions and
briefings on the region. You heard from Mr. Bildt today,
and you will be hearing next from Mr. Klein, who is my
representative in Bosnia, and then you will hear from
Special Representative Bernard Kouchner and General
Reinhardt, who will be coming from Kosovo.

I think it is important that we discuss the region as
well as Kosovo because we are operating in a very difficult
neighbourhood. Without understanding what is happening
in the neighbourhood, we will find it extremely difficult to
make progress. I will follow these briefings up in April
with a comprehensive report that will touch on what is
happening in the region and on our operations in Kosovo,
so that we can move forward and take decisions with a
broader picture in mind.

I think Ambassador Lavrov is right in raising the
question he has raised, but I do not think it is Mr. Bildt
who should answer the question. I think some of these
issues will be raised when I submit the report in April. I
think the question that has been raised has lots of impact
on our activities, on elections and on other things. If we
are going to go ahead with elections, and if we want to
register the Serbs and have them participate, can we go to
register them in Serbia without reference to Belgrade?
There are all sorts of issues involved, and they will be
raised. I do not think it is for Mr. Bildt to answer.

So I would ask the Russian Ambassador to be
patient. These questions are being discussed, and we will
come back to them. I think Mr. Bildt focused on regional
issues today, not wanting to usurp the role of Mr.
Kouchner, from whom the Council will hear. I think some
of these issues should be reserved for him. So if
Ambassador Lavrov will be patient, we will get back to
the issues he has raised.

