Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): I would like first of
all to thank Mr. Annabi for his very useful and
comprehensive briefing. We took note with satisfaction
of a number of positive developments over the past few
weeks in the area. Still, in view of the general situation
in the province, we are not very optimistic.

Ukraine welcomes the fact that, largely due to the
efforts of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the Serb National
Council took the decision to rejoin the Interim
Administrative Council and the Kosovo Transitional
Council (KTC) as observers, after having withdrawn
for several weeks. We applaud the signing on 29 June
of the joint UNMIK-Serb National Council
understanding on the participation of Kosovo Serb
representatives in the Joint Interim Administrative
Structure institutions. The document laid out concrete
steps to be taken by UNMIK to enhance security and
access to services for the Kosovo Serb community, in
particular the creation of the UNMIK Police Special
Security Task Force. We consider these measures
extremely important and timely, and in our View they
are aimed at easing the hardships faced by the Serb
community. At the same time, we regret the decision of
the Kosovo Democratic Party (PDK) leader, Mr. Thaci,
to suspend temporarily his participation in interim
structures, in the wake of the above agreement. With
the municipal elections coming, political games of this
sort are counter-productive.

My delegation views positively the UNMIK
efforts to build up the judiciary system in Kosovo
through the further appointment of international judges
and prosecutors to a number of district courts in
Mitrovica, anilane and Pristina. However, we would
like more clarity about the concept of establishing a
Kosovo war and ethnic crimes court, as proposed by
UNMIK, and about the correlation between its
jurisdiction and that of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. I would be grateful
to Mr. Annabi for additional information on this
subject.

We welcome yesterday's nomination by the
Special Representative of the Ombudsperson for
Kosovo, to investigate and mediate complains from
individuals, groups and organizations about possible
abuses of power by international and local authorities.
It is our hope that the creation of this post will
contribute to establishing the rule of law and promote
reconciliation between ethnic groups.

We remain convinced that progress towards
turning Kosovo into a peaceful and tolerant,
democratic and self-governing entity within the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia cannot be achieved until and
unless all ethnic groups' basic human rights - most of
all the right to life - are protected. Unfortunately, the
general situation regarding the security of the national
minorities has not improved. On the contrary, the
systematic and ongoing violence against non-Albanian
minorities in Kosovo, especially against remaining
Serbs and Gypsies, is on the rise. Therefore, we cannot
be fully satisfied with the activities of UNMIK and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR). While acknowledging their
efforts to promote an atmosphere of safety and security,
we encourage them to take a more assertive approach
to stop all kinds of violence, as well as to eliminate the
illegal possession of weapons. For example, the huge
arms cache discovered by KFOR in Drenica in late
June, allegedly belonging to the former Kosovo
Liberation Army (KLA), proved that the process of
disarmament has not been effective and that there is an
illegal arms flow in Kosovo. In this connection, we feel
that the relevant Security Council Committee could be
more effective.

We are similarly concerned by the increased
number of attacks on UNMIK and KFOR personnel
and their property. Such actions are absolutely
unacceptable. My delegation welcomes the resumption
of operations in northern Mitrovica by the
humanitarian pillar of UNMIK, other United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations.

In the context of the preparatory work for the
municipal elections to be held in October, my
delegation is profoundly concerned by the fact that
almost no Serbs have so far registered to vote. As we
stated earlier, the abstention from participation of
Kosovo Serbs in the civil registration process and
municipal elections could throw their results into
question and undermine the political credibility of the
United Nations. We learned with interest of the
UNMIK plan to establish quotas for national minorities
in the municipal councils, irrespective of their
participation in the elections. In our view, this
approach, despite its good motives, could contradict
the very notion of democratic elections and does not
solve the problem of the participation of Serbs.

Last but not least, since the problem of the lack of
UNMIK police personnel is still very critical, let me
draw the attention of the Secretariat to the current
situation of Ukraine's offer to provide UNMIK with a
special unit of 115 policemen. Such a unit has been in
standby readiness for a couple of weeks now, awaiting
the United Nations inspection team to come to Ukraine
at the beginning of July to authorize the unit's
deployment. However, the United Nations inspection
has been postponed several times for indefinite periods.
We are really disappointed by the inconsistency of the
United Nations Secretariat in tackling this issue, which
is incompatible with the urgent need for additional
police personnel in Kosovo, as was confirmed by Mr.
Annabi today. We call on the Secretariat to re-address
this matter as soon as possible.

Finally, let me also ask Mr. Annabi about the
current state of and prospects for the adoption of the
draft municipal regulation, which is meant to define the
responsibilities and powers of municipalities. Just a
few days ago, we received the UNMIK regulation on
the municipal elections in Kosovo, which, without the
regulation on the municipalities themselves, seems to
be incomplete.

