Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
I should like to thank President Meron, President
Joensen, Prosecutor Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow
for their briefings.

The year 2014 is a symbolic milestone for the
International Tribunals in that their mandates to fight
against impunity could be completed as called for in
resolution 1966 (2010). Almost all of the pending
cases of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), as well as the Tribunals
themselves, are close to the finish line. We note and
wish to compliment the hard work of the judges, staff
members, prosecutors and defence lawyers during their
respective reporting periods. However, it is expected
that the completion of the case work of the Tribunals
will be delayed. One ICTR case and several ICTY cases
are still pending and will not be finished before 2017.
While the Tribunals were not able to completely finish
up all the mandates scheduled to end in 2014, such
important mandates cannot be left unfinished.

The Republic of Korea therefore believes that the
extension of the mandates of the judges and prosecutors
ofthe Tribunals is necessary in order forthem to complete
their work. However, as it is true that the mandates are
expected to run over the deadline, we would like to ask
the Tribunals to redouble their efforts to finish their
work according to their respective completion strategies.
If the reason for delay is because of the inefficiency
or backlog of procedural problems for the Tribunals,
significant additional efforts or special solutions should
be sought. At this juncture, we have to remember that
resolution 1966 (2010) represents a promise not only to
the Security Council but also to the victims, witnesses
and the larger international community. We hope that
the Tribunals with their extended terms will lay a solid
foundation for the international community to close the
impunity gap for future generations.

Lastly, my delegation stresses the importance of
the continuous efforts to disseminate the legacy of the
Tribunals. We recommend that the rich activities of the
Tribunals and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals serve to bring the work of
the Tribunals closer to international and regional
communities.

