Mr. Nteturuye (Burundi) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on the
outstanding manner in which you are presiding over
the work of the Security Council. I also congratulate
the delegation of the United States on its presidency
during the month of November.

My delegation welcomes the recent Security
Council mission to Central Africa, led by Ambassador
Jean-Marc de La Sabliere, the fourth such visit since
2001. The report under consideration (S/2004/934),
which complements the Secretary-General's report on
Burundi (S/2004/902), published on 15 November
2004, points out honestly and unambiguously the
progress and the challenges of the peace process in
Burundi and in the subregion.

We would like to address the most important
aspects, not only for the end of the transition of
Burundi but also for the period beyond. First, dialogue
among Burundians must continue so that the widest
possible consensus can emerge on political issues, in
particular power-sharing and the adoption of laws that
will govern the post-transition period. For Burundi
needs peace not only before the end of the transition,
but also after it.

Council members were correct to ask their
Burundian interlocutors during their visit if the
political provisions being prepared presaged true
stability and lasting peace after the elections. Let us
repeat once again: the more we emphasize the search
for political consensus, the more likely we are to have
lasting peace after the elections.

The international community is called upon to
encourage Burundians to build a Burundi for all and by
all. It is also called upon to encourage the future
leaders of the post-transition period to reassure today's
sceptics by building a climate of trust and preventing
what the Secretary-General calls in his report
"recklessly pursuing a winner-takes-all strategy"
(S/2004/902, para. 62).

Secondly, the question of the Forces nationales de
liberation (FNL) warrants special attention from the
Council. My delegation is pleased to observe that the
Council mission noted how concerned the Burundian
authorities are by the behaviour of leaders of that rebel
movement which spreads hatred and violence and
which is trying to derail the electoral process. The
authorities of Burundi are asking the Council not only
to support the decisions of the heads of State of the
subregion, but also to go further by promising all
necessary assistance to prevent the leaders of the
Forces nationales de liberation, allied with the negative
forces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, from
sabotaging the peace process in Burundi and disrupting
peace along the border, especially that between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi.

Thirdly, turning to the fight against impunity,
Burundians are still waiting for the United Nations
contribution. In that regard, we should make public the
embargoed report of the Secretariat's assessment
mission undertaken in May with the mandate of
evaluating the timeliness and feasibility of establishing
an international commission of judicial inquiry in
Burundi. The report should be submitted to the
Government of Burundi and to the Security Council
before the end of the year, as promised, and everything
should be done to hasten the consultations that will
follow upon the report's publication. The struggle
against impunity, the establishment of the rule of law
and national reconciliation are important to the
stability of post-transition Burundi. They must be
addressed lucidly.

Fourthly, international assistance is crucial to
financing the elections and to implementing the
reforms called for in the Arusha Agreement. Be it a
question of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration operation; reform of the security and
justice sectors; assistance for returnees and displaced
persons who wish to return home; or the reconstruction
and revitalization of the economy, we still await the
assistance promised by the lenders. Burundi cannot
solve those problems by itself. My delegation invites
the Economic and Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Burundi to visit the region and to see for
itself yet again the link between bread and peace,
especially at this crucial stage in the process of putting
the country back on track. Without substantial
humanitarian and economic assistance, poverty, disease
and unemployment are potential factors for
destabilization and could re-ignite social tensions after
the elections because, as the Security Council mission
observed, elections are not an end in themselves.

Those are the cornerstones that form the basis of
adherence to the electoral calendar and end-of-
transition activities, which could augur a more
promising future for Burundi. To date, and following
the Security Council's most recent Visit, the train has
been stubbornly moving towards the station, as
witnessed by the 80 per cent registration of potential
voters in the referendum and by the onset of
demobilization at three sites. The first site is for the
voluntarily demobilized personnel of the Burundian
Armed Forces; the second is for the voluntarily
demobilized personnel of the Forces pour la defense de
la democratie and other armed movements; and the
third is for demobilized child-soldiers. Meanwhile,
laws on the new national defence forces and the new
national police have just been adopted by the National
Assembly.

We take this opportunity to welcome the role that
has been and will be played by the United Nations
Operation in Burundi in all aspects of the late
transition process, especially action to disarm the
civilian population and election monitoring.

Reforms must move forward at the same pace in
order to create a general symbiosis and dynamic to
help Burundi overcome this crisis, the positive effects
of which will be felt beyond its borders so as long as
all the countries of the subregion are part of the
dynamic established at the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region held at Dar es Salaam on
19 and 20 November under United Nations auspices.
Our subregion needs to recover rapidly so that we can
tackle our reconstruction and development through
such organizations as the Economic Community of the
Great Lakes Countries, which must be reactivated, the
East African Community and others.

