Mr. Larrain (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
Despite the unquestionable progress made by the Haitian
National Police in recent months, the fact that certain
goals have not yet been achieved makes it inadvisable for
the United Nations to bring to an end the successful work
of supporting and contributing to the professionalization
of the Haitian National Police at all levels.

My delegation is grateful to the Secretary-General
for his clear assessment of the situation, contained in his
report and its addendum, which are before the Security
Council for consideration. The recommendations
contained in the report deserve our full support. They are
fully in keeping with the ultimate goal of achieving the
consolidation of a professional national police force in
Haiti.

My delegation believes that the existence of such a
police force is a basic condition for the rule of law and
for the stability of democratic institutions in that country.
The United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, have endorsed that approach, and we therefore
have before us today a draft resolution that will establish
a new United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti to
continue to provide assistance to the Government of Haiti,
lending support and contributing to the professionalization
of its national police force.

The duration of the mandate of the Mission, which
is set at a single one-year period, has the merit of being
realistic and consistent with the tasks it will have to carry
out.

The draft does not, however, neglect the needs of the
Haitian people in the sphere of development. Accordingly,
the eighth preambular paragraph stresses the need for a
sustained commitment by the international community and
the international financial institutions to assist and support
economic, social and institutional development in Haiti.

The challenges currently faced by the Haitian people
are considerable. The increasing professionalization of

 

their police forces has brought out more clearly the
constantly growing gap separating those forces from the
judicial institutions. In the light of this observation, it seems
more necessary than ever for Haitian democratic institutions
resolutely to take up the task of judicial reform. No one can
take Haiti's place in that endeavour, which must be tackled
as soon as possible in parallel with efforts to train the
national police.

As a member of the group of Friends of the Secretary-
General for Haiti, Chile is pleased with the results achieved
in the text that we will be voting on. We are grateful for
the efforts of the delegations of members of the Security
Council, which made it possible to accommodate various
concerns without sacrificing the requirements of the Haitian
people.

I would not want to conclude without expressing my
country's gratitude to all the personnel of the United
Nations Transition Mission in Haiti, which is finishing up
its excellent work, as well as to the countries that
contributed to its formation. We are certain that the
personnel of the new United Nations Mission will be able
to meet the lofty challenge of helping provide Haiti with a
truly professional and democratic police force.

