Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome the High Representative
of the European Union (EU), Ms. Federica Mogherini,
to the Security Council and to thank her for her
first - and valuable - briefing since her assumption
of her duties, which we hope will signal continued
cooperation and interaction between the United Nations
and the European Union. I would also like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his own valuable
briefing.

In the complex environment in which we live
and face various regional challenges, the cooperation
of the United Nations with regional and subregional
organizations has become ever more important to the
realization of international and regional stability and
peace, and an increasingly necessary strategic option
in dealing with many issues and in achieving the
aspirations of the United Nations, its Member States
and peoples of the world.

Jordan believes that regional challenges require
regional solutions and the establishment of sound
partnerships among different organizations. They also
require paying greater attention to relationships between
the United Nations and such regional organizations as
the European Union, the African Union and the League
of Arab States, which would enhance the role played
by all these organizations in addressing regional issues
and their containment. There is no alternative to the
important role played by these regional organizations
in the maintenance of peace and security in their
respective regions. As regional organizations, they are
better able to understand the nature of the regions, their
needs and the challenges they face.
The active role played by the European Union in
international forums and in its bilateral and regional
partnerships, not only with countries within Europe and
their neighbours but with many other countries of the
world, adds further importance to the United Nations
work to preserve peace, prevent conflict and promote
regional and international security. The common values
and objectives of the United Nations and the European
Union facilitate the work of both organizations in
facing today's challenges in promoting human rights
and equality and mediation and rapprochement among
conflicting parties.

At the diplomatic and foreign policy levels, the
European Union plays a major role in contributing to
regional complementarity based on joint cooperation.
In the face of global challenges, security threats and
economic pressures in our world today, the European
Union has become involved in many regional or
international efforts to develop a unique and effective
set of tools and mechanisms for promoting political
partnership, economic support and commercial activity,
as well as in dealing with crises and finding appropriate
solutions for them.

Most of the challenges we face are transboundary,
transcending the borders of one country or one region.
The EU is aunique regional organization since it is aware
that the security and stability of one region depends
on what is happening in neighbouring countries and
other regions. In the Middle East, the European Union
plays an active and supportive role in the resolution
of many issues in the region, which it considers to
be one of its highest priorities and major interests in
the foreign policy sphere. The States members of the
European Union and countries of the Middle East also
share the same vital interest and security concerns,
such as terrorist organizations and transborder crime,
which can only be addressed through a strong regional
partnership.

The European Union is also an important member
of the international Quartet, together with the United
Nations, the United States of America and the Russian
Federation, with a view to reaching a comprehensive
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli issue and the
establishment of the independent State of Palestine.
It is also the largest donor to the Palestinian people
and considers the establishment of peace between
Palestinians and Israelis to be one of its major
foreign policy objectives. That in itself indicates
the determination by the European Union to further
contribute to the settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli
issue and other thorny issues in the Middle East.
Another example of the active role played by the
European Union is reflected in its great contributions to
assisting Middle Eastern and North African countries
in implementing political reforms, bringing about
democratic transition and providing social and economic
support. In Libya, the deterioration of the situation will
have repercussions not only in neighbouring countries
but also in Europe, the Middle East and the rest of
the world. International cooperation should therefore
be intensified and focus on relaunching a political
dialogue under the auspices of the United Nations to
find the best means to support the Libyan Government
and its legitimate, constitutional institutions as they
face the security and political challenges of confronting
fundamentalism and terrorism so that Libya can finally
and successfully complete its transitional process.

I should also mention the positive role the European
Union has played in its efforts to contain crises and
achieve stability in the Balkans, particularly in Kosovo
and Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Ukraine, as well
as through its contribution to strengthening States'
capacities in order to establish stable societies and
supporting peace, security and the rule of law. The
rapprochement that has been achieved among countries
in the Middle East and those of the European Union has
also had many positive results, including the special
relationship that exists between Jordan and the EU.
We have excellent cooperative relations through the
Euro-Mediterranean Partnership and the Deauville
Partnership, launched under a French initiative in 2011.
Jordan is also the European Union's premier partner in
the area of technical negotiations, particularly regarding
the establishment of a partnership on migration.

In conclusion, the complex challenges we face show
clearly that strengthening cooperation and coordinating
our efforts, as well as exchanging expertise and lessons
learned between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, has become ever more vital
as we combat current threats to peace and security by
developing rapid reaction systems for preventing and
resolving crises and ensuring that problematic situations
do not arise. It is important that such cooperation
continues on the basis of our shared values and goals,
and with the aim of maintaining international peace
and security.

