Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
The peace process in Angola is at a crucial phase.
Considerable progress has been made recently,
particularly with regard to the steps taken by the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation and
UNITA to accomplish the remaining tasks set forth in the
Lusaka Protocol.

On 11 March, the Angolan Government announced
the legalization of UNITA as a political party. Three
governors have been appointed and seven vice-governors
nominated, as envisaged in the Lusaka Protocol. Six
names have been nominated for ambassadorships abroad.
Mr. Savimbi's special status has been recognized.
On the other side, UNITA demilitarized its forces on
6 March and Radio Vorgan ceased broadcasting in April
after having functioned for many years. Consequently, the
propaganda campaigns have shut down in recent weeks
and a UNITA delegation, led by the party's Vice-
President, arrived in Luanda to prepare for the
establishment of UNITA headquarters in the capital. We
believe that these measures are very positive and will help
to restore confidence between the two parties. That is
why it is important to continue working to accomplish all
the tasks laid down in the Lusaka Protocol as soon as
possible.

Progress has undoubtedly been achieved and that is
encouraging, but the security situation in some areas of
the country remains precarious. The continuing tensions
are mostly the result of armed attacks, often targeting
civilian police and local government authorities, resulting
in many casualties. Armed elements of UNITA have also
launched two attacks on MONUA. These actions and the

 

constant threats against the Angolan National Police have
also affected stability and security in other regions of
Angola and are delaying the implementation of the
remaining tasks. We therefore call on UNITA to intervene
and to put an end to these attacks and unwarranted
activities.

The United Nations presence in Angola and its
assistance in strengthening peace and stability have
undoubtedly greatly helped to alleviate the situation and
bring the parties closer to each other. This participation is
necessary in order to bolster the efforts being made to
effect national reconciliation, restore confidence and
strengthen economic and social development. We believe
that the deployment of 83 additional civilian police
observers, as authorized by the Security Council in its
resolution 1157 (1998), will facilitate the normalization of
State administration and help in the training of some
elements of the Angolan National Police.

My delegation believes that it is very important to
intensify efforts towards national reconciliation and
stability. We therefore favour extending MONUA's
mandate to 30 June 1998 and will vote in favour of the
draft resolution before us.

