Mr. Skau (Sweden): Until today, the Security
Council had stood united in its demand on all parties
to refrain from the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
The Council has consistently confirmed that the use
and proliferation of such weapons of mass destruction
constitute a threat to international peace and security.
With the adoption ofresolution 2209 (2015), the Council
committed itselfto holding those responsible for any use
of chemicals as weapons in Syria, including chlorine
and other toxic chemicals, to account. The Council
has thus far failed to deliver on that commitment and
respond to the conclusions the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM).

The conclusive findings of the JIM. are clear. The
Syrian Armed Forces have used chemical weapons
on at least three occasions, and the terrorist group
Da'esh has used mustard gas at least once. The Council
cannot remain passive in the face of confirmed
non-compliance with its own numerous resolutions and
the first confirmed case of non-compliance by a State
party to the Chemical Weapons Convention. To demand
accountability is not politicization but our common
responsibility. That the Council was not able to honour
its commitments owing to the use of the right to veto
of two of its permanent members is indeed deplorable.

Sweden condemns in the strongest terms all use
of chemical weapons in Syria and elsewhere and will
continue to do so. We trust that the Council will be
able to once again show a united front against such
international crimes. The Council's work to ensure
accountability for chemical weapons used in Syria
does not stop here. We strongly support the JIM's
continued efforts to reach independent and technically
underpinned conclusions with regard to the perpetrators
of chemical weapons use in Syria.

Sweden will be making a voluntary contribution
of approximately $220,000 in response to the appeal
of the fifth JIM. report (see S/2017/131), and we look
forward to future JIM. reports. We will continue to
work with all members towards helping the Council to
assume its responsibility again. We owe that to all of
those who have suffered the inhumane consequences of
toxic chemicals used as weapons. It must be clear that
there will be no impunity for those crimes.

In conclusion, over the past six years the Council
has been divided on too many occasions on how to end
to the conflict and the needless human suffering in
Syria. We fully support the ongoing United Nations-
led talks in Geneva. A renewed process geared towards
lasting peace in Syria is ourjoint responsibility.

