Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): At the outset, allow me,
Mr. President, to join other delegations in commending
your delegation most sincerely on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June. I also wish to commend you for convening this
important open debate focused on the global effort to
prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
by non-State actors.

Botswana aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Botswana also welcomes this open debate, which
seeks to consider practical measures to implement
resolution 1540 (2004), and applauds your country,
Sir, for drawing global attention to the threat of
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors. The rise of terrorism and insurgent
groups increases the risk of non-State actors acquiring
weapons of mass destruction.

The advent of international terrorism has had
adverse effects on our efforts to establish and sustain a
tranquil and peaceful international order. Moreover, in
the recent past, terrorist groups have employed weapons

of mass destruction against innocent and unarmed
civilian populations. Ensuring that such actors do not
have access to those devastating weapons should be a
lesson and a challenge for us all.

Botswana fully supports resolution 1540 (2004),
which urges all States to refrain from providing any
form of support to non-State actors seeking to develop,
acquire, manufacture, possess, transport, transfer or
use nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their
means of delivery, in particular for terrorist purposes.

Weapons of mass destruction are a serious threat to
global peace and security, and their use has devastating
consequences for humankind and all forms of life on our
planet. In that regard, it is imperative that the Security
Council, Member States and international organizations
spare no effort in preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors. In
that regard, Botswana reaffirms its commitment to
international instruments that ban weapons of mass
destruction, such as the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the Biological Weapons Convention.

Botswana also fully supports the ongoing United
Nations conference to negotiate a legally binding
instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons, leading to their
total elimination Should that effort come to fruition,
it would be an enormous step towards a nuclear-free
world, for which we all yearn.

Before I conclude, let me highlight some of the
measures that Botswana has adopted to support the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). To strengthen
national capacities to deal with emerging global security
challenges, Botswana, among other things, adopted a
counter-terrorism act, a chemical-weapon prohibition
act and a proceeds-and-instruments of crime act.
Botswana also continues to train agencies, such as
the financial intelligence agency, and other safety and
security entities to effectively deal with the crimes of
terrorism, terrorist financing, money laundering and the
monitoring and tracking of the movement of chemicals
in the country that have the potential to contribute to
the proliferation of chemical weapons.

There are a number of challenges and opportunities
available to us in order to effectively deal with this
matter. Botswana firmly believes that deepening
international cooperation and strengthening existing
mechanisms should form the basis of our efforts to
prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction. We are gravely concerned that, while there
is general consensus on the escalation of international
terrorism, the difficulty in agreeing on a common
definition of terrorism will continue to undermine our
efforts to fight that global scourge.

Also problematic is the phenomenon of dual-use
and the use for peaceful means. The inherent right of
sovereign States to the peaceful use of nuclear energy,
for instance, must be respected. Anything to the
contrary undermines existing multilateral instruments,
the Charter of the United Nations and all others efforts
to prevent non-State actors from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Botswana's
unwavering commitment to support the international
community by playing its part in ensuring that terror
organizations do not have access to any weapons ofmass
destruction. We need sustainable peace and security in
order for the human spirit to thrive and develop.

