The President: I will now make a statement in my
national capacity.

I would like to thank Mr. Mladenov once again
for his briefing and for the work of his team on the
ground in what we have heard are obviously very
difficult circumstances. I took careful note of his
characterization of the current situation and, given the
number of crises and difficulties we have seen over
Gaza in recent months, I know he did not make that
characterization lightly. I will come back to that topic
in due course.

As others have done, I wanted to start by stressing
that the United Kingdom's position on settlements has
not changed. They are illegal under international law,
present an obstacle to peace and threaten the physical
viability of a two-State solution. The British position
was reflected in our support for resolution 2334 (2016)
but also for previous resolutions that confirmed the lack
of legal validity of the settlements, such as resolution
465 (1980). We also condemned the advancement of
plans for over 2,000 housing units across the West Bank
on 10 October and call on such counter-productive
action to end.

Turning specifically to Gaza, I wanted to thank
Ms. Hary for her briefing and her insights on access.
We take this issue very seriously. I believe that the most
important aspect of the situation is the escalation of
hostilities in Gaza that began on 12 November, about
which we are very concerned. We welcome the ceasefire
reached between Israel and the Palestinian Islamic
Jihad, and we are grateful, as are others, to Egypt and
the United Nations for their mediation efforts.
I wish to stress the complete unacceptability of
the indiscriminate attacks against civilians by the
Palestinian Islamic Jihad. We regret the loss oflife and
urge all parties to adhere to the ceasefire arrangement.
In the longer term, we encourage actors to put forward
sustainable proposals to resolve the threat posed to
Israel's security by Hamas, the Palestinian Islamic
Jihad and other militants in Gaza. Hamas' misrule is
leading to dreadful consequences for the people of
Gaza and also of Israel.

I wanted to pick up on Ms. Hary's briefing on
movement and access restrictions and show how they
have constrained exports and affected the Palestinian
economy in terms of low growth and rising levels
of unemployment. We look to Israel to apply the
same conditions to Palestinian traders as they do to
Israeli traders.

I also wanted to join other speakers in reiterating
our concern about demolitions and incidents of
violence in both directions. I would also like to take the
opportunity tojoin others in saying that Israel's security
is absolutely a top priority for us and to condemn the
missiles that are fired at Israel. However, as long as the
destabilizing situation and the violence continue, it will
be very difficult to find a way through.

We remain concerned by the increase in settler
violence. We welcome work towards genuine and
democratic national elections for all Palestinians, and I
agree with those speakers who said that such elections
would be crucial in view of the establishment of a
viable and sovereign Palestinian State. To this end, we
call on all Palestinian factions to seek common ground
and work together to pursue a positive path towards
democracy for the full benefit of the Palestinian people.

I also wanted to put down a marker about a call
for greater media freedoms in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including revising relevant legislation.
We are concerned by the 17 October decision by the
Magistrate's Court in Ramallah, which ordered the
blocking of 50 Palestinian Arabic websites, which we
think is an important part of what is happening on
the ground.

Finally, I would like to join others in noting the
importance of the two-State solution, as well as the
importance of Palestine and Israel living in peace and
mutual respect, side by side as equal and sovereign
States. Security is, of course, an absolutely crucial
component of that.
I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.

