Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.

Unfortunately, despite the intensified rate of
meetings in the Security Council, and more recently
in the General Assembly, on the situation in Syria, we
continue to see - week after week, day after day and
even hour by hour - a macabre, seemingly endless
spiral. The most recent United Nations reports on the
situation in Aleppo are horrendous. First we learned
of the possibility that hundreds of men, women and
children in eastern Aleppo may have disappeared after
being evacuated. And today we are being told that
summary executions are taking place in that same part
of the city and that snipers are murdering dozens of
civilians, including women and children, in the streets
and even in their homes.
It all seems to show that we are facing the end
of the battle for control of Aleppo. But the question
must be asked: At what price? How many innocent
civilians have paid with their lives in the fight against
terrorism? How many corpses are under the rubble of
the intense bombings? Perhaps we will never know.
What we do know is that the vast majority of children,
mothers, workers and the elderly who are dead were
not terrorists. We have urged the parties to the conflict
to refrain from continuing to commit these atrocities.
Everything points to the fact that responsibility for the
lastest episodes belongs to the Syrian forces and their
allies. Let us be clear: Syria has been destroyed, and the
crisis cannot be solved militarily. Negotiations among
all the parties are the only way out. All the parties to
the conflict should be held accountable for their crimes.
Impunity will only encourage them to go on with such
bestial acts.

Today's meeting focuses on Aleppo, but Uruguay
is seriously concerned about the progress that terrorist
groups have made in the past week, particularly in
Palmyra, where Da'esh fighters have retaken control
and dozens of civilians have been killed. The terrorists
are still very strong in Syria. We reiterate that at
the moment the only possible solution depends on
the imposition of an unconditional and immediate
ceasefire in Aleppo and throughout the rest of Syria,
which will enable hundreds of thousands of Syrians to
get immediate access to humanitarian aid and make
it possible to hold negotiations, as provided for in
resolution 2254 (2015), which is just about to mark its
first anniversary. We must ensure that arrogance and
triumphalism based on ephemeral military victories do
not prevail. We must listen to the members and to the
Special Envoy, and we must negotiate.

