Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to present
the latest report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (8/2012/820). As the Council knows, the report,
published 8 November, covers the period from June
to 23 October and looks at all the major developments
during that period and some other important points.

During the reporting period, the South Sudanese
Government focused mainly on resolving pending
problems that pit it against the Sudan. The absence
of progress in resolving the security, economic and
political differences between the two countries
continues to have direct consequences for security and
stability within South Sudan and on efforts to promote
peacebuilding and State-building and to meet the
crucial needs of citizens.

While tensions between the Sudan and South
Sudan have undeniably eased with the signing of the
cooperation agreements of 27 September, the sluggish
implementation of those agreements could have a
negative impact on the economic stability of South
Sudan, in particular if there are delays in restarting oil
exports. The Council knows how dependent that country
is on oil revenues, and it is clear that any additional delay
would not only continue to have a negative impact on

the Government's development programmes, but could
also cause new tensions between its various entities and
within the security services.

Furthermore, that fragility has been somewhat
exacerbated by a degree of discontent in the country
with regard to how the discussions with the Sudan
have been developing. The oil provided to the Sudan
as compensation for the secession and the agreement
on the demilitarization of the so-called l4-mile area,
at the border between Bahr el Ghazal on the west and
South Darfur, have been perceived as a dangerous
compromise and caused significant internal opposition,
which is aggravated by the absence of concessions from
the Sudanese Government. I would refer in particular to
the definitive status of the Abyei region. The governor
of Northern Bahr el Ghazal, Mr. Paul Malong Awan,
who, to date, had adopted a robust stance on this issue,
nonetheless recently announced that he would not
oppose the seasonal migration of Sudanese Arab tribes
to the south.

Nevertheless, inter-community tensions remain
high in border regions, and they have been exacerbated
by their militarization and recurrent incidents.

Like many other countries in post-conflict
situations, South Sudan has to cope with very significant
internal challenges. The lasting stability of the country
will depend on the effectiveness of strategies used to
resolve them. The leaders of South Sudan must lay the
foundations of a democratic and participatory society
in which the management of public matters is rooted
in respect for the law and all citizens believe that their
Government is committed to protecting them and to
providing everyone with the dividends of peace, such
as services and basic infrastructure.

On the whole, the security situation in South
Sudan has remained stable over the past four months.
Nonetheless, Jonglei state remains the epicentre of
ongoing security challenges, while the tri-state area of
Unity, Warrap and Lakes states are also dealing with a
resurgence of instability.

Following violence late last year in Jonglei state,
the Government adopted a threefold strategy. It is
focused on disarming the population, launching
the reconciliation process and targeting discontent
communities to prevent the potential recruitment of
young people by militias.

Through its commitment, the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS)
has been able to convince the Government to launch a
preliminary voluntary disarmament campaign focused
on actively raising awareness among communities.
Between March and June, more coercive action followed
this first stage, with what we must admit are uneven
results. The abuses committed by the Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA) have been systematically
reported to the Government with the aim of bringing the
perpetrators to justice. The Government also took the
encouraging decision to redeploy Murle SPLA officers
in order to dispel doubts within that community as to a
potential ethnic polarization of the army.

(spoke in English)

On the political side, following the All Jonglei
Peace Conference of May 2012, progress towards
intercommunal reconciliation and peacebuilding has
been slow. Outreach to community leaders to prevent
the recruitment of their youths by rebel militia groups
has met with little success. The abundant availability
of weapons and weakened traditional community
structures have resulted in community leaders
confessing openly to having little control over their
respective youths. A comprehensive and inclusive
political process led by the Government that addresses
the core grievance of the disgruntled constituencies
remains an urgent need.

In the light of the foregoing, the recent activities of
militias led by David Yau Yau are a cause for serious
concern. Information on the ground points to high
risks of an escalation of violence as the dry season
has arrived. David Yau Yau's militia clashed regularly
with SPLA troops throughout the reporting period
and has threatened United Nations peacekeepers in
the state. There have also been reports of his militia
actively recruiting among the Murle youth. UNMISS
has reinforced its presence in the State and remains,
of course, in constant touch with the Government to
counter the rebel militia group's activities and prevent
abuses against civilians.

Concurrently, sporadic cattle raids and
intercommunal conflict continued in the Unity, Lakes
and Warrap tri-state area, despite the efforts of the
SPLA and the South Sudan National Police Service.
According to local authorities, clashes on 5 and
7 November in a cattle camp in Lakes state between
two Dinka sub-clans resulted in no less than 28 dead
and 37 seriously injured. A number of large-scale cattle
raids were also reported in northern Jonglei state.

With regard to the establishment of national
institutions, progress on the constitutional review
process has been slow. The substantive work on the
transitional constitution has yet to begin, as has civic
education and State-wide consultations by the National
Constitutional Review Commission. A decision on
extending the one-year mandate of the Commission,
which lost a total of at least six months in its first year
of activity, has yet to be taken. Yet that process remains
one of the key pillars on which long-term stability
of the country would rest. We continue to urge the
Government to ensure that the process is transparent,
inclusive, consultative and not completed in haste.

On an encouraging note, the President decreed
the establishment of the National Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Council, which is
chaired by Vice-President Riek Machar. The Council held
its first meeting on 14 November to review preparations
for launching the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) pilot programme. Subsequently, a
second meeting took place on 20 November, at which
a road map was agreed upon for a total review of the
DDR programme proposal by all relevant ministries.
The Council therefore needs to take a decision on the
starting date of the pilot project, which is related to the
availability of Government and international funding.

The Government has also announced that it is
moving forward with the development of a national
human rights agenda, which the Mission hopes will
take into account a number of outstanding concerns,
including the recently resumed execution of prisoners
on death row, some of whom were sentenced with no
or inadequate legal representation, and continuing
incidents of prolonged arbitrary detention. The Ministry
of Justice's forum of relevant Government authorities
aims to develop measures to mitigate the incidence of
arbitrary arrests and illegal detentions and to increase
access to justice. However, there is growing concern
over politically motivated incidents ranging from
threats to abductions that have targeted journalists,
civil society activists and political opponents. In the
effort to combat impunity, greater emphasis has to be
placed on strengthening civilian and military justice
systems and holding to account those responsible for
grave violations, including rape and torture.

Human rights remain a core element of the mandate
ofUNMISS. We were therefore alarmed by the decision
of the Government, on 23 October, to expel one of
the Mission's senior human rights officers, an act
which has no justification and was in clear violation

of both the United Nations Charter and the status-of-
forces agreement signed by the United Nations and the
Government of South Sudan. Despite the Mission's
interventions with Government authorities at the highest
levels, the order has yet to be rescinded. I therefore
urge the Government to rescind its decision to expel the
UNMISS staff member and call upon members of the
Council to do the same.

Another promising area where progress could
be achieved in our efforts to support capacity-
building for key South Sudanese institutions is the
development of the Police Service, including through
the registration and training of police. However, in that
area progress will require key complementary legal and
administrative reforms as well as significant resources,
which so far have been lacking. The construction of
police stations and other essential police infrastructure
in the counties, and the provision of the necessary
police equipment - communications equipment and
vehicles in particular - are key impediments to that
process. The assumption of law enforcement functions
by the South Sudan National Police Service throughout
South Sudan is one of the most critical objectives for
long-term peace and stability in the country and will
require sustained attention and investment if it is to be
successful.

In order to respond to the impact of the revenue
shortfall following the oil shutdown earlier this year,
the Government conducted a prioritization of crucial
governance functions called the core functions under
austerity initiative. The United Nations has provided
support to that process, in particular in the areas of
social and human development, the rule of law and
overall coordination. The initiative is now guiding
Government planning and budgeting for the 2013-2014
period. The Government, the United Nations country
team and other partners are currently in the process of
realigning their programmes with the priorities outlined
in the Government's peacebuilding and State-building
initiatives. It is expected that a new compact will be
developed early next year to shape South Sudan's
development agenda.

With regard to progress in consolidating UNMISS

and building the Mission's own capacity, I am pleased to
confirm that Rwanda has agreed to deploy three Mi-l7
helicopters to UNMISS and to consider the deployment
of another three helicopters, and that the Republic of
Korea has agreed to deploy an engineering unit early
next year. That unit will be stationed in Jonglei state to
cover the areas of greatest need for both UNMISS and
South Sudan. I regret to report, however, that progress
towards the full decentralization of the Mission has
been impeded by a number of factors, including the
limited engineering capacity in the first and second
years of the Mission and the wet season, which brings
construction work in the counties to a standstill for
almost half the year.

Although we had originally planned for a total of
28 country support bases for the first and second years,
we have had to recalibrate that figure to 20, and of those
the Mission currently has six fully operational bases
and a temporary presence in seven others. Seven more
country support base locations in Mayon and a number
of other places have been prioritized for 2012-2013.
However, the unintended delay in the operationalization
of those country support bases has meant that the time
frame for the construction of all 35 bases has had to be
extended to 2015.

At this time, the Mission's military force is finally
fully deployed, while police deployments are at 80 per
cent of authorized capacity. As I said, we look forward
to receiving utility helicopters from Rwanda. An
assessment was carried out in September to determine
the requirements for riverine capacity for the Mission.
Its conclusions are now being implemented so as to
further enhance the mobility of both the civilian and
military components of the Mission.

I wish to conclude by thanking the members of
the Council for their continued engagement on South
Sudan and their sustained support for UNMISS, and
by expressing our appreciation to the leadership and
personnel of the Mission.

