Mr. Gillerman (Israel): I should like at the outset
to congratulate you, Sir, on you assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of September.
Let me also wish you well in assuming the
representation of your great country.

Two days ago, on 13 September, we
commemorated the tenth anniversary of the signing of
the Declaration of Principles on the White House lawn.
That was a time of hope for the people of the region
and of the world that the leadership on both sides was
committed to a peaceful and negotiated resolution of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. At that time, and
despite well-founded reservations, Israel was willing to
believe that Yasser Arafat had abandoned the path of
terrorism and embarked on the road to true
reconciliation and mutual recognition. It was on the
basis of that commitment that Mr. Arafat entered
Palestinian Authority territory to implement his
obligations under signed agreements.

Unfortunately, as we have all known for some
time, Mr. Arafat lied. Israel, like other members of the
international community, has come to that conclusion
reluctantly and painfully. More than any other State,
we invested a great deal in Mr. Arafat's word and were
willing, against our better judgement, to heed calls
from other States to forgo or forgive Mr. Arafat's
failures, even at the earliest stages of the peace
process.

As much as we had all hoped for the opposite
result, it is abundantly clear that the person with the
standing to deliver a fair and genuine peace on the
Palestinian side has done the most to bury its chances.
We cannot ignore the facts. His continuing rejection of
Israel's right to exist, his denial of the ancient ties of
the Jewish people to its homeland and his support of
terrorists and their tactics have brought untold
suffering to the region and denied the promise of peace
and prosperity for Israelis and Palestinians alike. He
has sought to turn a political and resolvable conflict
into a seemingly intractable religious and cross-cultural
struggle. Among the litany of deliberately missed
opportunities, the Palestinian leadership, under Mr.
Arafat's control, rejected at Camp David the
opportunity for the establishment of a Palestinian State
side by side with Israel, in favour of the path of
terrorism that he, as one of its masterminds, has never
really abandoned.

Since September 2000, 869 Israeli citizens have
been killed, and nearly 6,000 have been wounded, in
homicide bombings and terrorist attacks that
deliberately targeted the innocent. There is hardly a
single Israeli citizen today who has not been affected,
directly or indirectly, by Palestinian terrorism. The
equivalent number of casualties in a country with a
population of that of the United Kingdom would be
84,609 citizens. That figure may give us all some pause
in comprehending the devastating impact that the
Palestinian leadership's refusal to confront the
terrorists in its midst has had on the people of the
region.

Tragically, Mr. Arafat's rule has brought
considerable pain and havoc to Palestinian society as
well. The brazen refusal of the Palestinian leadership to
fulfil its obligations to dismantle terrorist
organizations, and join the global campaign against
terrorism has exacted a heavy toll on Palestinian
society. By allowing terrorists to set-up shop in the
heart of Palestinian civilian areas, in grave violation of
international humanitarian law, Mr. Arafat has
seriously endangered the lives of innocent Palestinian
civilians. By stifling dissent, preventing the emergence
of democratic institutions and violating the human
rights of Palestinians, including the Palestinian
Christian community, he has set back the development
of a vibrant and responsible Palestinian society. By
allowing only one voice while nurturing a myriad of
competing security and terrorist organizations, he has
succeeded in perpetuating his own corrupt rule at the
expense of the welfare of Palestinian civilians.

Events of recent days have proven again that Mr.
Arafat is determined to prevent any process of genuine
reconciliation between Israelis and Palestinians. I dare
say, there is hardly a diplomat in this room who would
not admit privately that Mr. Arafat represents a
significant obstacle to the peace process. He has
shunned every outstretched hand, while placating the
international community with pathetic rhetoric that has
been belied almost daily by his actions. The result has
been paid in the blood of Israelis and Palestinians.

He is amongst a select group of terrorist
entrepreneurs who have brought airplane hijackings,
massacres of Olympic athletes, the killing of children
sleeping in the shelter of their own beds, and suicide
terrorism, to a region that yearns for peace and
stability. And he is at the helm of those who have been
supporting mega-terror attacks, in the style of the
bombing of the Twin Towers, to bring the region to the
brink of catastrophe. Today such immoral tactics,
stamped with Mr. Arafat's label of origin, are callously
and indiscriminately exported beyond our region.
Global, indiscriminate terrorism is made by Arafat, and
was invented by Arafat.

Knowing all this, for how long will there be states
among us who are willing to continue the Charade of
touting Mr. Arafat as a legitimate leader committed to
the welfare of his people and peaceful relations with
his neighbours. The ruin that Mr. Arafat has left behind
in Jordan, Lebanon, and the West Bank testify to the
fact that he has brought nothing but despair and
devastation to his own peoples and to other peoples in
the region. He is his own people's devil of death and
their greatest tragedy.

One need not rely on Israeli declarations to come
to this conclusion. Courageous members of Palestinian
society and responsible Palestinian and world leaders
have themselves admitted that Mr. Arafat's cruel,
authoritarian and corrupt rule is designed to perpetuate
his own power - not to benefit his people.

Since efforts have been underway to restart the
peace process through the road map, Mr. Arafat has
played a wholly destructive role at every step of the
way. He has actively sought to prevent the Palestinian
Prime Minister from fulfilling the Palestinian
obligations under the road map. He has sabotaged
attempts to establish and new and different leadership
in the Palestinian Authority, which stood at the basis of
President Bush's vision.

He has refused to allow the consolidation of
security forces under the control of an empowered
minister for internal security, so that finally,
responsible Palestinians can act to completely
dismantle the terrorist infrastructure, as they are
morally and legally obligated to do. After voicing his
active objection to the appointment of Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas, Mr. Arafat pressured members of the
Palestinian legislative council to narrow Mr. Abbas'
control. He has acted to undermine Mr. Abbas from the
beginning of his tenure to the very end, until Mr. Abbas
was compelled to resign and admit publicly that Mr.
Arafat had not given him the authority to fulfil the
obligations that the Palestinians had taken upon
themselves.

He has continued to encourage acts of terrorism
and violence, and kept renegade terrorist groups like
the Tanzim under his direct control, so that at any
given moment he could scuttle efforts to renew
dialogue by directing the murder of innocent civilians.

He has worked to prevent efforts made to
introduce transparency and accountability in
Palestinian Authority's finances, so that money can
continue to be funnelled into his private accounts. He
has signed peace agreements with one hand, and signed
checks to terrorists and suicide bombers with the other.

The decision of the Israeli cabinet last Thursday
merely states the obvious, namely, that Mr. Arafat is an
obstacle to peace. This realization was a driving force
in the call for reform in the context of the road map,
and it is even more relevant today as the prospects for
restarting the peace process risk being doomed to
failure.

In other instances, members of the international
community have recognized that certain leaders are so
destructive to the rights of their own people and to the
security and stability of their region, that their
legitimacy must be questioned. Mr. Arafat is no
exception.

How many more children have to die? How many
more concerted peace efforts need to be scuttled before
the world is willing to denounce Mr. Arafat's role in a
clear voice?

And yet, when is the Security Council galvanized
into action? Was it galvanized to act after the horrific
suicide bombings which killed 22 and injured 135 on a
crowded bus in downtown Jerusalem, filled with
orthodox Jewish families and children and babies
returning from prayers at the Western Wall? Was it
galvanized to act this past Tuesday when two suicide
bombings, at a cafe in Jerusalem and a bus stop in
Central Israel, killed a total of 15 and injured more
than 70 Israelis, just hours apart?

The Council may have already heard that these
latest attacks were perpetrated by terrorists recently
released by Israel as part of a goodwill gesture towards
the Palestinian leadership. They are further evidence
that every gesture made by Israel and every risk taken
for the sake of peace has been answered with criminal
action and inaction on the part of the Palestinian
leadership under Mr. Arafat's control.

Let us take a moment to consider the price of
Israel's goodwill gestures made at the behest of the
international community in the hope that Mr. Arafat's
leadership would respond in kind. It is the price paid
by Dr. David Applebaum and his daughter Nava, who
were among those murdered in the terrorist attack in
Jerusalem this past Tuesday. Dr. Applebaum, a
renowned specialist in emergency medicine and the
head of the emergency room at Shaare Zedek Hospital,
who himself had treated countless terror victims, had
brought his daughter to the Jerusalem cafe for a heart-
to-heart talk on the very eve of her wedding. It is the
price paid in lives because ambulances carrying the
injured from a terrorist attack must slow down so that
they can be checked as a result of intelligence reports
indicating that terrorists are attempting to booby-trap
ambulances to explode upon arrival at hospitals. It is
the price paid in fear by courageous Israeli civilians
who do not know when or where the next attack,
resulting from Mr. Arafat's encouragement or
acquiescence, will come.

It would be a grave error if the Council were to
come to the aid not of the victims of terrorism, but of
their sponsor and perpetrator. The Council's focus
should be directed first and foremost at terrorism and at
its facilitators, and not at the response to terrorism.
Pressure should be directed against the problem and
not against those who are its victims.

The efforts of the Palestinian representative in
this Chamber advance not the interests of the
Palestinian people, but the personal interest and corrupt
rule of Mr. Arafat himself. High-minded rhetoric about
the so-called legitimacy of Mr. Arafat's leadership and
the illegitimacy of Israel's interference are meaningless
and hypocritical in the face of the hundreds of dead and
injured innocent civilians killed with the direct
approval or acquiescence of Mr. Arafat himself. What
country, faced with terrorism of this unprecedented
magnitude and duration, would not hold directly and
criminally responsible the person who has both
orchestrated the terror and refused to suppress it?

In perpetuating this game of legitimizing Mr.
Arafat, we fundamentally undermine our efforts to
allow an empowered Palestinian Prime Minister to
work to implement the road map and reach a peaceful
solution. Such a policy serves the interests of no one
other than the terrorists whom Mr. Arafat continues to
support. It is time we expressly admitted that he is part
of the problem and not part of the solution.

Israel holds out hope that a new and different
Palestinian leadership that categorically abandons the
ways of Mr. Arafat will be ready to fully and
responsibly implement its obligations to fight terrorism
and incitement. If it does so, it will find in Israel a
willing partner ready to make painful compromises, as
it has proven before, to realize President Bush's vision.

Our discussions today take place on the tails of 11
September, the anniversary of the worst terrorist attack
in history, and the signing of the Declaration of
Principles in Washington on 13 September 1993. These
two events are a haunting and vivid illustration of the
devastating effects of terrorism and of the promise and
possibility of peace if terrorism is abandoned and the
vision of peace between Israelis and Palestinians is
vigorously pursued.

Time and again, the world has held out hope that
Mr. Arafat has rejected the path of terrorism for the
path of peace; the hope that he has become a
responsible statesman and not remained a professional
terrorist. In the two years following 11 September, Mr.
Arafat has continued to demonstrate that he is on the
wrong side of history and that he refuses to learn any
lessons about the effects of terrorism for both Israelis
and Palestinians. Rather than taking responsibility to
build a genuine, democratic Palestinian society that can
live in peace with its neighbours, he has turned
Palestinian victimhood into a professional enterprise
and Palestinian suffering into a source of power and
personal prosperity. We will bring no benefit today to
the cause of peace, or to the legitimate rights of
Palestinians and Israelis, if we come to the defence of
someone who has brought only suffering and the
promise of further bloodshed.

