Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
important meeting. Our thanks go as well to the Secretary-
General for his timely report.

The issue discussed in the report is among the most
important ones facing the international community. It is
taking on increased significance because of the nature of
the problems to which it gives rise, and therefore it should
be given careful study.

Though we have been receiving reports on this issue
from the Secretary-General for more than seven months, we
are now being urged to discuss this question only a week
after the publication of this latest report. This subject
should have been dealt with in a timely manner, either by
the Security Council itself or by all Members of the
Organization or the international community.

We support the measures taken by the Security
Council in the framework of the Charter and within the
prerogatives of the Council under the Charter, and we
approve its readiness to act in situations where civilians are
targeted and where humanitarian assistance is wilfully
prevented from reaching its intended recipients. We
welcome the statements made by Council members,
including the permanent members, on 21 January, 12
February and 22 February 1999 on that subject - that is,
that the Council should act within its prerogatives and in
accordance with the Charter, intervening only if there is a
threat to international peace and security.

We also join the call to move away from double
standards in the field of human rights, and we believe that
the same attention should be devoted to those situations,
wherever they may arise, that involve a loss of civilian
life in armed conflict or which are a source of untold
suffering, without allowing the political considerations of
Council members, and especially of the permanent ones,
to prevail over the collective considerations of the
Council and of the United Nations as a whole.

The protection of human beings and their right to
live in peace and security should always be the sacred
objective of societies. This idea has evolved throughout
the development of civilization to this very day and has
been marked by the idea of the State as the protector of
its citizens. Today we are witnessing unprecedented
interest in the protection of the human individual, and we
strongly support this new idea. However, and in just as
balanced a manner, we believe that we should not focus
only on one criterion that has been studied in depth. We
believe that the right of society, within the framework of
a State, to protect itself and its future should also be
preserved.

Therefore, any international action to protect
civilians should not involve only the entity responsible for
the protection of citizens - the State, with all of its
incumbent duties - but we sincerely believe that the
international community must respond to any attempt to
harm civilians in situations of armed conflict, be it during
an international conflict or in an internal situation where
a State may have lost control of its territory. We also
support the idea that transgressors should be brought to
justice under international legislation and the relevant
machinery.

The report was submitted at the request of the
Security Council, which asked that the Secretary-General
put forward specific proposals in order to enable the
Security Council, within the scope of its responsibilities,
enhance the physical and legal protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

To this end, before I go into the thinking behind the
report of the Secretary-General and his proposals, let me
say that we believe that we first should deal with the
question of the mandate and responsibilities of the
Council, including the future of the Charter.

Article 24 of the Charter defines the role of the
Council. It is responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security. In carrying out this task,

 

it is duty-bound to respect the purposes and principles of
the Charter. The mandate of the Council is to decide
whether the continuation of a conflict might threaten
international peace and security and to submit a report in
this connection containing recommendations on ways to
resolve the conflict pursuant to Chapter VI.

The Council may also act pursuant to the Charter
within the framework of Chapter VII if it feels that peace
is threatened or violated or if it believes that incidents
constitute aggression pursuant to Article 39 of the Charter.

The legal framework for Council action is defined by
respect for the purposes and principles of the Charter, that
is, the non-use of force except in the implementation of
Council resolutions adopted pursuant to Chapter VII. This
means that a conflict must threaten or violate international
peace or be deemed aggressive. The Council should not
intervene in the internal affairs of States pursuant to
paragraph 7 of Article 2 of the Charter.

The Council's role is thus to act in a practical manner
to ensure peace, whereas the role of the General Assembly
is legislative. The Assembly has its own purview: to
consider all issues pertaining to peace and the general
principles of cooperation to alleviate human suffering,
including the protection of civilians in armed conflict. In
brief, this distinction means that the Council is responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security in
the strictest sense, whereas the Assembly is responsible for
the follow-up assessment of international situations and the
human right to live in peace and stability.

On this basis, we would hope that the Security
Council is able to address this subject within the framework
defined by the United Nations Charter, while respecting the
delicate checks and balances between the various United
Nations bodies, especially the General Assembly, as well as
United Nations and other agencies, governmental and non-
governmental, responsible for the protection of civilians.

I shall now address the logic behind the Secretary-
General' s report and recommendations. From the outset, the
Secretary-General has quite rightly stressed the major
problem involved in international law: the lack of
machinery to ensure its implementation. Though this is a
genuine problem, we must understand that it arises from the
facts that international law is based on States' being on an
equal footing and that the United Nations is not a
supranational Organization. A careful consideration of the
report will reveal that this situation both raises the Security
Council above member States and places the prerogatives
of the United Nations, its various bodies and other
international organizations into the Council's hands. This
anomaly needs to be closely analyzed, especially in the
light of the current international situation.

We do not approve of the report's tendency to
favour practical considerations over respect for law and
the principles of the Charter. To be sure, compatibility
must exist between the implementation of international
humanitarian law and the provisions of the Charter. We
cannot, however, forget the importance of consulting
States and of reaching prior agreement with them,
because we cannot conceive that the need to implement
international humanitarian law or practical considerations
for humanitarian protection could compel us to flout the
Charter. That is inconceivable to us. If we seek to plug
the gaps in the edifice constructed by the Charter, this
should be done legally and through measures advocated
by the Charter. A great deal can be accomplished thereby
towards ensuring the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

A great deal of the report is devoted to humanitarian
action. We find this preponderance reflected neither in
law nor in the common endeavours of States embodied in
the agreements and resolutions of international
organizations. This is in fact one of the most controversial
topics addressed here at the United Nations and beyond.
Attempts to implement intervention through the actions of
the Council do not bestow the legitimacy which the
Council lacks. If, as we see it, the logic of the report is to
give the Security Council a role beyond that currently
mandated by the Charter, we cannot but question such
logic. We shall therefore comment on certain ideas set
forth in the report.

First, the report disregards the principle of obtaining
the agreement of States to preventive measures that might
violate their sovereignty or reduce or affect their political
unity or territorial integrity. This flouts the sacrosanct
Charter principle of the sovereignty of States.

Secondly, some recommendations made in the report
would have the affect of allowing the Council, by taking
legal measures, to act counter to instruments of
international law and human rights, whereas States may
choose other means of legal and political recourse. The
recommendations may sometimes run counter to the
provisions of accords by which the parties agree to settle
their disputes.

 

Thirdly, we are cautious with regard to the request
made of the Council in the report to play a monitoring role
in the implementation of international agreements, whereby
the Council would compel States to sign and ratify
agreements, withdrawing their reservations, and States
would advise the Council on steps which they may have
taken in this regard. This role is well beyond the Council's
prerogatives and competence.

There are many other points which we might raise in
this framework. However, I would like to say in conclusion
that it is a good, even desirable, idea for this item to be
included on the agenda of the General Assembly and of the
Economic and Social Council for further study and more
detailed examination as an extension of this welcome
initiative taken by the Security Council. The responsibilities
and prerogatives of the Council are based on the Charter.
Implementing the ambitious plan of the Secretary-General,
as we would wish, requires coordination between the
United Nations and organizations which provide
humanitarian protection, something which is currently
beyond the capacity of the United Nations or the Security
Council.

