Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the information
provided by the briefers. At the outset, we would like to
commend Mr. Griffiths for the leadership he has shown
in this very delicate phase in the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement and extend him our full support
in calling on the parties to cooperate constructively, in
good faith and without preconditions for the benefit of
their people.

In his statement, Mr. Lowcock once again spoke of
the crux of this conflict - the humanitarian situation
affecting millions of people after years of war and
economic and institutional debacle. We have noted how
restrictions on the movement of assets and personnel
due to continued fighting and bureaucracy constitute
one of the greatest obstacles facing humanitarian
agencies, with areas declared as military zones by the
parties to the conflict. The movement of goods from
the port of Al-Hudaydah to the rest of the country must
be accelerated in order to alleviate the suffering of the
population and to make it possible to use port revenues
to pay the salaries of civil servants, which would
boost the economy. Above all, the promised financial
resources must be disbursed in order to comply with
the humanitarian response plan for Yemen in order to
implement without delay the comprehensive response
aimed at saving the lives of millions of people.

We have listened with great attention and concern
to the information Mr. Beasley presented today.
We reiterate that humanitarian access must not be
politicized or used as a weapon of war. All parties
must facilitate the collection of objective data in order
to produce reliable assessments of people's needs. The
international community must continue to influence
all parties to conflict in order to allow timely, safe and
unhindered humanitarian access.

We note with concern and condemn the growing
hostilities between the parties, as evidenced by attacks
carried out by both sides. The parties and the States
that support them must do more to protect civilians. We
recall that all military action directed against civilians,
public spaces, residences or medical and educational
facilities, as well as the launching of missiles and the
deployment of anti-personnel mines, are contrary to
international law and international humanitarian law.
Such actions could constitute crimes against humanity to
be investigated and punished by international tribunals.

With regard to the situation of children in this
conflict, we recognize the efforts of the Government
of Yemen to identify 90 focal points within the Yemeni
armed forces to be trained in the identification and
documentation of children within their ranks. While
some measures have been put in place by the parties
to mitigate grave violations against children, the
number of cases continues to rise, due primarily to
children being recruited in recent months, which is
unacceptable. We therefore call on the parties to the
conflict to prioritize the protection of children and to
ensure that all incidents are duly investigated.

Despite the conflict and fear of reprisals,
young people remain hopeful and involved in their
communities, and aspire to lasting peace. We therefore
reiterate that the key to the permanence of a political
solution is the meaningful participation of women and
young people in conflict resolution processes.

Finally, we pay tribute to the humanitarian workers
who daily face the human face of this war. The Council
remains united in the face ofthis situation afflicting the
people of Yemen, as it recognizes that there can only
be a political solution that, once and for all, will lay the
foundations for ending one of the worst and most tragic
humanitarian crises of all time.

