Mr. Akram (Pakistan): As this is the first formal
meeting of the Security Council for this month, may I
take this opportunity to extend to you, Sir, the warm
felicitations of the delegation of Pakistan on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
current month. We will extend our full cooperation to
you to ensure the success of your presidency.

I would also like to express my delegation's
congratulations and admiration to Sir Emyr Jones
Parry, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, for a successful presidency last month.

The Security Council has been established to
defend a world order based on the principles and
purposes of the Charter. Our Charter prescribes strict
rules for the use of force by Member States, and this is
envisaged in two circumstances only. The first is in
exercise of the right of self-defence against a direct act
of aggression or use of force; the second is the
collective use of force under Article 42 of the Charter,
with the explicit authorization of the Security Council.

The attack perpetrated by Israel against the
territory of the Syrian Arab Republic on 5 October did
not meet these strict requirements set out in the Charter
with regard to the use of force. This was an arbitrary
attack, and in legal and political terms it is clearly a
violation of the Charter. It is also a violation of the
several resolutions that the Security Council has
adopted on the issue of the Middle East - resolutions
242 (1967), and 338 (1973), 350 (1974), 1397 (2002)
and others.

We welcome the fact that the Government of
Syria, instead of retaliating against this wanton attack
on its territory, has chosen to approach the Security
Council for redress. The Security Council must
commend Syria's self-restraint and condemn the Israeli
attack against Syria's territory.

A few weeks ago, the Secretary-General warned
Member States about the danger of the misuse of the
"T" word - namely, terrorism - for actions by States
designed to suppress peoples and to achieve their own
partisan objectives. We believe that the response of
Israel in this case is one such example of the
exploitation of the campaign against terrorism for other
purposes. The problems that Israel faces are problems
that arise from its illegal occupation of Palestinian and
other Arab territories. The answer to individual acts of
terrorism is not State terrorism, nor is it wanton attacks
against other countries, in violation of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations. State power
must distinguish between acts of terrorism and the
legitimate struggle of peoples under foreign occupation
for self-determination and liberation.

Pakistan has officially condemned Israel's attack
against Syrian territory as a violation of international
law. We urge the Council to speedily adopt a decision
to condemn that military aggression and to uphold the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic.

