Mr. Kullane (Somalia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting. I acknowledge the briefing
given to the Security Council by Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations Edmund Mulet

Somalia has achieved significant progress in the
past two years since the Council reviewed the previous
benchmarking report. The Council was briefed recently,
but I would like to highlight the fact that we reached a
new milestone last week with the election ofa President
of the Galmuduug Interim Regional Assembly and the
confirmation by Parliament of the members of the
National Independent Electoral Commission and of
the Boundaries and Federation Commission. Those
achievements, especially on the federal front, would not
have been possible without the military gains of 2013
and 2014, which opened up political space. And that is
thanks to the sacrifices of the Somali National Army
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

However, our military efforts are not over.
Al-Shabaab no longer controls vast areas of the country,
but it is still capable of conducting attacks against
the Somali National Army and AMISOM. We are
concerned about the degradation it has caused during
the period of Ramadan. Just last Friday, Al-Shabaab
conducted an attack in Mogadishu. Once again, the
attack was repelled, but we need to be able to degrade
Al-Shabaab's capacity to conduct such attacks.

It is important to support AMISOM. and maintain

its troop levels in Somalia, as well as to provide it with
enablers to improve its efficiency. More important, we
will be able to stabilize Somalia in the long term and
to withdraw international troops only by building a
strong security sector in the country. We have achieved
some progress this year, especially with the adoption
of the Gulwade plan for the development of the Somali
National Army. The non-lethal support package to the
Somali National Army has been very helpful. I welcome
the recommendation to extend it until the end of 2016,
and to expand it to the 3,000 troops from Puntland.

It is also now time for us to step up our work to
develop the police sector in Somalia and to focus on
community security. Public security in a country should
be provided by the police, and that is the ultimate goal
in Somalia. It should start happening now with more
support provided to the police, especially outside
of Mogadishu, where we need to re-establish police
services.

The Somali Government also welcomes the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that the
entire international community begin gradual hand-
over to the Somali security institutions. While we are
mindful that the full achievement of that objective will
take time, it needs to become the guiding light of the
international community's efforts on the security front.

Finally, the problem of armed violence in Somalia
will not be resolved by working on the security front
alone. We need the Council's support to build the
capacity of Somali institutions in Mogadishu and in
the interim regional administrations. We also need
to provide opportunities to the youth of the country,
to develop infrastructure and to progressively tackle
the roots of violence. That is a longer-term ambition,
and the Council's support for the recommendations of
the benchmarking report is an indispensable building
block.

