Mr. Noziri (Tajikistan): I have the pleasure to
deliver the following statement on behalf of the
members of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
(OIC) in Tajikistan's capacity as Chair of the OIC

group.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his briefing. I also would like to express our deep
appreciation to the Colombian presidency of the
Security Council for the convening of this timely
meeting and for giving the OIC group the opportunity
to address the Council.

The Palestinian question remains a top priority
and a challenge for the entire international community.
The implementation and fulfilment of our collective
political commitments, resolutions and pledges on this
issue have been pending for more than half a century.
The OIC group remains firm in its conviction that the
Security Council must not be absolved of its role in
this regard and should act forthwith to ensure the
realization by the Palestinian people of their right to
self-determination, sovereignty and independence in
their State of Palestine in the territory occupied since
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, including a
just solution for the plight of the Palestine refugees in
line with United Nations resolutions and international
law.

Our debate today acquires extraordinary
importance, given that it coincides with the difficult
situation that millions of Palestinians in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
continue to endure. Despite resolution 1860 (2009), of
8 January 2009, Israel, the occupying Power, continues
its military aggression against the Gaza Strip. The
illegal Israeli blockade remains in force, thereby
continuing to affect the lives of the entire Palestinian
civilian population of Gaza - preventing their access
to humanitarian aid and basic materials; impeding
reconstruction, including by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East and the United Nations Development Programme,
of the thousands of destroyed homes and infrastructure;
and obstructing economic and social recovery. In this
regard, the OIC group continues to call for serious
follow-up to the findings and recommendations of the
investigations of the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict as an essential step to
ensuring justice and accountability and averting further
human rights violations in the occupied Palestinian
territory by Israel, the occupying Power.

In the West Bank, Israel continues its illegal
settlement construction, home demolitions, violent
military raids, movement restrictions and land
confiscation, imposing hundreds of checkpoints and
detaining thousands of Palestinians. It also continues to
build the annexation wall, in clear violation of
international law and the legal authority of the advisory
opinion (see A/ES-10/273) of the International Court of
Justice. These violations are most intense and
aggressive in occupied East Jerusalem, where Israel
also continues a systematic process to alter the historic
Palestinian-Arab-Islamic identity of Al-Quds Al-Sharif
through its flagrant attempts to Judaize the city by
changing its demographic composition and character.

Today, the OIC group reaffirms the centrality of
the cause of Al-Quds Al-Sharif for the entire Islamic
Ummah and stresses the Palestinian, Arab and Islamic
nature of occupied East Jerusalem and the need for full
respect for the sanctity of Islamic and Christian holy
places in the city. The OIC group also reaffirms that
Al-Quds Al-Sharif remains an integral part of the
Palestinian territory occupied by Israel since 1967, and
that its illegal annexation by Israel continues to be
rejected and unrecognized by the international
community.

We affirm that the resolution of the entire Middle
East conflict is dependent on solving its core issue,
which is the Palestinian question. The international
consensus to realize the vision of two States requires a
clear stance based on international legitimacy and
justice. There must be full acknowledgement of, and
respect for, the historic commitments and pledges made
in that regard, as embodied in the terms of reference of
the peace process, namely, the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, including
the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace
Initiative, to which the OIC subscribes, and the Quartet
Road Map. Every effort must be exerted by the
Security Council as well as by the Quartet, in the light
of its declared commitment to fulfil the collective legal
and moral responsibilities relevant to the realization of
peace, justice and security in the region this year.

At this crucial stage, there must also be
acknowledgement of, and continued full support for,
Palestinian State-building efforts, which are advancing
successfully. Since, regrettably, the peace process
remains in a sate of stagnation, the time is ripe to
recognize the independent State of Palestine based on
the 1967 borders, as that is the cornerstone for
achieving stability, prosperity, peace and security for
Palestine, Israel and other neighbouring countries in
the region.

The OIC also joins the international community's
stance reaffirming that all measures and actions taken
or to be taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to alter
the legal, physical and demographic status of the
occupied Syrian Golan and its institutional structures,
as well as Israeli measures to impose its jurisdiction
and administration there, are null and void and have no
legal effect. The OIC demands that Israel abide fully
and immediately by resolution 497 (1981) and
withdraw completely from the occupied Syrian Golan
to the lines of 4 June 1967, in implementation of
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as well as from
the remaining Lebanese occupied land.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm the full support
and solidarity of the OIC with the Palestinian people in
their endeavour to regain their legitimate and
inalienable national rights, including their rights of
return, self-determination and to establish their
independent Palestinian State on their national soil,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

