Mr. Seek (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation would like to offer you,
Mr. President, and your entire team its heartfelt
congratulations as you assume the presidency of the
Council. We wish you, Sir, every success. As we did
in January 2016 during your first presidency of the
Council, my delegation assures you, Sir, of its full
support and cooperation. I would also like to extend my
warm congratulations to my colleague Nikki Haley and
the whole team of the United States delegation for the
outstanding and very productive manner in which she
steered the Council's work last month.

I thank the Prosecutor for her report and for the
detailed briefing she gave this afternoon, which sheds
harsh light on the very tenuous situation in Libya. I also
take this opportunity to congratulate her and her team,
once again, for their tireless efforts to bring justice to
the victims of international crimes. As a State party to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
Senegal strongly supports the Court's mandate, which
consists in combatting impunity throughout the world,
including in Libya.

In this regard, we welcome the cooperation
provided thus far to the Court by the Office of the
Prosecutor-General of Libya in the course of the
ongoing investigation in the country and we encourage
it to continue in this direction. We would also like to
urge the international community in general and the
Security Council in particular to continue to assist the
Prosecutor as she continues to carefully investigate
these allegations and to bring those responsible to
justice. For their part, those actually in power in Libya
must fulfil the obligation imposed by resolution 1970
(2011) to cooperate with the Court and to promptly
bring to justice any individual who has been indicted.

In listening to the Prosecutor's report, what is clear
is that the security situation remains very unstable
owing to fighting between different groups, but also
terrorist threats. This situation hampers the ability of the
Office of the Prosecutor to conduct the investigations
necessary in Libya. However, the Office continues
to make considerable efforts in order to execute the
arrest warrants issued in the case of Mr. Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi. The Prosecutor has therefore reiterated
her appeal to the Government of National Accord for
the surrender of Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the
Court, following the Pre-Trial Chamber's dismissal of
her request of 26 April 2016, with a view to obtaining
authorization to transmit the warrant issued against
Mr. Al-Qadhafi to Mr. Al-'Ajami Al-'Atiri, Commander
of the Abu-Bakr Al-Siddiq Battalion in Zintan, Libya.
Thi 3 would hold true even if, according to certain
recent information, Mr. Al-Qadhafi is no longer being
detained by A1-'Atiri, but is under the control of the
Zintan Military Revolutionary Council.

Furthermore, in the case of Al-Tuhamy Mohamed
Khaled, the Office of the Prosecutor requested the
unsealing of the arrest warrants of 21 April, again
in anticipation of the Pre-Trial Chamber, which
subsequently issued a favourable ruling on 24 April. In
our view, this a significant step forward in the execution
of the arrest orders. All this sufficiently demonstrates
the Prosecutor's determination to make progress as
quickly as possible on the situation that our Council has
referred to her, as well as the centrality of the struggle
for justice and the fight against impunity in her efforts.

The political situation in Libya remains complex
and the security situation remains fragile and unstable.
In order to overcome the Libyan crisis, we must take
into consideration and implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions on Libya, which are based on the
desire to find a peaceful, political solution to the Libyan
conflict. That is why Senegal welcomes the efforts of
the various interlocutors, such as the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, neighbouring countries, the
High-level Committee of the African Union on Libya,
the European Union and the League of Arab States. All
these efforts are essential to facilitating dialogue among
the parties in order to achieve lasting peace in Libya
and to put an end to human rights violations, including
the inhuman and abusive treatment of migrants in
detention centres.

Unfortunately, the frequency and the number of
such violations continues to grow, with ongoing serious
allegations of torture, slavery, trafficking in persons
and sexual violence. This requires the ongoing and
effective support of the Council and the broad and
committed support of the international community to
establish a stable security environment that guarantees
freedom, justice and respect for human rights.

In our view, strengthened and continuous
cooperation between the Security Council and the
ICC remains paramount if we want to win the fight
against impunity and for peace and security to triumph
because, as Benjamin Ferencz, the former Prosecutor at
the Nuremberg Tribunal, said,

"There can be no peace without justice, no justice
without law and no meaningful law without a
Court to decide what is just and lawful under any
given circumstance."

It is in this spirit that my country, Senegal,
addresses Ms. Bensouda to state that we strongly
support her action. This is also why we call for the
necessary resources to be provided to her Office, and
beyond - to the ICC as a whole.
