Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to welcome
Ambassador Zahir Tanin as he makes his first briefing
to the Security Council as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
I assure Mr. Tanin of our full support in his efforts, as
well as for the important role UNMIK has played, and
will continue to play in the immediate future.

We have heard the statements made by Mr. Ivica
Dacic, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and
Ms. Vlora Citaku. And we have also heard the briefing
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. We have read the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/833), carefully and with concern. We
are concerned by the atmosphere in Kosovo - as we
have heard and read - which has clearly deteriorated
as contrasted with the situation at the beginning of
the year. That erosion is also evident in the Secretary-
General's three most recent reports.

We are concerned by the unacceptable recourse to
aggressive rhetoric, threats and violence by political
stakeholders in Pristina, including parliamentarians,
without any respect for democratic norms. We are
concerned by the unjustifiable lack of implementation
of the commitments made - commitments that were
the outcome of agreements that just a few months ago
we had all celebrated unanimously here in the Council
as steps in the right direction. We are concerned by the
untimely return to unilateralism on the part of the Pristina
authorities, to the detriment of the Brussels dialogue
facilitated by the High Representative of the European
Union, which the Council has always encouraged. We
are equally concerned by the deteriorating security
situation in Kosovo, as set out in the Secretary-
General's report, as a result ofthe increasing number of
acts of vandalism and violent protests led by political
and social protagonists, as well as by ongoing incidents
against non-majority communities and against cultural
and religious heritage sites associated with those
communities. And we continue to be concerned by the
lack of progress with regard to voluntary returns of
internally displaced persons and with regard to missing
persons, as well as by the continued existence of major
shortcomings in the areas of human rights and the rule
of law.

Those social and substantive issues represent key
basic principles of the European identity that Kosovo
desires to achieve. It is for that reason that they must
be the subject of committed, priority attention - above
others of a more formal nature. Spain once again calls
for the high-level dialogue between the two capitals to
be given the pride of place that the Security Council
attaches to it. There is a need to return to the path of
dialogue, good-faith negotiation and the implementation
of the commitments undertaken - in brief, the path of
reconciliation.

The agreements achieved months ago to set up an
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
and to set up a specialist court to take up cases
investigated by the Special Investigative Task Force
were steps in the right direction. Implementing them
is crucial for any eventual goal the parties may seek
to pursue. We acknowledge that they were complex
agreements that were painstaking to finalize, in which
both sides had to give something up. That is precisely
the reason that they are good agreements. However,
impeding or delaying their implementation would be
a step backwards, backsliding that would weaken the
process and erode the mutual trust that is necessary
in any dialogue process. Moreover, such decisions are
detrimental to the interests of the people and of Kosovo,
as well as to the advances towards reconciliation,
stability and progress. Spain therefore rejects such
decisions, as they have been rejected by the Council
and by the European Union.

Without prejudice to our position of principle,
which is well known and which was recently set out
at the meeting of the UNESCO General Conference,
Spain has been constructively supporting all efforts
aimed at achieving concrete results that would benefit
the entire population of Kosovo, such as the Brussels
dialogue. We are prepared to maintain that constructive
position. However, we hope that all the relevant actors
will also demonstrate the same constructive spirit and
that such an attitude will result in a clear commitment
to continue dialogue and responsible conduct that
promotes respect for the rule of law.

