Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kuwait for presiding over today's
meeting and extend our appreciation to Mr. Jan Kubis
for his briefing on the situation in Iraq.

Peru is closely following developments in Iraq
and welcomes the losses inflicted on Da'esh and its
expulsion from the country. We commend the support
displayed by broad segments of Iraqi society and stress
the importance of international support, in particular
that of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI), in attaining this important objective.
Nevertheless, as stated in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2018/42), there is a need to remain vigilant
as to potential terrorist regroupings and fresh terrorist
attacks. We regret that in November and December
2017 terrorists were able to take more than 60 lives.
We highlight the need to promote the rule of law and to
ensure accountability for the atrocities committed by
Da'esh, in line with resolution 2379 (2017), adopted by
the Council last September.

We support United Nations efforts to facilitate
dialogue between Baghdad and Erbil. This new phase
should be strengthened and translate into a fluid,
complementary relationship between the federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government.
We believe it necessary to continue to strengthen and
sustain peace in all its aspects, which means that we
must rebuild the country and especially strengthen
its institutions, in particular its capacity to defend
itself, provide security and protect the human rights of
its people.

To that end, it is therefore critical that there be
an increase in professional civilian staff across all
regions of the country, which would help the process of
national decentralization. It is also important to tackle
corruption and to promote tolerance and reconciliation,
as well as work towards the socioeconomic development
of the country and the establishment of initiatives
and investment and development projects that offer
opportunities for all Iraqis, especially its young people.

In this connection, we welcome initiatives such as
the United Nations recovery and resilience programme
in support of the national development plan launched
by the Secretary-General, and the recent international
conference convened by Kuwait at which pledges of
$30 billion were made to rebuild Iraq. These initiatives
point to the growing confidence of the international
community in the future of the country. We believe,
therefore, that we must continue to build on this so that
we can effectively address the needs of the 3.4 million
persons in highly vulnerable situations and the
3.2 million internally displaced persons.

We eagerly await the national elections slated for
12 May and believe it is key to ensure that all citizens
participate, especially women and youth, and that
internally displaced persons can vote too. We must
ensure the credibility and transparency of the process
and of the technology to be used.

In all of the areas I mentioned, UNAMI must
continue to provide advice and assistance to the
Government and the people of Iraq. Peru supports the
recommendations made by the external advisory team,
which recently proposed a new operational framework
and a more efficient use of the Mission's resources that
is commensurate with its functions.
We therefore support the work of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis and
his entire team. My country continue to follow closely
the Iraqi process, which we believe will continue on
this path, which has enabled it to overcome the Da'esh
terrorist threat.

