Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia wishes to thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. J can-Pierre Lacroix, for his statement, and the four
Force Commanders for their very informative briefings.

Bolivia joins in the previous expressions of words
of tribute for the valuable lives of soldiers and civilian
personnel that have been lost in the fulfilment of their
duties in the implementation of the mandates of the
various missions and, in particular, with regard to the
recent events in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. We also wish to pay sincere tribute and
express our thanks to each and every member of United
Nations peacekeeper contingents around the world.
They are sparing no effort to fulfil their missions and
implement their mandates, despite the limitations,
including insufficient resources, difficult conditions
on the ground and challenging security environments.
It is also necessary to thank the countries that
contribute personnel military, police, observers or
civilian personnel for their generosity, solidarity
and commitment to the United Nations system
and to countries that are suffering from conflicts
and instability.

Bolivia has been committed to its membership
through its actively participation in peacekeeping
operations, contributing militarily since 1995 to
missions such as the United Nations Observer Mission
in Angola, the United Nations Observer Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
the United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala,
and United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. The
proper selection of personnel and the training received
at the peace operations battalion training have made it
possible for our soldiers to be part of a select group
of military personnel throughout the world with the
excellent qualifications they have received.

The international context is undergoing significant
transformations; it is not and will never be static. The
constant threats to international peace and security by
terrorist groups highlight the need for peacekeeping
missions to be subject to structural changes that will
enable them to adapt and repel these threats more
efficiently. The threatening environments of extreme
violence and volatility, in addition to the influence of
terrorist groups, have led to the tragic loss of life in
missions. Bolivia reiterates its vehement rejection of
such actions.

We emphasize the efforts of the Security Council to
achieve the objectives of each of the existing mandates.
The unity of everyone involved is essential on the
ground to strengthen the financial, tactical, operational
and strategic aspects, in strict accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and respecting the
principles of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of States.

Finally, it is important to improve the material
equipment of peacekeeping missions so that they are
able to control the areas where crises arise with the
primary purpose of fulfilling their mandates. Therefore,
effectiveness should also be achieved through
continuous coordination and exchange of information
among missions and local authorities. It goes without
saying that no peacekeeping mission can succeed if it
does not have the support of the host country.

