Mr. Al-Sameen (Oman)(interpretation from Arabic):
The Security Council is meeting today to consider a very
important matter, the situation in Burundi, and to establish
an international commission there.

The history of Burundi since independence has been
one of a power struggle between the two main ethnic
groups there. This struggle has led to the death of
hundreds of thousands of persons - men and women,
young and old, Hutu and Tutsi. People have been
slaughtered for no apparent reason other than their
belonging to a specific ethnic group or to their living in
a certain place. Each death is a tragedy in itself. In a
climate where lawlessness reigns, each killing refuels the
cycle of hatred and revenge.

The assassination of President Ndaday in 1993, just
a few weeks after he had delivered a statement on behalf
of his country before the General Assembly, and the
abortive coup d'etat and the massacres that followed it
plunged the country once again into a political and
humanitarian crisis which has sparked a new cycle of
killings and other violence: grenades are thrown into
marketplaces; families are shot in their homes at night;
people are stoned to death on the streets.

My delegation believes that one of the main reasons
for such violence is that those responsible usually flee
with complete impunity and do not answer to the rule of

 

law. Those responsible for the killings of hundreds of
thousands of people over the last 30 years have not been
identified, let alone been brought to justice. This climate
has encouraged some people to take the law into their own
hands, partly because they do not believe in the integrity of
the judicial system, and partly because they are trying to
pursue their own political agenda, regardless of the human
cost.

It is for these reasons that my delegation will welcome
the adoption of the first resolution on the situation in
Burundi requesting the Secretary-General to establish, as a
matter or urgency, a commission of inquiry to investigate
the facts relating to the assassination of President Ndadaye
in 1993 and the acts of violence that followed. We would
like to mention particularly that this idea did not come out
of the blue. It was referred to in the Ake-Huslid report;
recommended by the Security Council mission to Burundi;
foreseen by the parties in the Convention of Government;
and called for in many presidential statements issued by the
Council on the situation in Burundi. Therefore, we are
delighted that this idea is finally taking shape.

We, like others, are of the view that the establishment
of such a commission will be a significant step towards
putting an end to the culture of impunity, which breeds
further violence. It will expose the extremist elements on
both sides, and will deter any attempt by them to further
destabilize the situation and the peace and security of the
country.

However, in order for the work of the commission to
be successful, it has to be both impartial and independent
in terms of its mandate and its composition. Full respect by
the Burundian Government for the commission's integrity
and security, as well as access to information and
witnesses, are essential for the commission's success in
carrying out its mandate. It is also extremely important that
there be a commitment by the Burundi Government to
implement the recommendations that the commission will
submit. Otherwise, the whole exercise will be meaningless.

We reiterate that, based on the political nature of the
situation in Burundi, and as we understand that this draft
resolution is accepted by the Burundi Government, my
delegation will vote in favour, hoping that its adoption will
contribute towards bringing about peace and national
reconciliation.

In conclusion, I would like to commend the efforts of
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative in
Burundi, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, as well as the
efforts of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), to
bring about peace and stability in Burundi.

