The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

I would first like to thank the Secretary-General
for the report (S/2012/923), submitted pursuant to the
request ofthe President ofthe Council in the presidential
statement of 29 June 2012 (S/PRST/2012/18). I
would also like to thank Mr. Abou Moussa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), for his briefing on UNOCA's activities and
on areas affected by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA).

The situation in Central Africa has improved
overall in terms of restoring peace and regional
cooperation. We welcome the work and role of UNOCA
to that effect, as well as Mr. Moussa's efforts to support
the various Central African countries and subregional
organizations, especially in the area of capacity-
building. On that front, support for such organizations
as the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) should remain a priority,
particularly in the light of recent developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We welcome the
framework agreement for cooperation among regional
offices, as well as the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, in strengthening coordination in
conflict prevention and mediation.

We also hope that the Regional Office and
Mr. Moussa will continue to strengthen regional
cooperation on an inter-State or interregional basis
in order to respond to the many challenges the region
is facing. We particularly welcome the cooperation
between UNOCA and the United Nations Office
for West Africa, aimed at responding to common
challenges and threats, especially in the Sahel region
and the Gulf of Guinea, such as transnational organized
crime, the traffic in small arms and light weapons, and
the fight against terrorism. Central Africa must rise to
this challenge, and Morocco welcomes the efforts of the
States of the region, as well as those of regional offices,
to support interregional cooperation, particularly in
responding to the challenges of terrorism and the traffic
in small arms and light weapons in Central Africa.

As indicated in the report, piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea has grown to considerable proportions in recent
years, to the extent that it now threatens stability and
development in the region. Piracy has even affected
countries that are geographically distant from the Gulf,
and its economic impact has been felt on an international
level. In order to respond to this scourge - which is,
unfortunately, spreading throughout Africa - we must
take action, and that can be done only through regional
coordination between ECOWAS and ECCAS, as well as
the countries of the Gulf of Guinea region.

We welcome the efforts of the regional Office to
facilitate organization of the regional summit on piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea, to be held in April 2013. We
also welcome the efforts of ECOWAS and ECCAS, as
well as those of the Gulf of Guinea Commission. We
invite Mr. Moussa to make the most of the opportunity
offered by the NATO ministerial meeting to consider
interregional cooperation and all the security challenges
and respond to them.

Turning now to the Lord's Resistance Army, that
group continues to threaten the stability and lives of
thousands of men, women and children in the Central
African region. We emphatically condemn its activities,
which violate international humanitarian law and
international human rights. In this context, we welcome
the regional strategy of the United Nations, with its five
pillars and unified framework, aimed at responding to
LRA atrocities. We further welcome the efforts of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to respond to
the LRA and to strengthen the armed capacity of the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, as well as its efforts
in the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
for former combatants.

Through its participation in peacekeeping forces
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Morocco
will continue to provide protection for the civilian
population, humanitarian aid and medical assistance.
We will continue to support the countries of the region,
especially in the areas of human development and
capacity-building.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Moussa to respond to
comments and questions raised by several members of
the Council.

