Mr. Motoc (Romania) (spoke in French): It is a
great pleasure for my delegation, Madame, to see you
personally presiding over the Council. Your presence
here today, as the Council is seized with a
phenomenon, the magnitude and cruelty of which were
sadly recalled to mind by the powerful video we have
just seen, reinforces the message we intend to send. We
welcome the very well-documented and motivational
briefing provided by Special Representative Olara
Otunnu, as well as his overall dedication to the
protection of children. We welcome the presence of
Ms. Carol Bellamy and her tremendous work at the
helm of the United Nations Children's Fund.

The delegation of Romania fully associates itself
with the statement to be made by the Irish Presidency
of the European Union.

The recruitment of children as fighters in combat
zones throughout the world and the many facets of
their exploitation are a shameful reality of our

contemporary world. The fact that the Security Council
has decided to address the scourge of children in war is
remarkable and we rejoice that our forum is so strongly
committed to that topic and to see that so many
Members of the United Nations have come to express
their interest in today's debate.

A child soldier - removed from his family and
compelled to confront the horror of war, where he will
often be injured, mutilated or mentally traumatized by
the fear and hatred engraved in his memory - is not
merely deprived of his childhood; his fate as an adult is
also jeopardized. The adoption of resolution 1460
(2003) was a step forward in our common task to
prevent such tragedy from striking the lives of many
children and to alleviate whatever harm may already
have been caused. One element of the resolution that
we believe deserves particular attention is the stand
taken on situations in which women and children -
girls in particular - have been victims of sexual
exploitation or abuse in the context of a humanitarian
crisis, especially when the perpetrators are
peacekeepers or humanitarian personnel.

Today, considering the Secretary-General's
remarkable report, we learn with satisfaction that the
six core principles elaborated by the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee have been incorporated into the
code of conduct of the staff of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone. This is a major step forward and Romania, as a
country that provides significant troop contingents to
peacekeeping missions in several parts of the world,
can only welcome the Secretary-General's intention to
extend the application of those principles to the
personnel of the United Nations as a whole.

I take this opportunity to recall that Romania was
among the first countries to sign and ratify the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict. We
have taken note with great interest and are carefully
analysing the recommendations made in the Secretary-
General's report designed to intensify the struggle
against the recruitment and involvement of children in
armed conflict.

The time has indeed come to ensure that the
existing standards are effectively applied by the parties
concerned. To that end, we support the establishment
of a systematic, objective and comprehensive
mechanism to follow up and report on violations of
children's rights in conflict areas. To that end, using the
United Nations network in the field in conflict zones
would seem to be the most suitable solution. At the
same time, one United Nations agency in the field will
have to act as a focal point for such a mechanism,
facilitating a coherent and effective dialogue with the
parties to a conflict and the conceptualization and
implementation of specific plans of action, for instance
in the field of education. We support the potential role
of the International Criminal Court in prosecuting and
sentencing those guilty of war crimes against children.

I wish to express our full appreciation for the
prodigious efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Olara Otunnu, whose
dedication to and competence in the protection of
children in armed conflict are well known. We hope
that he will be able to pursue the implementation of the
proposals set out in his report of August 2003, to play
an active role in reviewing information on violations of
protection standards for children in times of war, and to
propose follow-up action.

We must not forget the progress achieved outside
the United Nations context thanks to the tremendous
efforts of non-governmental and civil society
organizations, including at the regional level. We
encourage them to pursue their outstanding work in the
field, including in preventing recruitment, in relieving
the suffering of child victims and in the complex
activity of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, in close cooperation with United Nations
agencies on the ground.

The Security Council will soon initiate
consultations on a new draft resolution that should
provide clear guidelines for future steps to protect
children in situations of armed conflict. I am convinced
that, with the resolve and commitment of the members
of the Council, the text of the draft resolution will be
rapidly agreed on and can be adopted soon.

