Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Burundi, for the quality of
his briefing. We also thank Ambassador Jiirg Lauber,
Permanent Representative of Switzerland and Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for his briefing on the changing
socioeconomic situation in Burundi.

My country welcomes all the efforts made by
the facilitator to guarantee the inclusiveness of the
inter-Burundian political dialogue. However, it
notes with regret the absence of the Government of
Burundi and some political actors at the fifth session
of the talks, which was held from 24 to 29 October in
Arusha, Tanzania. My delegation therefore urges all
stakeholders to retake their place in the political process
and to create the conditions for a permanent return to
stability in the country.

Cote d'Ivoire also welcomes the commitment
of Mr. Yoweri Museveni and Mr. Benjamin Mkapa,
mediator and facilitator, respectively, and expresses
its appreciation for their efforts for peace and stability
in Burundi. In that regard, my delegation supports the
facilitator's proposal to prepare a consensus document
for consideration by the mediator and Heads of State of
the East African Community at the next summit of the
organization, scheduled for 30 November in Kampala,
including the recommendations of the Kayanza and
Entebbe road maps, which were elaborated by the
Government and the opposition.

The humanitarian question and human rights in

Burundi are matters of concern to my delegation,
despite the improvement in the security situation. Cote
d'Ivoire calls on the Government of Burundi to shed
light on the allegations of human rights violations in
Burundi reported by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and by the
Commission ofInquiry on Burundi ofthe Human Rights
Council. To that end, we encourage Burundi to engage
in a constructive dialogue with the Commission with a
view to implementing the recommendations made by it,
and with a view to improving the human rights situation
in the country and to resuming negotiations with the
High Commissioner for Human Rights for the signature
of the memorandum of understanding for cooperation
with the institution.
My country also welcomes the authorizations
granted on 9 November to 25 international
non-governmental organizations and urges them to
speed up the accreditation process to facilitate the
effective resumption of the voluntary repatriation
programme for refugees. It also calls on the international
community and donors to increase their contributions
to the financing of the 2018 humanitarian response
plan in Burundi so as to enable the improvement of
humanitarian assistance to those in need.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire calls on the international
community to continue to support the initiatives of the
East African Community and of the mediator and the
facilitator ofthe inter-Burundian political dialogue in the
coming stages of the process leading to the preparation
of credible and peaceful elections, scheduled for 2020.
C6te d'Ivoire congratulates Mr. Michel Kafando,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, for the work
done in a difficult context and reiterates its support for
all initiatives for peace and stability in Burundi.

