The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of the Russian Federation. We thank Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their overview of the political and humanitarian situation in Yemen. We are concerned that fighting continues in various parts of Yemen, affecting civilians in particular. The situation in the country, widely acknowledged as the worst humanitarian crisis in the world today, continues to deteriorate. Humanitarian problems and challenges have come to the fore, requiring an immediate response from the international community. At the same time, humanitarian assistance is being delivered intermittently. We are concerned that the United Nations programmes to provide basic assistance, including food security, access to water and health services, are being curtailed due to a lack of funding. We are deeply concerned about the current health situation. The vital infrastructure has been almost completely destroyed, and there is an acute shortage of medicines and equipment. That is compounded by the coronavirus disease pandemic. Our country is providing assistance to Yemen through United Nations agencies. We call on donors, including from the region, to increase the necessary support. At the same time, we recall that humanitarian assistance must be impartial and that assistance must be distributed on a non-discriminatory basis to the entire population in all parts of the country, regardless of who controls a particular area. We consistently advocate that the parties to the Yemeni conflict should as soon as possible renounce violence and move towards a political settlement of their differences. We see no alternative to resolving issues through an intra-Yemeni dialogue. We note with regret that the parties have not yet signed the joint declaration. We support Special Envoy Griffiths' tireless efforts in these circumstances. He has steadfastly sought to establish discussions among the belligerents in order to end hostilities, establish confidence-building measures and tackle urgent humanitarian, socioeconomic and political matters. We welcome the agreement on the exchange of prisoners and the beginning of its implementation. We very much value the role of the International Committee of the Red Cross in that process - a development that shows that the parties are indeed able to negotiate. We trust that will enable them to build trust and establish a comprehensive dialogue. Among the issues where progress can be achieved is the situation concerning the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We urge the stakeholders, including the United Nations Office for Project Services, to look after one another's interests and cooperate constructively with a sharp focus on achieving solutions acceptable to all. On our part, we will pursue contacts with all interested Yemeni and external parties. We will urge them to seek compromise and support the efforts of both the United Nations and Mr. Griffiths personally. We will also support the efforts of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement. We trust that our Security Council colleagues and the entire international community will do the same. In conclusion, we would like to note that the situation in Yemen has a direct bearing on the Middle East, the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea regions. In order to achieve de-escalation in the region, we urge the international community to engage in constructive cooperation in pursuit of peace and stability throughout the Middle East, including on the basis of resolution 598 (1987). The Russian blueprint for collective security in the Persian Gulf region remains relevant in that regard. It provides for an inclusive and collective approach for resolving problems. We object to attempts to pin blame for all developments in the region on one side alone. We reiterate our call for all stakeholders to begin comprehensive dialogue to create favourable conditions for cooperation. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
