Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, I would like to join others in
welcoming you, Sir, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Norway, to this very important meeting of the Security
Council today. We are also grateful to Mr. Petritsch,
Mr. Klein and Mr. Solana for their assessments of the
current situation in Bosnia.

The Russian Federation believes that ensuring
stability in Bosnia overall, and in each of its entities, is
the main condition for further successful progress in
the peace process, on the basis of the Peace Agreement,
whose potential is far from exhausted.

We support the efforts of the High Representative
with a View to restructuring the international presence
and, in particular, the plan of action that he has
prepared. We believe that all activities in Bosnia,
including the proposed reorganization of the
international forces there, should be aimed at
strengthening Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single,
stable and independent State.

We have often emphasized that a solid foundation
for Bosnian statehood can be laid only through the
careful search by the Bosnian parties themselves for
mutually acceptable solutions. To that end, the
representatives of both entities must demonstrate
greater willingness to cooperate, make compromises
and find the strength within themselves to rise above
narrow ethnic interests so as to achieve common
Bosnian goals. Only thus will it be possible to ensure
State structures and organs of authority that function
normally at all levels, as well as an effective legislature
and a single economic space. Progress in that direction
will allow for conditions that will ensure stability and
democracy for the political forces in the country, as
well as economic, social and cultural development and
integration into the European structures.

In that context, the question of constitutional
reform is a priority. A decision in that respect must be
taken by the sides themselves. Any other approach
would necessarily lead to negative consequences for
stability within the country, particularly on the eve of
the Bosnian-wide elections, and would strengthen the
position of nationalist parties in both entities. In this
regard, it is necessary to be extremely cautious; the
imposition on the Bosnians of any solution to this very
significant problem by decree of the High
Representative could, indeed, be counter-productive.

Another important aspect of strengthening the
positive trends in Bosnia and Herzegovina is the
overall regional situation. We believe that a solid,
positive dynamic in the development of Yugoslav-
Bosnian and Croatian-Bosnian relations is extremely
important for the further stabilization of the Balkans. In
this respect, new opportunities are opening up as a
result of the recent signing between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia of
a bilateral agreement on free trade, the exchange of
ambassadors between those two countries and the
resumption of the work of the inter-State diplomatic
commission on border issues of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia.

Those steps, geared towards establishing
mechanisms for resolving specific problems that have
built up in the relationship between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
and between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, are
laying the foundations for solid, good-neighbourly
relations. The achievement of that goal is also being
assisted by the efforts of the High Representative to
step up the process of the return, to the places where
they used to live, of refugees and internally displaced
persons from national minorities. Unless that problem
is resolved, we can hardly talk about achieving real
political stability in the country.

We share the concern about reports of the
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina of terrorist bases
for organizations of the Bin Laden and Al-Qaeda type.
We believe it important to take all necessary measures
in order to eliminate from Bosnia and Herzegovina any
environment conducive to extremists and extreme
nationalists.

With regard to the work of the Stabilization Force
(SFOR) and the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia, such activities must be carried out
strictly in accordance with the mandate that the
Security Council gave SFOR; there must be no
Violations of that mandate, including the methods of
cooperation with the Tribunal.

There is another matter relating to security in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We must stress once again
that attempts to establish a single army would run
counter not only to the Peace Agreement but to the
Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which states
that defence matters are within the purview of the
entities. Any effort to rush that process through would
be counter-productive, and could disrupt the rather
fragile balance of political stability that has begun to
build up in the last few years between the Serbs one the
one hand and the Bosniacs and Croats on the other.

We support the outcome of the Brussels meeting
of the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board,
held on 28 February, including that part relating to the
transfer to the European Union, on 1 January next year,
of the functions of the management of the international
police operation. It is important that we achieve a
seamless agreed transition of the operation to the new
format and ensure that the United Nations International
Police Task Force (IPTF) is duly and properly replaced
by the European Union Police Mission, with, of course,
the appropriate authorization by the Security Council.
In this regard, we must remember that the work of the
new Police Mission will not begin from scratch, as
many of the tasks facing the IPTF have already been
discharged, or will have been completed by the end of
2002. The issue, moreover, concerns the transfer of
authority to the new mission and not a review of the
United Nations operation's existing mandate, which is
based on the Dayton Agreements.
The Russian Federation intends to continue
providing multifaceted support for the development of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single multi-ethnic State
consisting of two fully equal entities - the Republika
Srpska and the Federation - and will make a
constructive contribution to resolving any problems
remaining in the Bosnian settlement.

