Mr. Passy: It is a pleasure to be back in the
Security Council.

As members will recall, Bulgaria was a non-
permanent Council member in 2002 and 2003. That
was a busy time for my country. But there has been no
pause since then, as at the time when we rotated out of
the Security Council we had already assumed the
chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

I congratulate Pakistan on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and commend
Germany for its successful leadership as President in
April.

In my remarks today, I will focus on the role of
the OSCE and what the chairmanship of the OSCE is
engaged in nowadays. The low-key, soft-security
nature of OSCE work rarely gains public attention, but
that does not diminish its importance. The presence of
the Chairman-in-Office in the Security Council is yet
further proof of that.

As members know, since 1992, the OSCE - at
the time, the Conference on Security and Cooperation
in Europe (CSCE) - has been a regional arrangement
as described in Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter. Close and expanding cooperation with the
United Nations, the European Union, NATO and other
regional organizations is a priority for the Bulgarian
chairmanship. With its specific expertise and with the
unique activities that it implements from Vancouver to
Vladivostok, the OSCE is a special partner of the
United Nations.

The roots of our organization go back more than
30 years, to the CSCE and the Helsinki process, which
meant so much to me and my generation as we
struggled to win basic human rights in what were then
communist countries. I believe that the OSCE has
much to be proud of in its relatively short history. The
CSCE was a catalyst for ending the cold war by
keeping the focus on human rights, encouraging greater
openness and transparency, stressing arms control and
uniting Europe.

The OSCE, as the largest security organization in
Europe, helped to end civil war in Tajikistan,
constrained conflict in the Republic of Macedonia,
Moldova and Georgia and defused inter-ethnic conflict
in a number of States. With the United Nations, the
OSCE continues to play a major role in building civil
society in post-conflict Bosnia and Kosovo.

With its unique comprehensive approach to
security - stressing human rights and economic
development as well as political-military issues - the
OSCE remains the primary instrument for early
warning, conflict prevention, crisis management and
post-conflict rehabilitation in its region. Our 18 OSCE
field missions, especially in countries of the Caucasus
and Central Asia, represent an invaluable on-the-
ground presence which can help us deal more
effectively with new threats to security.

Addressing and preventing the most salient
threats to security are a high priority for the Bulgarian
chairmanship as it builds on the efforts of its
predecessors. I would like especially to underline the
role of my predecessor Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, the
Chairman-in-Office in 2003.

Take, for example, counter-terrorism. The OSCE
is looking at practical issues such as travel document
security, the threat of man-portable shoulder-fired
missiles to civilian aviation and improving ways of
stopping the financing of terrorism. Work is being done
to destroy ammunition stockpiles to eliminate the
possibility of their ending up in the wrong hands. The
OSCE works closely with the Council's Counter-
Terrorism Committee. Indeed, in March the OSCE
hosted, in cooperation with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the third special meeting of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee with international,
regional and subregional organizations.

We do not limit ourselves to worthy statements of
intent. We bring together the practitioners - experts in
airport security, for example, or people who design and
produce passports - to enable them to share
experiences and best practices. This is practical work
which should make it harder for terrorists to threaten
civilian aircraft with portable missiles or to cross
international frontiers using forged passports and
identity cards.

Furthermore, the OSCE is coordinating assistance
on the ratification and implementation of 12 United
Nations conventions and protocols on anti-terrorism.
We are also trying to ensure that anti-terrorism
legislation does not compromise human rights and are
therefore working with the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime to assist OSCE States in drafting
national anti-terrorism legislation. That is in line with
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).

The OSCE is working to control the spread of
small arms and light weapons. Last December, we were
proud to present the OSCE's Handbook of Best
Practices on Small Arms and Light Weapons to
Ambassador Kuniko Inoguchi of Japan, representing
the United Nations. Today, many more people are at
risk from illegally-held small arms and light weapons
than from weapons of mass destruction. These weapons
are easily concealed, are portable and have often been
diverted from legal possession through illegal
channels. In the wrong hands, they can be used by
terrorists, criminal groups and sometimes, with
terrifying effect, by children caught up in civil conflict
as irregular forces. Too often, such small weapons can
turn disagreements into violent conflicts with
devastating consequences. The OSCE's regional work
provides substantial input for the United Nations
Programme of Action on the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons.

Given the ever present threat from crime,
policing is high on our agenda. The OSCE has quickly
and effectively built up expertise in community
policing, particularly in multi-ethnic societies. We have
trained police in the Republic of Macedonia and in
Kosovo, where recruits join the United Nations-led
Kosovo Police Service. The OSCE is also
implementing a police assistance programme in
Kyrgyzstan and is formulating programmes to assist
Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan in reforming police
culture and operational effectiveness. In the future,
more attention will also be paid to crime intelligence.
We need to do more to break the link between crime
and conflict.

Policing is a perfect OSCE issue - bringing
together security and human rights - and we can play
a lead role. The rule of law needs to be enforced in a
way that is proportionate and professional and that has
the respect of the community. When handled badly,
policing can be part of the problem. When there is
effective, democratically controlled policing, societies
are more stable and more integrated. We should not
wait until crises deteriorate to the point where
peacekeeping is required. We should do more to
strengthen policing within States where necessary, with
the support of the international community.

Border management and security constitute
another area to which the OSCE is paying greater
attention. As Europe is transformed, borders are
becoming more open. At the same time, that openness
is being exploited by traffickers of drugs, people and
weapons. There are also issues, such as pollution,
development and water management, that defy borders
and that therefore require regional cooperation. The
challenge is to facilitate legitimate cross-border travel
and commerce, protecting human rights and promoting
human contacts, while ensuring a level of security that
is commensurate with the threats posed by illegal
cross-border activities. Those factors are being
considered in the elaboration of an OSCE border
management and security strategy. Those issues will
also be the topic of a conference on borders to be held
with the United Nations in Vienna in September.

The OSCE is paying increasing attention to
fighting trafficking, particularly trafficking in human
beings. I will shortly be appointing the first special
representative on combating trafficking in human
beings to increase the OSCE's capacities in that
important work.

Last December, the Maastricht Ministerial
Council adopted a new OSCE Strategy Document
which provides recommendations and commitments for
addressing economic and environmental threats to
security and stability in the OSCE region. To
implement the strategy, we are working closely with
the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe,
particularly when it comes to reviewing the
implementation of commitments and the development
of early warning mechanisms and indicators. In fact, an
inter-secretariat task force has been created to that
effect. We also work closely with the United Nations
Environment Programme and the United Nations
Development Programme on our common Environment
and Security Initiative, which is designed to assess key
environmental issues relevant for security in South-
Eastern Europe, Central Asia and the Caucasus.

The human dimension remains at the heart of the
OSCE's activities. Recent OSCE election-monitoring
operations, in Georgia and the Republic of Macedonia
for example, once again demonstrate the importance of
expert, objective international observers. Election
monitoring and assisting OSCE States with
democratization are core activities of the Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights. The
OSCE's Representative on Freedom of the Media is a
unique watchdog who monitors media freedom in the
OSCE area. Free media are vital in open societies.
With freedom comes responsibility - for example, in
relation to hate speech on the Internet. Those are the
types of contemporary issues that the OSCE is
addressing.

Tolerance, non-discrimination and integration
remain key themes for the OSCE. In Berlin recently we
had a high-profile conference on anti-Semitism that
provided a valuable opportunity to see what concrete
steps can be taken to better address that scourge in the
OSCE area. I would like to thank in particular the
German Foreign Minister, Joschka Fischer, for
supporting the organization of that conference. Our
participating States agreed to compile, share and make
public reliable statistics on incidents of anti-Semitism
and other hate crimes, to review their legislation and to
pay more attention to education on tolerance. We are
working with, among others, the United Nations
Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination.

We are also implementing an Action Plan on
Improving the Situation of Roma and Sinti in the
OSCE Area. Furthermore, we intend to evaluate what
more can be done to combat violent manifestations of
racism, xenophobia and discrimination. Those forces
are still evident across the OSCE region, and they need
to be contained. Also evident is the threat of extreme
nationalism and inter-ethnic conflict. Here, the High
Commissioner on National Minorities continues to play
a discreet and valuable role. Increasingly, his work
involves projects, including some carried out in
cooperation with United Nations agencies.

In cooperation with the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
among others, we are paying attention to education and
its important role in building tolerance and inter-
cultural understanding.

The OSCE and the United Nations work well
together in the field. In Kosovo, the OSCE is an
integral part of the structure of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
Immediately after the recent flare-up of violence, on 22
March, I and the Secretary General of NATO, Jaap de
Hoop Scheffer, visited Pristina, thus demonstrating the
determination to take the most effective measures
possible in restoring order and normal life in the
province. We expressed our full support for UNMIK
and KFOR.

The Bulgarian chairmanship has no doubts - and
made it clear to the parties - that the implementation
of the international community's "standards before
status" policy with regard to Kosovo should be strictly
followed. That policy was reconfirmed during the open
meeting of the Security Council held on 13 April and
in the statement of the President of the Council on
Kosovo issued on 30 April 2004 (S/PRST/2004/l3).
The Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
should honour their commitments and "ensure that acts
of violence and threats are not repeated". Multi-
ethnicity and reconciliation should be rebuilt
throughout Kosovo in an urgent manner.

On 23 March in Belgrade, I discussed with
Government representatives the events in Kosovo and
the situation in Serbia and Montenegro. In my
meetings, I stated that the international community
highly appreciated the Government's wise approach to
the developments in Kosovo and its prompt reaction to
the unrest in Belgrade, Nis and other places.

The recent violence in Kosovo has shown once
again that the international community - most notably
the United Nations, NATO, the European Union (EU)
and the OSCE - must act in concert so that the
progress there can be maintained and can become truly
sustainable.

On 13 and 14 April 2004, a regular regional
meeting of the heads of OSCE missions in the
countries of the western Balkans was held in Sofia.
The meeting was devoted to considering how to better
streamline the functioning of the OSCE field presences
in the countries of the western Balkans. The situation
in Kosovo, the fight against terrorism and illegal
trafficking, the strengthening of border control, refugee
returns, education and the training of young people
were high on the meeting's agenda. Particular attention
was devoted to problems related to education and the
media.

Developments in Georgia have brought into
sharper focus the relations between the United Nations
and the OSCE in that country. The OSCE supports the
efforts of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia to bring about a comprehensive political
settlement of the conflict in Abkhazia. The OSCE
stands ready to help with opening the Ghali branch of
the United Nations Human Rights Office in Sukhumi.
In South Ossetia, the OSCE works closely with the
United Nations Development Programme and with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in the implementation of rehabilitation and
repatriation projects within the framework of an EU
grant to the OSCE.

Given the latest developments in Ajara, I
congratulated President Saakashvili, the people of
Georgia and the Government on achieving a peaceful
settlement of the situation in Ajara. The Bulgarian
chairmanship will continue to assist vigorously in
strengthening democratic institutions in Georgia for the
benefit of all citizens. I am pleased to note the
constructive role played by the Russian Federation -
particularly by Igor Ivanov - in settling the crisis
situation. We stress the importance of restoring
Georgia's territorial integrity by peaceful means as a
crucial prerequisite for the country's democratization
and prosperity, as well as for the stability of the
southern Caucasus. We hope that the peaceful
resolution of the crisis in Ajara will stimulate new
efforts to resolve the conflicts in South Ossetia and
Abkhazia.

Following up on its support for democratic
elections, the OSCE is committed to working with the
Georgian Government to continue the process of
democratic reform and to maintain the country's
territorial integrity by peaceful means. After my visit
to Georgia, I also visited Armenia and Azerbaijan,
where - as the Council is aware - the OSCE has
been working with the parties to seek a resolution of
the Nagorny Karabakh conflict. As I said at the time,
the OSCE cannot perform miracles. It is up to the
parties themselves to find the necessary courage and to
realize that they share an interest in long-term peace
and stability. However, the OSCE is committed to
providing further suggestions and to facilitating a
substantial dialogue aimed at bringing about mutually
beneficial results. The longer the conflict persists, the
more complex it becomes; here, time is no one's friend.

As Western and Central Europe have
demonstrated, most recently by EU enlargement,
regional cooperation can be a catalyst for confidence-
building, good-neighbourly relations and prosperity.
That is a message that I spread to my colleagues in
South-Eastern Europe, and it is a point that I have
raised in visits to the Caucasus and to Central Asia.

In that respect, I believe that Central Asia's
security and Afghanistan's future are closely inter-
linked. In April, after visiting all five Central Asian
republics, I flew to Kabul for meetings with President
Karzai and Foreign Minister Abdullah. The OSCE has
plenty of experience to share on issues relevant to the
future of a stable Afghanistan. I believe that the OSCE
and the United Nations can work more closely with the
States in the region to promote regional security,
stability and cooperation.

The OSCE is active in a wide range of areas, and
we have good working relations with the United
Nations. I believe that we can do even more. The
OSCE will continue to cooperate with major
international players - the EU, NATO and the United
Nations - with the aim of improving their ability to
respond quickly and effectively in addressing major
contemporary challenges.

There is more room for sharing the OSCE's
experience with other parts of the world, particularly in
areas adjacent to our region. OSCE institutions and
commitments may be inspirational to others who, like
us, are searching for ways to prevent conflict, improve
bilateral and regional relations and live in secure,
pluralistic and lawful societies. That has been the
OSCE's aim for the past 30 years. And while the world
has changed since the cold war and the Helsinki Final
Act, we still face threats and challenges to security
between and within States. That is why the OSCE
continues to adapt and to work to build security
through cooperation.

