Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for her briefing.

We appreciate the continued efforts by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) to clarify all outstanding issues regarding
the initial declaration of the Syrian Government
on its chemical weapons programme. However, we
understand from the report of the Director-General of
OPCW that the Secretariat remains unable to resolve all
the identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies.

In that regard, we note that the Director-General
has sent a letter to the Syrian Government emphasizing
the importance of resolving the outstanding issues on
an expedited basis.

We would like to once again stress the importance
of meaningful and results-oriented communications
and continued consultations between the OPCW and
the Syrian Government with the clear objective of
addressing all remaining outstanding issues once and
for all. Meanwhile, we note the Fact-finding Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic (FFM) has continued its
investigation with regard to the alleged use of chemical
weapons in Douma in April. All parties should
cooperate with the FFM. in its ongoing investigation.
We look forward to the issuance of its final report on
that incident.

We also note that the FFM. has continued to collect
and analyse information related to five incidents of the
alleged use of chemical weapons in Syria. Our position
remains consistent and clear, namely, that any use of
chemical weapons in Syria by any actor under any
circumstance is totally unacceptable.

As the Secretary-General stressed in his letter
dated 29 October, "it is imperative that no impunity
for those acts be permitted by the international
community" (S/2018/97I) In that regard, we remain
convinced that restoring the unity of the Council is the
most sensible way forward to make tangible progress
towards ensuring accountability.

Finally, we would like to underscore the importance
of resuming political dialogue in order to sustainably
address the Syrian crisis.

