Mr. Selim (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I am fully confident that you will guide the
deliberations of the Council with the utmost efficiency.

A few days ago, we were horrified to witness the
slaughter of21 Egyptian citizens on abeach in the Libyan
city of Sirte. I should like to express our appreciation
to all those who have condemned that barbaric act and
expressed their condolences and their solidarity with
the Egyptian people at this pivotal moment. Expressions
of condolences and solidarity, while important, are not
sufficient to confront the dangers and existential threats
that civilized human beings face today. I have come
to the Council to affirm that what is in fact required
is to adopt strong and genuine positions and concrete
measures to face the dangers posed by Daesh and its
ilk, who are familiar only with the language of criminal
violence and killings. I have come here to say that the
blood of Egyptians is precious, just like that of any
other victims of heinous barbaric acts. I believe that
they deserve our seriousness in fighting this scourge in
every corner of the Earth.

I should like to review with the Council a little of
the history in order to shed light on how and why we
have reached the current situation in Libya. When the
international coalition decided to support and defend the
Libyan revolution in 2011, Egypt was a firm supporter
of the aspirations and hopes of our brothers in Libya.
However, at that time, we were concerned that the
ultimate benefactors would be violent extremists, given
that many of those fighting on behalf of the revolution
were in fact backed quite generously by regional Powers
that sought to install themselves in power in Libya after
the fall of the regime. Despite our repeated warnings,
through diplomatic channels, about the dangers of
relying on extremist elements that did not represent the
Libyan people, our fears were materialized. Extremists
assumed a prominent position in the post-Al-Qadhafi
regime.

The Libyan people elected a new Parliament - the
General National Congress - which was dominated by
liberal national views. Libya was the only Arab State
where violent political Islam had failed to achieve a
majority. But, owing to the limitless financial and
military resources that violent political Islam possessed,
it was soon able to superimpose its will on the Libyan
people's true aspirations. Threats, kidnapping and
assassinations of members of Parliament and attacks
on Government institutions, with the aim of passing
laws and setting policies, soon became the norm. That
seriously undermined Government institutions and
enabled extremists to place those institutions firmly
under their control.

No doubt, everyone remembers the circumstances
under which the political isolation law was passed, a
law that effectively barred many Libyans who did
not subscribe to political Islam from running for
Government office. Among them was the Speaker of
the General National Congress. In addition, there were
other indications of the deterioration of the situation
in Libya, including the kidnapping of Prime Minister
Ali Zeidan and attacks on Embassies. Attacks on
Embassies, the assassination of the United States
Ambassador in Benghazi, the kidnapping of Egyptian
Embassy staff and other grave incidents are listed in
the letter I addressed to the Secretary-General and the
President of the Security Council on 17 February.

However, the international community's actions
were insufficient to preserve the security of the Libyan
people and those of Libya's neighbouring States on the
Mediterranean. Nor did the international community
move effectively to counter the threats posed to
international peace and security. When parliamentary
elections were held in June 2014, in which political
Islam gained only 10 per cent of seats, it confirmed
once more the moderation of the Libyan people and
their clear inclination to support democratic forces. At
the time, Egypt warned that extremists would again
impose their domination through the use of force
in an attempt to accomplish what they failed to do
through the ballot box. Nevertheless, the international
community took little notice when extremists resorted
to arms and occupied Tripoli, along with its airports
and Government institutions, thereby forcing the
legitimate Parliament to vacate the capital and to resort
to holding its sessions elsewhere in Libya. That, in turn,
prompted ludicrous objections from the extremists that
the Parliament was convening its sessions outside the
Libyan capital.

I have no doubt that the Council has followed those
and other developments closely. Therefore, I will not
delve into this any more. I do, however, wish to reiterate
them today, because of the complacency of some in
confronting those who seek to impose their will through
the use of arms. Unfortunately, this comes at a time that
is crucial in the history of the Arab people - when
democracy and the free expression of their will should
have enabled them to advance and modernize their
societies, and not regress to the Dark Ages. Today, in
the light of the enormity of the danger the recent events
in Libya pose, not only to that country's people or its
neighbouring States, but to humankind as a whole,
we simply no longer have the luxury to repeat past
mistakes. Our peoples will judge us.

As the international community, we have to assume
the historic responsibility placed on our shoulders and
on the shoulders of the Council in dealing with the
clear threat to international peace and security posed
by the current situation in Libya. If we are to rectify
past complacency in dealing seriously with the Libyan
crisis, we then must actively cooperate to support
the Council of Deputies and the Libyan Government
in order to enable them to extend their legitimate
authority and sovereignty to all Libyan territory and
to combat terrorism wherever it exists in all parts of
Libya - north, south, east and west. That will require
the following measures.

First, legal restrictions placed on the ability of the
legitimate Government and the Libyan National Army
to procure their defence needs should be lifted so that
they may be able to confront terrorism and achieve
stability and security.

Secondly, concrete measures should be taken to
prevent the acquisition of arms by all non-State militias
and entities through the imposition of a naval blockade
on arms being sent to areas of Libya outside the control
of the legitimate authorities.

Thirdly, States wishing to assist the legitimate
Libyan Government in confronting terrorism and
imposing security should be allowed to do so in the light
of the severe difficulties the legitimate Government
faces in that regard, with the condition that such
assistance be provided in coordination with the Libyan
Government and with its approval.

Egypt has decided to respond to the requests and
needs of the Government of Libya and has provided
military assistance. We will not hesitate to confront the
terrorist threat that challenges our region with its ugliest
face. This despicable organization is seeking to spread
terror throughout the Arab and Islamic world - from
Iraq to Syria to Libya and through them to the heart of
Europe, which is the closest continent to our region and
the most susceptible to the threat that this and similar
organizations pose.

We call for full support for Arab League resolution
7852 (2015), adopted on 15 January, which calls for
extending all forms of support to the Libyan Government
and asks the Security Council to lift the restrictions
imposed on arming the Libyan National Army. We
fervently hope that the Security Council will respond
positively to those calls. I trust that the Permanent
Mission of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan will
circulate today a draft resolution for discussion in the
coming days that will address the actions required to
achieve a successful conclusion to the Libyan crisis.
For this threat is a most dangerous one.

Before concluding my statement, I wish to
reaffirm that Egypt will continue to support the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Bernardino Leon, who is making great and
appreciated efforts in Libya to achieve a political
settlement to the crisis through the establishment of an
inclusive Government that represents all political forces
that have renounced violence and terrorism and that
seek a negotiated settlement to the conflict. At the same
time, I wish to reiterate that, while a political solution is
an absolute necessity, it is not an alternative to militarily
confronting terrorism. I have no doubt that, through the
current political dialogue, the Government of national
unity will continue to seek to combat terrorism as a
matter of priority, just as it has been a matter of priority
under the current Government, led by Prime Minister
Abdallah Al-Thinni.

We call upon the States represented here to
do their utmost to support the legitimate House of
Representatives. Waging the international community's
war against terrorism requires the active participation
of a national partner. We would like to deal with the
honourable partners in Libya, and not those who are
acting against the interests of their country. If the
objective is to promote a political solution in order
to let some impose their will on the Libyan people, I
would ask the international community to make every
possible effort to support the legitimate House of
Representatives. The war against terrorism requires
a national partner. There is no better partner than the
Parliament of the Libyan people, which was elected
through the ballot box. The current Government or
its successor will gain the confidence of the House of
Representatives if Mr. Leon is successful in his efforts,
as we hope he will be.

In conclusion, I thank Council members for their
time. I again express our sincere hope that the Council
will deal with the crisis in Libya as a matter of extreme
urgency, the utmost priority and as an issue that requires
concerted efforts to confront a common danger that
seeks to reverse the forward course of humankind. I
trust that we as a community with a clear vision of its
goals and aspirations will succeed in our mission.

