Mr. Djinnit: I wish to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on taking this important and timely
initiative on the civilian aspects of conflict
management and peace-building. My participation in
this debate, on behalf of the African Union (AU)
Commission, stems from the long-standing partnership
for peace between the African Union and the United
Nations. It is also a testimony to our vested interest in
the present deliberations of the Security Council and
the outcome of this meeting, as Africa, unfortunately,
remains high on the peace-building agenda of the
United Nations.

Moreover, the African Union, which is
increasingly involved in peace support operations, is
paying attention to this evolving debate, particularly
since the adoption of the Brahimi report (8/2000/809).

The Commission of the African Union welcomes
the observations and recommendations made in the
background paper (S/2004/722, annex), and it will give
them serious consideration as the African Union
continues with its proactive agenda in response to
crisis and conflict situations.

The African Union has had limited experience in
peace support operations. As members are aware,
under the Cairo Declaration of 1993, establishing the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, the
OAU was not expected to undertake peacekeeping
operations that were considered the exclusive
responsibility of the Security Council. Rather, it was
then required to deploy observation missions of limited
scope and duration.

It was on the basis of that limited mandate that
the OAU had deployed a number of observer missions
in various conflict areas such as Rwanda, Burundi, the
Comoros, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Ethiopia-Eritrea. In some of those missions, the need to
deploy civilian personnel arose. For instance, the OAU
deployed observer missions in the Comoros at various

stages of the reconciliation process in that country,
essentially for confidence-building. We deployed
groups of gendarmerie elements that were better
prepared than military observers to interact with the
civilian population and authorities. That experience
proved to be successful.

The situation has changed under the African
Union. In the Protocol establishing the Peace and
Security Council, the heads of State or Government
expressed their strong determination to enhance the
capacity of the African Union to bring about peace,
security and stability on the continent.

Article 6 of the Protocol establishing the Peace
and Security Council delineates its responsibilities in
the following areas: promotion of peace, security and
stability in Africa; early warning and preventive
diplomacy; peacemaking; peace support operations and
intervention, pursuant to article 4 of the Constitutive
Act of the African Union; peace-building and post-
conflict reconstruction; humanitarian action; and
disaster management.

Furthermore, the Protocol recognizes the
importance of an effective cooperative relationship
between the civilian and military components of any
mission. Article 13 of the Protocol provides for a
stand-by force - "civilian and military components"
to be "ready for rapid deployment at appropriate
notice".

Based on that mandate, the African Union, soon
after its establishment, was called upon to demonstrate
its resolve to respond to conflict situations and
emerging crises. It had to do so despite the constraints
inherited from the OAU, including the lack of the
capacity to respond to crisis and conflict situations in a
rapid, timely and effective manner. Against that
background, the African Union had no alternative but
to deploy peace-support operations in Burundi to pave
the way for the deployment of a peacekeeping
operation by the United Nations - which has been
done since then - and, more recently, in Darfur, where
the African Union is confronted with an immense
challenge.

Our still-limited experience in the Darfur region
of the Sudan, through the establishment of the
Ceasefire Commission and the deployment of the
African mission in the Sudan, revealed the need to
expand the composition of the mission to include
civilian components in order to address the civilian,
human rights and humanitarian aspects of the crisis,
affecting, in particular, women, children and the
elderly. It also revealed the need to include women in
the AU mission to address the specific plight of women
in that region. This, I believe, deserves special
consideration in future peace-support operations. The
linkage with civil society organizations also merits
particular attention.

In deciding to deploy peace-support operations in
Burundi and Darfur, the African Union was indeed
aware of its limitations. However, it took up the
challenge, in the expectation that the United Nations
and other partners would provide the requisite support.
In the process, the African Union gained valuable
experience, which needs to be built upon.

I wish to seize this opportunity to pay tribute to
the United Nations and its Secretary-General and to the
Security Council for their commitment to peace in the
continent and for their constant support of the efforts
of the African Union and its regional communities.

I wish also to express gratitude and appreciation
to our other partners, which provided the African
Union with financial, logistical and material support
that enabled our continental organization to assume its
responsibility. Their support is all the more necessary
now that our organization is called upon to assume a
greater role in peace-support operations.

As I stated earlier, with the establishment of the
African Union, our continental organization is engaged
in building its peace and security architecture, at the
core of which is the Peace and Security Council,
provided with the mandate of authorizing the
deployment of peace-support operations, including
peacekeeping and intervention. Needless to say, as part
of the process of enhancing the effectiveness of the
Peace and Security Council, our efforts should be
geared towards the establishment of the African
standby force by 2010 as agreed upon, to provide the
African Union with the tool to implement its decisions.

However, as we strive to achieve that goal, our
continental organization is faced with the challenge of
building a rapid-reaction capability that will enable it
to bring a value-added element and have a comparative
advantage in the context of the partnership for peace
we want to strengthen with the United Nations and
other partners within the international community. In
that endeavour, the African Union would rely on the
continued support of the United Nations within the
framework of Chapter VIII of its Charter. It would also
count on the strong support of its partners to build its
capacity effectively to plan, deploy and manage peace-
support operations.

