Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to join others in congratulating
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General and
Head ofthe United Nations Office ofCounter-Terrorism;
Ms. Michele Coninsx, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate;
and Ms. Joana Cook, Senior Research Fellow at the
International Centre for the Study of Radicalisation and
Political Violence, for their informative briefings.

My delegation notes with deep concern that,
despite the military and strategic setbacks they have
suffered, Da'esh and its associated individuals, groups,
businesses and entities continue to pose a serious
threat to world peace and security. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes the determination of the United
Nations and its constant support to Member States
to meet the persistent challenge of the fight against
terrorism within the framework of a comprehensive and
coordinated approach.

According to the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/770), many challenges remain, including
the gradual transformation of Da'esh into a nexus of
franchises, as well as the threat posed by the return
and relocation of foreign terrorist fighters. In addition,
Da'esh and its associated groups are using new
information and communication technologies, which
further complicate the fight against terrorist group
financing, recruitment and propaganda activities.
These new challenges force States to refine and
coordinate their tools and responses to match the scale
of the scourge.

My delegation notes with concern that the actions
of Da'esh affect the entire world. In Africa, a significant
number of combatants affiliated with Da'esh remain
very active in Somalia, in the greater Sahel and in West
and North Africa, notably in Egypt and Libya, where
there are 3,000 to 4,000 foreign terrorist fighters.
Terrorist groups continue their destabilization activities
through increasingly sophisticated armed attacks. They
also have expanded their control over smuggling routes

and hamper the free movement of goods and people in
affected areas. In Africa, for example, States already
weakened by all manner of difficulties will be forced to
allocate a significant part of their budgets to combating
their enemies in asymmetrical wars that undermine
their development efforts.

In view of that situation, Cote d'Ivoire urges
solidarity and cooperation among all actors and
advocates an improvement in national and regional
counter-terrorism capacities. In that regard, we
welcome the signing, on 23 February, of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Pact, a framework for
cooperation among the heads of United Nations entities
responsible for combating terrorism and preventing
violent extremism. My country also welcomes the
strengthening of cooperation between the Office
of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, through high-level
bilateral consultations in the regions most affected by
terrorism and violent extremism.

Such cooperation is essential and enables the
follow-up of the evaluation visits in order to ensure
that the technical assistance proposed meets the
recommendations and targets the priority needs of each
State. My delegation welcomes the unanimous adoption
by the General Assembly, on 26 June, of resolution
72/284, on the review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, with a view to defeating
terrorism through cooperation.

Lastly, my country welcomed the conclusions of
the first High-level Conference of Heads of Counter-
Terrorism Agencies of Member States, held on 28 and
29 June at Headquarters. The meeting provided a forum
for exchanges on strengthening multilateral cooperation,
including innovative public-private partnerships, so as
to improve the sharing of sensitive information.

The fight against terrorism is undeniably a national
and international security emergency. No matter how
well developed, the security responses proposed by
current counter-terrorism strategies will be truly
effective only if they are bolstered by bold policies
to combat poverty and youth unemployment, which
are sources of radicalization and violent extremism.
Cote d'Ivoire is therefore of the opinion that terrorist
movements leave us no choice but to pool our means of
fighting them, within the framework of coherent and
coordinated strategies for the fight.

