The President (spoke in Spanish): I welcome the
presence of the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki Moon, at this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/ZOl6/1051, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations. It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution before it.

May I take it that it is the wish of the Security Council
to adopt draft resolution S/2016/1051 by acclamation?

There being no objection, I declare the draft
resolution adopted by acclamation, as resolution 2324
(2016).

I shall now make a statement on behalf of
the Council.

Mr. Secretary-General, it is a great honour to
convey to Your Excellency, on behalf of the members
of the Security Council, our profound gratitude for the
continuous support you have provided to the Council
in the discharge of its primary duty, the maintenance
of international peace and security. During the course
of your two terms, you have shared in the efforts of
the Council, brought potential threats to its attention,
and called on us to overcome our differences when
needed, making best use of the authority and powers
granted to the Secretary-General by the Charter of the
United Nations.

Today, we pay tribute to the perseverance, devotion
and flexibility that you have shown in the performance
of your duties, and to your unrelenting determination to
serve "We the peoples" above any other consideration,
as you committed to do when you took the oath of office
10 years ago.

Two remarkable successes should be highlighted
from your vast legacy: the Sustainable Development
Goals and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change,
both arising from your negotiating skills and diplomatic
acumen, and both reflecting the driving force of your
action - promoting solidarity throughout the world
and among different generations so that the men and
women of tomorrow might inherit a sustainable planet
and a safer world.

You have also embraced the cause of human rights,
advocating for fairer and more egalitarian societies
where the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
all human beings are fully recognized, protected and
promoted. Under your leadership, the Human Rights
Council was created and UN-Women established, and
you appointed the first Special Envoy on Youth. Thanks
to you, Mr. Secretary-General, the most vulnerable or
marginalized have been increasingly heard and assisted
by the United Nations.

During the decade in which you have been at the
helm of the Organization, you have worked tirelessly to
ensure that humanitarian aid reaches those who need it
most. You held the first World Humanitarian Summit in
Istanbul this spring to remind the world that 130 million
people today need humanitarian assistance to survive.
You have been at the forefront in placing the issue of
refugees and migrants at the heart ofthe concerns ofthe
international community. You have also advocated for a
collective action to more equitably share responsibility
and to reinforce our common effort in addressing this
issue. Finally, Mr. Secretary-General, you have not
ceased promoting action to relieve the suffering of
those populations in need.

Under your guidance and leadership, the United
Nations has undertaken multiple reforms. I would
like to emphasize, given its particular relevance to the
Council, the three reviews carried out in 2015 on peace
operations, the peacebuilding architecture, and the
women, peace and security agenda. All three call for
greater efforts in the area of prevention, for increasing
the efficiency of peacekeeping operations and for a
greater commitment to accountability. In that regard,
we very much appreciate the zero-tolerance policy with
respect to sexual exploitation and abuse by Blue Helmets
that you have launched with such determination and
which redounds to the legitimacy and credibility of our
peacekeeping operations and indeed the entire United
Nations system. Those achievements are a testament
to the moral authority and institutional potential that
the Office of the Secretary-General possesses. They
demonstrate clearly that no aim is too high and no
agenda too ambitious as long as it is accompanied
by an unwavering commitment to the Charter of the
United Nations.
Today's world is very different from that of
10 years ago, when you took office as Secretary-
General. At the helm of the Secretariat, you have
ensured that the Organization has made the most of
technological advances and has prepared itself to
meet the challenges of globalization, technological
change and new and emerging threats. Now that your
mandate is ending, it is only right that we commend
your untiring efforts to remain in direct contact with
all our world leaders, to listen and offer your good
offices and to strengthen United Nations collaboration
with regional organizations all over the globe. You have
also encouraged the United Nations system to open up
to partnerships with the private sector and reinforced
collaboration with the academic world, as well as
strengthening the participation and involvement of civil
society in the Organization's daily work. In a few days
you will pass the baton to your successor, Mr. Antonio
Guterres, and we are confident that he will perform the
duties entrusted to him in an exemplary manner. He
can count on our wholehearted support as he tackles
his responsibilities.

That universal author Miguel de Cervantes, who
died 400 years ago this year, said that good deeds never
lack a reward. On behalf of the Security Council, and in
the confidence that this promise will undoubtedly come
true, I would like to offer you our warmest wishes for
prosperity, health and success in the new stage of your
life that is about to begin.

(spoke in Korean; translation provided by the delegation)

I thank you for all your efforts and wish you good
luck in your future endeavours.

(spoke in Spanish)

I do not know if you understood any of that, but it
was meant very affectionately.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.

