Mr. Dah (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel (UNOWAS) for the quality of his briefing
on the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/649), fully
briefing us on the latest developments in the region
and the activities carried out within the framework of
the UNOWAS mandate.
Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the encouraging progress
made in the region, particularly in the areas of
democratic transition and governance, since the
previous report ofthe Secretary-General (S/2017/l 104).
However, we remain concerned about the persistence
of the multifaceted and complex challenges that
threaten the stability and development of the subregion
and the Sahel.

Indeed, in addition to terrorism and violent
extremism, the region is also exposed to transnational
organized crime, cross-border armed groups and the
intensification of violent conflicts between nomadic
herders and farmers. Moreover, the relative weakness
of State institutions, which impacts the provision of
public services, is exacerbating the already difficult
living conditions of millions of people in the region.
In order to mitigate the damaging consequences
of those phenomena, it is important to adopt a
comprehensive approach involving local populations
and the Governments of the States concerned, regional
organizations and the United Nations with a view to
working collectively to find lasting solutions.

One of the major obstacles to the development of
the region remains the insecurity caused by terrorist
groups, such as Boko Haram, Islamist groups, acts of
piracy and armed robbery ofthe population. Initiatives
to address those threats would therefore benefit from
being accelerated and strengthened. My country
supports and encourages the States of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to continue to take
the measures necessary to ensure that the Joint Task
Force reaches its full operational capacity. In that
regard, we welcome the Secretary-General's personal
commitment to supporting the operationalization of
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. I therefore urge donors to
deliver on their financial pledges, which are essential to
the ability of the Multinational Joint Task Force to play
its full role. Furthermore, my delegation welcomes the
efforts of the Task Force, the intensified interventions
of which have cut Boko Haram's operational resources
and scope of action in the Lake Chad basin.

With regard to security governance and the political
situation, my country welcomes the progress made in
security sector reform in The Gambia and Burkina
Faso. My delegation also notes with satisfaction the
peaceful democratic transition in Liberia, as well as
the recent credible elections held in Sierra Leone. In
view of the upcoming elections in several countries of
the region, my country echoes the Secretary-General's
appeal to national stakeholders to work together
to ensure a level playing field and create a climate
conducive to the organization of peaceful, inclusive
and credible elections.

While the economic prospects of all West African
countries are encouraging, more remains to be done
to offset the low purchasing power of populations
linked, according to the African Development Bank,
to high levels of income inequality. In the Sahel,
too, economic indicators do not inspire optimism. In
addition, inequality, unemployment and the lack of
opportunities further undermine the stability of the
area. That is why my delegation endorses the analysis
of the Economic Commission for Africa, which
advocates addressing the root causes of the crisis,
ensuring the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and offering investment
opportunities in the Sahel.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, the
alarming figures noted in the Secretary-General's
report challenge and call on us to pool our efforts to
find solutions to the plight of the 6.9 million people
in situations of food crisis in the Sahel and the
2.3 million people displaced in the Lake Chad basin.
Moreover, the resurgence of conflicts between farming
communities and herders, especially in periods of
transhumance, amplifies regional instability. With
regard to the last point, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the
initiative of UNOWAS and the Economic Community
of West African States to develop a regional action
plan on transhumance.

My delegation believes that only concerted,
planned and coordinated joint action can effectively
contribute to the stabilization of the Sahel region.
In responding to the Sahel crisis, the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel (UNISS) will
help support development processes, promote good
governance and improve security. In that context, the
United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel (2018-2022)
aims to support efforts under way in the region to
achieve sustainable development and realize the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and Agenda
2063. My delegation therefore urgently calls for the
effective recalibration of UNISS, which will help us
to emphasize the area's assets, on which its future
will depend, while looking beyond the challenges
it currently is facing. Moreover, gender issues, in
particular women's role in peace processes, remain
relevant, given the first-hand accounts we heard on
the subject during the Security Council debate on
women, peace and security in the Sahel on 10 July (see S/PV.8306).

The mission led by Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed to South Sudan, Chad and the
Niger clearly attests to women's determined call for
their inclusion, representation and participation in
peace processes, decision-making and governance
mechanisms at all levels of society. My delegation
therefore believes that it is important to encourage
the countries of the region to create the conditions
necessary for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) through the development and implementation
of their national action plans, with a view to robustly
involving women in conflict prevention and resolution,
as well as peacekeeping.

A reading of the Secretary-General's report
sufficiently provides us with insight into the security,
humanitarian, governance and development issues
prevailing in West Africa and the Sahel. In that
regard, my country welcomes the work of UNOWAS
and fully supports the activities of the Special
Representative in the region. As a relevant preventive
diplomacy tool, UNOWAS contributes significantly to
crisis management and mitigation, while promoting
dialogue and the implementation of reforms in the
region. My delegation therefore firmly encourages the
continuation and strengthening of the good offices of
UNOWAS within the framework of frank and fruitful
cooperation with national and regional partners,
with a view to creating collective momentum aimed
at sustaining peace and development. Cote d'Ivoire
reaffirms its full support for the work of UNOWAS
and assures the Secretary-General of its support for his
initiatives to achieve the goals ofpeace and sustainable
development in West Africa and the Sahel.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that
Cote d'lvoire will continue its cooperation with
the delegation of Sweden on drafting a presidential
statement on the activities of UNOWAS to be submitted
in the coming weeks.

