The President (interpretation from Russian): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

Today, the Security Council has again returned to the
subject of violations of the norms of international
humanitarian law in the former Yugoslavia. With deep
regret, we are obliged to note that the basic provisions of
resolution 1019 (1995) have yet to be implemented and that
the demands and appeals of the Security Council continue
to be ignored. The report submitted by the Secretary-
General on Srebrenica and Zepa, as well as the most recent
reports from the field, attest to the need for the Council to
continue to give priority attention to this issue.

Russia's principled position remains unchanged. We
firmly condemn any violation of international humanitarian
law and human rights on the territory of the former
Yugoslavia, no matter by whom or where it is perpetrated.
We firmly believe that the Security Council's reaction to
such violations cannot be selective or one-sided. If we
justly and firmly condemn one party for ignoring the
international community's demands, we cannot skirt in
silence and with closed eyes the obvious fact of unlawful
activity by other parties to the conflict. We are satisfied that
the one-sided nature of the initial draft resolution has been
corrected in the final text.

The resolution is based on the Secretary-General's
report, which cites, inter alia, information and evidence of
violations by the Bosnian Serbs of humanitarian norms in
Srebrenica and Zepa and in the region of Banja Luka and
Sanski Most. Sharing the concern expressed on this issue
by many delegations, we support the resolution's demand
that the representatives of the United Nations, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
other international agencies be given immediate and
unimpeded access to the regions where such activities are
assumed to have taken place.
We must also obtain an answer to the question of
the fate of all missing persons. Here, there can be no
ethnic or any other kind of selectivity. It is therefore
important that the resolution contains a provision granting
international personnel access to persons detained by all
parties. Representatives of the ICRC have often attested
to the fact that each of the Bosnian parties is remiss in
this respect.

In respect of the need to react to any activity of the
parties that violates the letter and spirit of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, we are pleased
that the resolution clearly expresses the Council's
condemnation of recent events in the area of Mrkonjic-
Grad and Sipovo. In these areas, units of Bosnian Croats
have implemented a scorched-earth tactic in territories
that, in accordance with the conditions of the Peace
Agreement, are allotted to the Republika Srpska. It is
precisely the Bosnian Croats who are designated by the
acronym contained in the resolution, "HVO", which for
some reason the sponsors decided not to spell out despite
our proposals for making the text intelligible to the
average reader. The sponsors' refusal to call things by
their names - their full names - does not help to allay
suspicions regarding the perpetuation of double standards
in addressing problems of humanitarian law and human
rights in the former Yugoslavia.

In continuing the subject of the territories the status
of which will undergo change, we should like once again
to draw attention to the serious threat of a potential mass
exodus of the Serbian population from Sarajevo, the
looting of their property and even the danger of physical
reprisals. In this connection we take very seriously the
most recent statements by the individual representatives
of the leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina which are by
no means helping to relieve our apprehensions on this
matter.

In our view, the Council is obliged to continue to
keep focusing on the fate of hundreds of thousands of
refugees whose presence on the territory of the former
Yugoslavia, in addition to the fact that it already
constitutes an unprecedented humanitarian tragedy in
Europe, is by itself a serious destabilizing potential, one

 

fraught with the possibility of additional hotbeds of inter-
ethnic tension and conflicts.

Supporting the demands of the resolution to all States
and parties to the conflict in the former Yugoslavia to
cooperate with the International Tribunal, Russia once again
reaffirms its position on the inadmissibility of making its
activity one-sided in nature. The task of the Tribunal is to
discover the truth and to give their just desserts to those
individuals whose guilt for crimes against humanity will be
established, regardless of their ethnic or religious affiliation.

It is inadmissible for anyone, including the Tribunal
and even the Security Council itself, to attempt to make use
of the sphere of international humanitarian law and human
rights as an instrument for achieving political goals.

The problems regarding the implementation of
resolution 1009 (1995) and many provisions of resolution
1019 (1995) continue to exist. This aspect of violations of
international humanitarian law will have to be given special
consideration by the Council on the basis of the Secretary-
General's report.

As to the letter of Ambassador Jovanovic', as
members of the Council are aware, it has not been
published as a document of the Security Council.
However, a great deal has been said about it at today's
formal meeting. Therefore, I believe it is necessary to
make this clear: the letter was indeed distributed at
consultations of the Security Council and was the subject
of discussion. As a result of this discussion, the President
of the Security Council met with Ambassador J ovanovie,
communicated the position of the Security Council,
listened to his explanations and then informed the
members of the Council and made the appropriate
statement to the press. In so doing, we believe the
question was terminated.

Having signed the Peace Agreement a few days ago
in Paris, all the parties undertook an additional
responsibility to abide by universally recognized norms of
international humanitarian law and human rights.
Unswerving implementation by them of their obligations
is a most important condition for the successful
development of the peace process and the achievement of
a just and lasting peace in the Balkans.

I shall now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on the agenda. The
Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 7.05 p.m.
