Mr. Koenders (spoke in French): It is a great honour
and pleasure for me to address the Security Council
today. The thirty-first progress report of the Secretary-
General (S/2012/964) on the United Nations Operation
in C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI), which Council members
have before them, provides an update on the situation
on the ground since my last briefing on 26 July 2012
(see S/PV.6808) and the implementation of resolution
2062 (2012).

Eighteen months on from the post-electoral crisis
and following the difficult weeks of summer and early
autumn, marked by alarming security incidents, Cote
d'Ivoire is now at an important turning point. Under
the determined leadership of President Ouattara, the
country is making encouraging progress towards
economic growth, peace and stability. Most leaders
and people want to turn the page and move towards the
future. At the same time, to ensure that the progress
made is robust and lasting in a political and security
situation that remains sensitive at both the national
and regional levels, several urgent structural measures
must be taken and implemented in the coming months,
especially in the closely interlinked areas of security,
political dialogue, justice and reconciliation.
The year 2013 will be an important one for Cote
d'Ivoire. The situation is encouraging but remains
fragile. Progress must be made simultaneously in the
areas of security sector reform (SSR), disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR), and political
dialogue and reconciliation so that C6te d'Ivoire can act
as a pillar of stability in its troubled subregion.

I would like to turn first to the question of political
dialogue and reconciliation by underlining a number
of commendable Government initiatives that have
recently contributed to an easing of political tensions.
I am thinking in particular of the provisional release
of political detainees in late December 2012, several
meetings of the Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, the most recent of which was held this
morning, and the upcoming meeting between Prime
Minister Duncan and the the Front populaire ivoirien.

These efforts are critical as significant political
divisions and tensions society still exist within Ivorian.
As Special Representative of the Secretary-General, I
use my good offices to encourage inclusive processes
and facilitate reconciliation. I welcome the easing
of tensions in recent weeks, which I believe offers a
genuine opportunity. I recall here the terms of resolution
2062 (2012), adopted by the Council last July, which
welcomed Government initiatives to

"enhance political dialogue with the political
opposition, including extra-parliamentary political
parties" (resolution 2062 (2012), para. 11),

and further called on the Government to "continue to
step up concrete measures in this regard and ensure
political space for the opposition" (ibid.). At the same
time, the resolution very clearly urges the opposition
parties to play a constructive role in reconciliation.

Moreover, open, transparent, free and regular
elections could be an opportunity to bolster the
democratic process in C6te D'Ivoire and contribute to
national reconciliation. Resolution 2062 (2012) calls for
the coming local elections to

"foster political inclusiveness and reconciliation,
considering proper timing, security conditions and
relevant electoral reform" (ibia'., para. 16).

The elections were scheduled for late February, but
this week the President announced a delay of several
weeks in order to "allow all major political parties to
participate". As Council members know, pursuant to our
mandate and in coordination with the United Nations
Development Programme, UNOCI will provide limited
support to the local elections, as its electoral assistance
division was shut down, although a small number of
experts have been retained to support the process.

Allow me now to raise the critical question of
security. The Government has launched significant
reforms. A comprehensive SSR strategy, which defines
immediate and long-term priorities for national
security, has been drawn up and a secretariat has
been created to pilot the reform's implementation.
It provides for key phases for the establishment of a
disciplined, republican and responsible armed force,
enhanced effectiveness of the gendarmerie and police,
and strengthened protection for civilians throughout
the country.

At the same time, the Government has adopted
a national DDR policy and created a single authority
in charge of DDR. It is is now imperative that cote
D'Ivoire begin implementing these two programmes
in a concrete fashion. SSR and DDR are critical tools
for consolidating stability in the country, and are also
among the most arduous of tasks.

In close cooperation with its bilateral and
multilateral partners, UNOCI has made its expertise
in those two fields available to the Government,
with a stress on reinsertion and reintegration, which
are critical to any DDR process. We appreciate the
Government's move to launch the DDR process as soon
as possible, and we encourage it to pursue that dynamic
on the basis of three priorities: a politically balanced
process; a database of ex-combatants with credible
numbers and clearly defined eligibility criteria to which
UNOCI has full access, as demanded in resolution 2062
(2012); and meaningful and innovative reinsertion and
reintegration programmes.

With respect to security reform, the Secretary-
General's report provides detailed information on
the priorities requiring sustained follow-up. I note
the importance of launching, immediately and on an
urgent basis, initiatives aimed at building confidence
within and among the police, the gendarmerie and the
armed forces. Such an approach is essential not only
to security but also to the other national priorities, in
particular reconciliation and political dialogue.

(spoke in English)

Over the past six months, cote d'Ivoire has
continued to make important progress in terms of
economic development. As noted in the report of the
Secretary-General, the economy is on a fast track to
recovery and growth rates are impressive. Following the
recent meetings of the Consultative Group held in Paris
on 4 and 5 December 2012, at which donors pledged
over $8 billion to fill the funding gap of the country's
national development plan for 2013-2015, investments
in employment and basic social services, notably health
and education in vulnerable areas, are now particularly
critical, as is sustained focus on good governance and
fighting corruption, and continued coordination with
donors to follow through on the commitments made in
Paris.

It is also noteworthy that State authority is being
restored throughout the country and that the National
Assembly is functional. Before going on recess in
December 2012, the Assembly passed some important
bills, including one relating to the ratification of the
Rome Statute. Finally, a new and smaller Government
was formed in late November under the leadership of
Prime Minister Duncan.

While Cote d'Ivoire has registered remarkable
progress on several fronts, significant challenges
remain to be addressed in 2013. The root causes of
instability and potential triggers of violence still need
to be tackled, including some of the issues I have
mentioned, related to governance, justice and human
rights, as well as land tenure and identity.

As Members of the Council are aware, between
August and October 2012 there was a spate of attacks
targeting national security forces in and around Abidjan,
and along the borders with Ghana and Liberia, with the
aim of destabilizing President Ouattara's Government.
Although their intensity has diminished somewhat
in recent weeks, these attacks have highlighted both
a higher degree of paramilitary organization within
opposition groups and vulnerabilities in the national
security and law enforcement institutions. They
also highlighted the need to prioritize SSR and DDR
programmes, as mentioned earlier, including support
to the police and judicial actors in investigating such
attacks more professionally and rapidly.

To address those challenges and, more generally,
prevailing insecurity in western Cote d'Ivoire,
including criminal activities, armed robbery, the illegal
circulation of weapons and cross-border movements,
which also affect international development partners
and the private sector, the Government has responded
swiftly, including recently by conducting a joint
operation with Liberia.
For our part, UNOCI has strengthened its military
presence along the borders with Liberia and Ghana.
As per the mandate assigned by the Council to the
mission, protection of civilians remains a major
priority, requiring concerted efforts on the part of the
Government and UNOCI, without prejudice to the
Government's primary responsibility to protect its
people. In order to maximize synergies and enhance
the implementation of its mandate at the local level
and throughout the country, we have, in cooperation
with the United Nations Country Team, strengthened
the presence of civilian personnel in a number of field
offices assisting the process of conflict prevention
and mitigation. This process also aims at fostering a
more integrated approach between the mission and the
country team, as the Council requested at our most
recent meeting, and more proactive outreach to other
key actors on the ground, such as non-governmental
organizations, civil society and the private sector.

Meanwhile, and with a view to strengthening the
important tool of inter-mission cooperation, UNOCI
and the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
have also been coordinating actions and the use of
assets in the border area, in support of the increased
cooperation between Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia, notably
through the use of the three armed helicopters that
shortly will be transferred from UNMIL to UNOCI for
cross-border operations. The two missions have also
enhanced information-sharing and regular meetings,
and are developing a cross-border communication
strategy within the context of intermission cooperation.

UNOCI is also strengthening its cooperation with
the United Nations country team in Ghana on issues
of common concern, notably that of Ivorian refugees
living in Ghana. I would also like to bring to the
Council's attention the fact that, in response to recent
developments in Mali and as part of prudent planning,
UNOCI has increased its vigilance and security
preparedness along Cote d'Ivoire's northern border
with Mali and in support of Ivorian efforts to secure the
border. The United Nations humanitarian community,
meanwhile, is finalizing contingency planning efforts.

Turning to human rights, violence has been
reported during attacks on civilians and security forces,
as well as during operations and arrests undertaken by
security forces. I condemn all violence and violations
of human rights. UNOCI is engaged in activities aimed
at preventing and promoting the respect of human
rights, especially those of women and children, and the
mission has also strengthened training on human rights
for Ivoirian security forces and provides assistance on
issues related to the justice reform and investigations.

I am troubled about continued reports of sexual
violence. Perceived impunity remains an important
concern, and recent violations - including those
in Bonon and Nahibly - have to be thoroughly
investigated, as requested by the Council. It is essential
that those who are responsible for gross violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
be held accountable, irrespective of their political
affiliation and in accordance with the country's
international obligations. Improvements in the justice
and penitentiary systems have been triggered and can
be further enhanced to combat impunity in a sustainable
way and improve access to equitable justice.

In conclusion, the Government of Cote d'Ivoire
will continue to need the support and engagement of
its international and regional partners, including the
United Nations, in order to consolidate the significant
gains achieved and address remaining challenges and
the root causes - notably land and identity issues - of
the repeated crises that have engulfed the country on
so many occasions over the past decades. This will be
a critical year for cote d'Ivoire and for UNOCI, which
I hope will continue to enjoy the strong and sustained
support of the Security Council. In the context of a
volatile regional security situation, the stability and
economic success of Cote d'Ivoire are more important
than ever to the stability of West Africa.

As requested by the Council, a Headquarters
assessment mission will be deployed in early February.
The mission will thoroughly assess the situation on the
ground, assist the mission in developing benchmarks
with the Government, as requested, to measure
progress, and prepare a special report to the Council to
be issued by 31 March.

