Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea thanks
Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, and Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Miroslav Jenea for their briefings,
which, unfortunately, continue to illustrate the very
troubling humanitarian situation of the Rohingya
people. We hope that the situation will continue to
improve since the Council meeting (see S/PV.8085) on
6 November 2017 during which presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/22, along with other appeals, urged the
Government of Myanmar to ensure that there would be
no further excessive use of the military force against
Rakhine state.

For the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, the issue of
the Rohingya people, which fundamentally dates back
to the colonial Administration of the previous century
and involve complex historical, national and religious
factors, requires a comprehensive approach. Current
objectives and temporary solutions must go hand in
hand with long-term goals and the search for a solution
that analyses the root causes. Poverty is a major source
ofinstability and conflict. The international community
should pay more attention to, and support the reduction
of, local poverty, focus on development by alleviating
poverty and seek peace through development in order
to definitively solve the problem.

The images and reports we are seeing on the
situation of the Rohingya people in Myanmar are truly
worrying and can only be described as a humanitarian
crisis. According to recent statistics, there are 680,000
Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh, while 176,000 of
the Rohingya who remain in northern Rakhine suffer
from severe food insecurity. That the most vulnerable
population is going through such a difficult situation
is undoubtedly cause for great concern, and calls for
action to help the victims.

In that regard, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
calls on the Myanmar authorities to assume their
responsibilities and to seek an immediate solution
to the crisis that the Rohingya population is going
through. Serious accusations of ethnic cleansing and
other atrocities must be considered with the utmost
seriousness, and an investigation must be opened in
order to shed light on the situation and lead its possible
perpetrators to face justice.

Assuming their responsibilities also includes
ensuring peace and security in the country, especially
in northern Rakhine state. That means responding to
the terrorist attacks attributed to the militants of the
Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army, who deserve our
strongest condemnation. The Government of Myanmar
has an obligation to ensure that the population fully
enjoys its rights within its territory.

In that regard, we request the Myanmar authorities to
take steps to create the right conditions for the peaceful
coexistence of all ethnic and religious communities in
Rakhine state and to make preparations - with the
necessary guarantees - to receive those who wish to
return to their original places of residence. The Myanmar
authorities must be prepared to manage the potential
reintegration of the returnees, must ensure their rights
and must contribute to rebuilding. They must intensify
and promote activities that prevent the escalation of
violence, restore law and order throughout the country,
create normalized socioeconomic conditions and solve
the refugee problem.

The Myanmar Government should make every
effort to comply with the recommendations of the
Advisory Committee led by former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan, and work with the Bangladeshi authorities
on the repatriation ofdisplaced persons in Rakhine state.

We urge all parties to refrain from actions that
could lead to further degradation of the situation and
to continue the constructive dialogue at all levels
without politicizing it. That is the only possible way
to comprehensively solve the complicated problem
of the Muslim minority in Myanmar. Equatorial
Guinea supports all efforts to facilitate interreligious
interactions within the country by involving the
spiritual leaders of all religions.

We take note of the contributions and actions of
Bangladesh, which, despite its difficulties, provides
timely humanitarian aid and welcomes those in need.
Equatorial Guinea greatly appreciates the generosity,
efforts and contributions of Bangladesh. The
international community should provide additional
assistance to Bangladesh commensurate with its needs.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that, in
order to reach a concerted solution in the mass movement
of the population across the border between Myanmar
and Bangladesh, we must first secure the goodwill of
both countries. The two parties have met a number of
times and are expected to sign a repatriation agreement
aimed at finding an acceptable solution to both parties.
This issue must be adequately addressed by Bangladesh
and Myanmar through bilateral channels.

The international community, including the
Council, must offer favourable conditions and create an
adequate environment to promote bilateral consultations
between Bangladesh and Myanmar. We are convinced
that, with the support and assistance of the international
community, Bangladesh and Myanmar will surely be
able to improve the situation and find ways to solve the
problem through negotiation.

I would like to conclude my comments on behalf of
Equatorial Guinea by referring to the offer of support
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
to both the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh
and to the refugees in finding a long-term solution
that would benefit the refugees, the authorities of both
countries, the host community of Bangladesh and all
the communities of Rakhine state. The implementation
modalities of the agreement, which should be in
accordance with international standards, would
contribute significantly to resolving the problem.

