Mr. Al-Khalifa (Bahrain): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this timely special
meeting of the Security Council on Iraq. I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/20), which is very comprehensive and
which we subscribe to. I would also like to thank our
former colleague and now Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq for his very comprehensive
and helpful report on the situation in Iraq. I would
also like to congratulate my colleague, His Excellency
Minister Ibrahim Al-Jaafari, on assuming his post. I
look forward to working with him, especially at this
very important time.

The security situation in Iraq and the spread of
Daesh in the past couple of years in Syria and Iraq
is a serious regional and global concern. Daesh has
exhibited an appalling level of brutality and disregard
for human life, as demonstrated by the murders of
journalists, aid workers and countless Iraqi and Syrian
civilians. Our shared objective should be no less than
the complete annihilation of that terrorist group.

The fight against Daesh requires joint action at
the regional and international levels in three crucial
arenas - the military, the financial and the ideological.
Concerning military operations, it is essential that
countries join Iraq in its fight against Daesh by
providing the requisite level of support. When it comes
to regional security, Bahrain has always assumed its
fair share of the burden. We joined our friends and
allies in securing Afghanistan and in the fight against
pirates and corsairs in the Indian Ocean, and by keeping
a watchful eye around the waters of the Arabian Gulf.
Today, Bahrain stands ready to join its allies in the
region and the world and to contribute its share to the
necessary fight against Daesh. We firmly believe that
the time has come for countries of the region to take the
lead in fighting the terrorist groups among us.

Moreover, Islamic institutions and scholars around
the Arab and Muslim world must not hesitate to point
out the clear deviation of Daesh and similar terrorist
cults, and to delegitimize any religious justification
that they may give. In that regard, Bahrain commends
the condemnations of Daesh from various centres of
Islamic authority and scholarship, and urges scholars
to continue doing so without any hesitation to help
us defeat that clear danger threatening Muslims and
non-Muslims alike.

Stopping the flow of fighters and financial resources
to Daesh is crucial to defeating it. The Kingdom of
Bahrain, as a longstanding Islamic and conventional
financial centre with a proven history of combating the
financing of terrorism and money laundering, will host
a high-level Government conference to discuss ways
of enhancing efforts to combat the funding of terrorist
organizations both within and outside of the Middle
East and North Africa.

The conference to be held during the first week
of November in Manama will aim at agreeing a road
map/action plan on how to further combat terrorist
financing and to ensure that the financial institutions
and charitable organizations of the Middle East and
North Africa are not used to channel funds to terrorists
or for other illegal activities.

With respect to stopping the flow of fighters,
Bahrain continues to monitor the flow of individuals
to affected areas in order to ensure that those with the
intent to join Daesh or similar groups are stopped before
leaving the country. In addition, those who return after
joining such groups are immediately apprehended.

Further, no less important than the fight against
Daesh is the effort to alleviate the day-to-day difficulties
and challenges that the Syrian and Iraqi people have
to face. Minority groups in particular have suffered
disproportionately in recent years, and the international
community, through the relevant United Nations bodies
and other international and national organizations,
must do all it can to provide the necessary aid.

I would like to take this opportunity to
offer Bahrain's support to His Excellency Prime
Minister Haider Al-Abadi and his newly formed Cabinet.
We are confident that the new Iraqi Government is
seeking to set a new way forward for Iraq, one that will
return the country to the path of peace, security and
stability.

Finally, we must remember that fighting terrorism
is a regional responsibility and that all countries of the
region must adopt the same position regarding terrorism
wherever it may surface and whatever its sectarian
leanings. There are terrorist groups no less criminal
than Daesh operating across the Middle East - from
Egypt to Libya to Lebanon and Syria and to Yemen to
the Gulf. State-sponsored terrorist organizations such
as Hizbullah and other proxies continue to terrorize and
kill innocent people all over the region. It is therefore
necessary - as I and many of us here have heard my
colleagues say - to adopt a holistic approach that
identifies, confronts and eventually defeats terrorists
in an effective manner.

