Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Sandra Honore, for her briefing, and
encourage her to continue to contribute to the process of
Haiti's restoration through her leadership of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
We also thank the Luxembourg presidency, which has
convened us to discuss the question concerning Haiti, a
topic of interest for Latin America and the Caribbean,
as has been reflected in the Organization of American
States and in successive summits of the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States and other
regional forums.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the Permanent Representative of
Uruguay on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti.

Chile's commitment to and solidarity with the
people and authorities of Haiti, on both a bilateral
and multilateral level, is long-standing. Exactly
10 years ago, when, as we do today, we held a seat
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council,
we supported and participated in the deployment of a
multinational interim force in Haiti. That same year, we
strongly supported the creation of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, aimed at supporting the
political process and promoting and protecting human
rights. Since then, Chile has contributed more than
11,000 men and women to its contingent there. Chile's
commitment to Haiti has also been reflected in the
leadership of MINUSTAH, in which two of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General have been
Chilean.

MINUSTAH's presence and multidimensional
nature have been shown to have made a positive
contribution to achieving a relatively stable and secure,
if fragile, environment in Haiti over the years. In
particular, its presence has enabled the country to deal
with the enormous challenges of the 2010 earthquake
and its continuing vulnerability to natural disasters.

Today, improving the political environment in
Haiti is a priority, and in that regard we commend the
Special Representative's efforts to facilitate a climate
of dialogue among all national stakeholders so as to
strengthen democratic institutions and address pending
processes. Special emphasis should be given to the
electoral arena. We share the Secretary-General's
findings regarding the importance of holding elections
in 2014 as a critical component in the continuity of
democratic institutions. In that regard, the enactment of
a new electoral law and the start of a national dialogue
process are positive developments, and we urge
Haitian political actors to participate in the dialogue
in a constructive spirit and a democratic approach.
However, there are areas that need special attention,
which is why we call on the authorities to make decisive
efforts to strengthen the rule of law, including in the
judicial and human-rights sectors.

We also urge MINUSTAH to continue its efforts to
include civil society in the political dialogue.

My delegation acknowledges the achievements in
the humanitarian field, in particular the permanent
relocation of over 90 per cent of internally displaced
persons. The efforts of the Haitian authorities, together
with the United Nations and non-governmental
partners, to respond to the challenge led to a positive
synergy that should be replicated in other areas. We
must recall that Haiti represents a clear example of
what the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs has called a forgotten humanitarian crisis; my
country therefore urges the major donors to continue to
finance the humanitarian appeals.

MINUSTAH's consolidation plan should be
implemented on the basis of ongoing assessments of
needs on the ground. It is also important that future
efforts to strengthen Haiti's institutional capacity be
based on the principle of national ownership in order
to enable the Haitian people to gradually assume the
various responsibilities. It is essential that the plan be
supported by strengthening capacities of the Haitian
National Police within a democratic framework of
respect for human rights.

My delegation welcomes the achievements of the
Haitian National Police strategic development plan
for 2012-2016, especially those of 2013, including the
promotion of over 1,000 police officers, allowing it to
reach the goal of 15,000 police officers by 2016. We
also highlight the graduation of female cadets among
the group. That has been reflected by a decrease in the
crime rate in sensitive urban areas and the disbanding
of several criminal gangs. Focused prevention
efforts carried out at the community level have
been fundamental to that end. We share the concern
of the Secretary-General that progress in police
professionalization has taken place without similar
progress in justice and accountability, thus affecting
the establishment of the rule of law.

The United Nations presence in Haiti in support
of the local authorities remains essential. In that
respect, we note the options offered in the report of
the Secretary-General regarding the United Nations
presence after 2016. It is our belief that those options
represent an initial basis of discussion. They are being
carefully studied by Chile's Government authorities,
which are also awaiting the strategic assessment to be
provided by the Secretariat.

During her recent visit to Chile, Ms. Honore
was able to assess with Government authorities the
importance we attach to and our vision for MINUSTAH.
In recent years, the participation of new countries of
Latin America and Caribbean in contributing police or
troop contingents to MINUSTAH has been important
in expressing the region's commitment to Haiti. In that
respect, Chile also considers it important to increase
the presence of Latin American and Caribbean officials
among MINUSTAH's civilian component.

Since 1996, my country has maintained a
consistent and firm position on the link between
security and development in achieving peace. That is
why we will continue to support quick-impact projects
and programmes to reduce community violence. We
consider it worth mentioning that the report covers the
development of quick-impact projects to contain the
cholera epidemic and prevent water-borne diseases.
That in particular is fully consistent with the United
Nations two-year plan in support of the 10-year
National Plan for the Elimination of Cholera in Haiti,
which is supported by my country. We also welcome
the appointment by the Secretary-General of Mr. Pedro
Medrano Rojas as Senior Coordinator for Cholera
Response in Haiti.
We understand that the financing requirements for
peacekeeping operations are growing worldwide in the
face of scarce resources. Nevertheless, a balance must
be struck within the United Nations in the allocation
of resources in order not to jeopardize the progress
made. Chile reiterates the need for the United Nations
to continue to support the Haitian authorities through
its funds and programmes and through MINUSTAH
and its civilian component, in particular based on the
integrated strategic framework for 2013-2016.

Finally, I wish to reiterate Chile's commitment to
the Haitian people and authorities and to MINUSTAH.
Chile will continue to support strengthening the rule
of law, democracy and the development of Haiti's
capacities, which will foster a political culture that is
committed to the country's stability and the progress of
the Haitian people.

