Mr. Empole (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July and to tell you how much my delegation and I
are honoured to see Peru, a friendly country, leading
today's Council deliberations. I would like to thank
you for giving me the opportunity to address the
Council at this meeting, focused on the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a subject of
particular importance to us.

I also take this opportunity to express to Secretary-
General Anto'nio Guterres the gratitude of the people
and the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for the tireless efforts he has been undertaking
since he assumed leadership of the Organization with
a view to preserving the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of my country and to guaranteeing it peace
and stability.

I would also like to express the gratitude of the
Congolese Government and people to all members of
the Security Council for their commitment to the cause
of my country and their sustained efforts to ensure the
complete restoration of peace and stability throughout
the country.

My delegation has taken note of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2019/575) on the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
appreciates its content. I thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head
of MONUSCO, who briefed us earlier. I also thank
Mr. Mansour Ayyad Alotaibi for briefing us on the
activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Having read the report under consideration, I wish
to make a few remarks and comments on some of the
points raised therein. These are areas mainly relating
to the political, security and social situation and to
MONUSCO. Before I broach those areas, however,
allow me to apologize on behalf of Mr. Ignace Gata
Mavita Wa Lufuta, Permanent Representative of the
Democratic Republic of Congo to the United Nations,
who is unable to participate in this meeting as he is
currently visiting Kinshasa.

In the aftermath of the elections of 30 December
2018 and the peaceful transfer of power, the political
situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo remains
dominated by the establishment of new institutions,
the finalization of the electoral process and the
implementation of the campaign promises made by
the President of the Republic on the implementation of
measures to ease political tensions.

Indeed, after Mr. Fe'lix Antoine Tshilombo
Tshisekedi took his oath as President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on 24 January and following
the approval of the mandates of the national deputies,
it was necessary to proceed with the establishment of
a new Government derived from the new legislature.
It is in that context that I note the appointment by the
President of the Republic on 20 May, in accordance
with the Constitution of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, of His Excellency Mr. Sylvestre Ilunga
Ilunkamba as Prime Minister. The latter is working to
finalize the composition of his entire Government with
a view to his inauguration by Parliament.

On another note, after the validation of the deputies'
mandates by the respective provisional offices, the
national and provincial assemblies proceeded to the
elections ofthe members of their permanent bureaus. To
date, all these assemblies have their definitive cabinets

in place and are functioning normally. It is in that
context that it is important to mention the election of a
woman, Ms. Jeanine Mabunda Lioko, to the presidency
of the Permanent Bureau of the National Assembly.

With regard to elections, in accordance with its
revised timetable, the Independent National Electoral
Commission (CENI) organized senatorial elections in
May. In accordance with the timetable published by
the temporary Bureau of the Assembly, the election of
the members of the permanent Bureau of the Senate is
scheduled for Saturday, 27 July.

Finally, it should be noted that CENI has organized
all the elections scheduled in its calendar. The elections
of governors and vice governors in all provinces of
the Republic, as well as the legislative elections in the
provinces of Mai-Ndombe and South Kivu, which had
been postponed for health and safety reasons, have all
taken place. Elections at the local level have yet to take
place. For its part, the Constitutional Court also closed
its consideration of cases related to electoral disputes.

With regard to the fulfilment of the President of the
Republic's campaign promises on the implementation
of political relaxation measures, it is fitting to point
out that this issue is at the heart of the work of His
Excellency Mr. Antoine Fe'lix Tshisekedi Tshilombo.
Upon his accession to his high office, the Head of State
took important steps to relax the political environment,
preserve human rights and open up democratic space.
Those measures have made possible, in particular:
first, the repatriation of opposition leaders and political
exiles; secondly, the release of political opponents,
including high-profile prisoners; thirdly, freedom to
demonstrate for all political causes; fourthly, access
to public media for all actors of every political strip;
fifthly, the fight against impunity and corruption;
and others.

With regard to security, it should be stressed
that the continued presence of foreign and national
armed groups in the eastern part of my country and
the deleterious nature of their activities are a matter
of great concern for the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. As the President of the Republic
has stated,

"Restoring peace throughout the country is a
priority, for what is at stake is the survival of
hundreds of thousands of compatriots, the stability
of established institutions, economic recovery and
an environment ofpeace among all our neighbours."
That means that, so long as that part of the country
is unable to enjoy lasting peace, while negative forces
remain active and its people, in particular women
and children, continue to fall victim to every kind of
violation and abuse that we have condemned over the
past several years, the attention of the entire Republic
will remain focused on that part of the country. That is
why the Government stands ready and determined in its
work, with the help of its army, to restore order, peace
and security and pursue the struggle against and the
eradication of those national and foreign armed groups.

As the report before us acknowledges, our army
is working tirelessly to restore order and prevent
insecurity. In that regard, it is necessary to note that
the Head of State has launched large-scale military
operations, such as those in Djugu and Mahagi.
Those operations have enabled the recovery of several
weapons and ammunition caches abandoned by
criminal groups and the control of those territories by
the Congolese administrative authorities. In order to
build on those gains, at least 200 police officers from
the Legion nationale d'intervention in Kinshasa have
been deployed in Djugu territory in Ituri.

The mission of those elements of the Congolese
National Police is to stabilize, pacify and build peace
in all the villages conquered by the Forces armees de
la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC) in
Djugu territory, which has been under attack since
mid-June by armed groups, resulting in the loss of
life and large numbers of displaced persons. Thanks
to those intensive military operations, the FARDC
has noted several instances of surrender among the
ranks of armed groups, in addition to those who have
voluntarily surrendered.

The Government is currently consulting with
MONUSCO to find the appropriate framework
for dealing with those compatriots with a view to
their reintegration into society. In that regard, the
Government calls on armed groups that remain active
to lay down their arms in order to benefit from the
advantages of this new demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration programme. It is incumbent upon me
to reassure the Council that, for their part, the Congolese
Government and its armed forces, which have made
many sacrifices in combating negative forces, remain
resolved to pursuing that noble mission, with the help
of its partners, including MONUSCO, until the total
eradication of those criminals is achieved, so that our
people can live in lasting peace while contributing to
the development of their country.

The Great Lakes region must aspire to improve its
well-being. Economic development can be achieved
only when there is peace and harmony among people.
Despite that progress, my country is curious as to how
armed groups have managed to acquire such large
quantities of heavy and sophisticated weapons when
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has been living
under an arms embargo for more than 10 years. My
country therefore expresses its wish to see the Group of
Experts shed light on the arms and ammunition supply
chain to establish the responsibility of countries that
are violating the arms embargo and further examine
the link between those illegal weapons and ammunition
supplies and the illicit trafficking of the country's
natural resources.

My delegation welcomes the new dynamic in the
Great Lakes region since the assumption of power
by President Antoine Felix Tshisekedi Tshilombo. In
addition to bilateral meetings with his counterparts
of the region, it is also worth mentioning the summit
meetings held in Kinshasa and Luanda on 31 May
and 12 July, respectively, among the Heads of State of
Angola, Uganda, Rwanda and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The main purpose of those meetings was
to shore up relations and the struggle against armed
groups, while promoting peace in the Great Lakes
region. The joint communique's that endorsed those
meetings reaffirmed the commitment of the Heads
of State to restoring peace and State authority in the
Great Lakes region, including in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as
economic development.

We remain convinced that the new regional
dynamic will prioritize heightened security measures
and border controls in order to effectively comply
with the arms embargo on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and to counter illicit trafficking in natural
resources, which is one of the major root causes of the
conflict in the country.

With regard to MONUSCO, as everyone knows
that United Nations force has been in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo since 1999 - 20 years. Thanks
to its presence on Congolese territory, much has been
achieved and, at times, the worst has been avoided, in
particular with regard to the protection of civilians,
the struggle against armed groups, the defence of
human rights and the protection of the country's
territorial integrity.

We take this opportunity to commend the work
done by the Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The Congolese people and their Government
express their gratitude to the United Nations, the troop-
contributing countries and the peacekeepers for their
efforts in the struggle to achieve peace and security in
my country and their sacrifices, including the ultimate
sacrifice of laying down their lives for the cause of
the Congo.

Today, as the Government of my country is engaged
in strategic dialogue with the independent Team of
Experts, in accordance with resolution 2463 (2019),
the Congolese people expect that the recommendations
emanating from that dialogue will be responsible,
preserve and not sacrifice the gains made during the
past 20 years, prioritize the interests of the Congo and
the Congolese people, and take into account the wishes
of the Congolese people, whose most ardent desire
is the total eradication of the negative forces and the
various armed groups that plague the eastern part of
the country.

However, regardless of the nature of those
recommendations, it is essential to strengthen
MONUSCO's operational effectiveness by focusing
on the quality of its troops, which should be more
specialized in tracking armed groups and able to handle
asymmetric threats. Those troops will have to continue
to work closely with the FARDC and be more agile,
mobile and equipped with the right equipment for
greater efficiency.

Moreover, with regard to the presence of armed men
on mining sites, it should be recalled that the law does
not allow the military to carry out mining activities. In
addition, the justification for the presence of FARDC
elements in mining areas, as has been mentioned several
times, is that they provide security at those sites, which,
regrettably, are generally located in conflict zones. The
Government deploys security forces in mining areas
to ensure the safety of all mining operators. If some
of the elements deployed for security reasons neglect
their duties and engage in mining activities, it is always
a good idea to report them so that the authorities can
punish them in accordance with the law.

With regard to social issues, the situation in the
Democratic Republic of Congo remains dominated
by the implementation of the President's 100-day
emergency programme and the fight against the Ebola
virus disease. With regard to the implementation of
the President's 100-day emergency programme, it
is important to note that several projects launched to
construct critical infrastructure are under way and
regularly visited by the authorities in order to assess the
effectiveness of the work being conducted and develop
new recommendations and guidelines, if necessary.

Regarding the Ebola virus disease, let me
inform the Council that this is the tenth time that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has faced such an
epidemic. However, it is the first time the outbreak has
occurred in a conflict area. It is also the first time that
it has exceeded a six-month period and that such a large
number of victims has been reported. The meeting that
the Security Council intends to convene on the issue on
31 July will provide an opportunity to share important
information on the subject with the most appropriate
resource specialists. However, we would like to reassure
the Council that our Head of State, Government and
people as a whole, with the assistance of our partners,
are determined to eradicate the Ebola epidemic, now
declared a public health emergency of international
concern by the World Health Organization, from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

At the initiative of President Tshisekedi, who on
20 July took the response to the epidemic under his own
supervision, the technical secretariat ofthe multisectoral
Ebola response committee that has been set up will now
be under the direction of an internationally renowned
epidemiologist in the treatment of the disease. The
technical secretariat and its team of experts are
responsible for coordinating all activities in the
implementation of the strategic response plan for the
Ebola virus disease outbreak and for putting in place
every possible urgent, essential and innovative measure
for the rapid control of the epidemic.
The Ebola virus disease in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is no longer simply a health issue, but a
cross-cutting problem that requires the consideration of
the following aspects, above and beyond assessing the
quality of care and treatment scheme available to date
at the Ebola treatment centres. First, with regard to the
fight against insecurity and access to vulnerable people,
it is important to secure the territories affected by the
disease so as to enable response operations to proceed
smoothly and for health and humanitarian workers to
work without fear of being attacked by armed elements.
Secondly, concerning strengthened preventive
measures, mobilization officers in the various health
zones and major centres in the affected provinces
should raise awareness about how to prevent the spread
of the epidemic. Thirdly, with regard to public support
for the response efforts, communities must collaborate
with response teams. Fourthly, a better coordination of
actions in the field is needed. Fifthly, adequate funding
is required to meet needs.

I would like to conclude by again thanking the
United Nations and the Security Council for their
commitment and efforts to promote peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Similarly, on behalf
of the Congolese people and Government, I again
thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Head of MONUSCO. Lastly, on behalf
of the Congolese people, I again thank MONUSCO
peacekeepers and troop-contributing countries for their
dedication and commitment to our country.

The meeting rose at 12.05 pm.
