Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): We want to add our voice
to those that have expressed appreciation to President
Ismail Omar Guelleh for his very insightful briefing
and his positive contributions to the peace process and
stability in the region.

Nigeria is concerned that political instability,
civil strife and inter-State conflicts have too long been
the defining features of the Horn of Africa. The
Eritrea/Djibouti border problem and the situations in
the Sudan and Somalia have had far-reaching
implications for regional peace and security. The
situation is exacerbated by transnational and cross-
cutting challenges, such as religious fundamentalism,
the proliferation of arms, terrorism, piracy, the
insecurity of borders and the race for exclusive access
to natural resources. We therefore welcome the

concrete steps enumerated by President Guelleh to
address those problems.

In the Sudan, the recently concluded country-
wide elections represent a political milestone and a
step in the right direction towards consolidating the
2011 referendum. We call on all parties to demonstrate
greater commitment to the remaining aspects of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. Indeed, this is the
time to intensify the Darfur peace negotiations and to
recommit the parties to resolving all outstanding
issues, especially those related to wealth-sharing and
other referendum issues.

We believe that without peace in Somalia there
will be no peace in the Horn of Africa. For that reason,
we share President Guelleh's View that the way
forward is for the international community to tackle -
in his words - the root causes of Somalia's enduring
conflict. Stabilizing Somalia is indeed a priority that
requires firm commitment. One way of doing that
would be to fully support the Transitional Federal
Government in confronting the extremely volatile and
unpredictable security challenges in the country. Until
those formidable challenges are systematically and
comprehensively tackled, the problems of insecurity
and instability in the region will endure.

The international community must be focused on
the full implementation of the Djibouti Agreement and
on Somalia's economic development needs. In that
regard, we support the Istanbul Conference to be held
this weekend. Increased support is also required for
Somali security forces through strategic training and
the provision of adequate resources for the payment of
salaries and the implementation of the national security
and stabilization plan.

The crises in that region have several cross-
cutting regional dimensions. A concerted regional
approach is therefore a critical factor to the return of
peace and stability to the region. We commend the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development for playing significant and crucial roles
in galvanizing and reinforcing the search for peace and
stability in the region, including in Somalia and the
Sudan. With peace in Somalia and the Sudan, Eastern
Africa would be a very strategic and important
business location in Africa. Peace in the region would
also have a profound impact on peace in Central
Africa. It would give impetus to the realization of the
goals being promoted by the Common Market for
Eastern and Southern Africa.

We believe that the region will require the
constructive participation and contribution of Eritrea to
achieve comprehensive peace in the region. That is
why we encourage Eritrea to support the Djibouti
peace process and the reconciliation efforts in Somalia.
We encourage Eritrea to comply with the provisions of
resolution 1907 (2009) in order to pave the way for the
eventual lifting of the existing sanctions based on the
progress that has been made.

