Ms. Villalobos (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Like previous speakers, Sir, I would like to
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the month of February, and to thank the
delegation of France for its presidency in January. We
would also like to thank the Executive Representative
of the Secretary-General and head of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone (UNIPSIL), Mr. Von der Schulenberg, and the
Permanent Representative of the Netherlands,
Ambassador Frank Majoor, Chairman of the country-
specific meeting on Sierra Leone within the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings and, in
particular, the work they have undertaken to fulfil their
mandates. We also thank Ambassador Touray, who
spoke on behalf of the Government of Sierra Leone, for
his statement.

My delegation believes that national
reconciliation and unity in Sierra Leone are of the
highest priority and require the participation and active
commitment of all sectors of society. The ethnic and
regional divisions in Sierra Leone should continue to
be addressed - a task in which the multiparty
Parliament of Sierra Leone has an important role.

Another fundamental component in the national
reconciliation process is the implementation of the
recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, in particular the reparations programme
for victims of the conflict, which still needs greater
international support.

Equally urgent is the review of institution
building. A system with stable institutions that
strengthens rights and the rule of law is absolutely
essential to consolidating peace, promoting

development and actively contributing to the greater
integration of Sierra Leone into international
processes.

However, we must be quite clear that, if they are
to achieve their crucial role, building institutions and
strengthening the rule of law require tackling
corruption head on, which includes greater
transparency in public management and accountability
and strengthening a culture that fights impunity. In that
regard, we recognize the work of the Anti-Corruption
Commission and its efforts to involve civil society and
other national interested parties in monitoring the
implementation of a national strategy to combat
corruption. We also recognize the support provided by
UNIPSIL and the Peacebuilding Commission to assist
the Government in that fight.

This Council must pay particular attention to the
growing threat to security in Sierra Leone posed by
drug trafficking, a problem that affects other countries
in the region and requires a resolute response.
Otherwise, all efforts made in other areas may be
undermined and ultimately prove futile. That is why we
believe it important for the Government and UNIPSIL
to work together in implementing the Plan Action
against Drug Trafficking and Related Organized Crime,
based on the Regional Action Plan adopted by member
States of the Economic Community of West African
States. Clearly, we are dealing with a regional issue
and it is therefore necessary to support and strengthen
the capacity of regional bodies to address those and
other issues, such as piracy, with a regional approach.

The Government of Sierra Leone is facing
challenges that we all know in its efforts to consolidate
economic and social development, support a
democratic Government, reform the security and
justice sectors and integrate the country's youth into its
economic and social structures.

In that context, the support of the international
community cannot be overlooked. The joint work of
the Government and UNIPSIL in implementing
President Koroma's Agenda for Change strategy is a
step in the right direction. However, further
complementary efforts are needed, as indicated in the
strategic framework of the Joint Vision of the United
Nations Family for Sierra Leone and in the Sierra
Leone Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework.

I should like to conclude by urging the
Government of Sierra Leone to redouble its efforts. We
reiterate our support for UNIPSIL and the work of the
Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and call for greater support from the
international community for the processes under way
in Sierra Leone.

