Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): I congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April. A well-deserved tribute
goes also to Ambassador Li of China for the efficient
manner in which he led the Council during the month of
March.

We agree with everything said by the Chairman of
the Non-aligned Movement in his statement. He spoke on
our behalf. But we have deliberately decided to repeat
what he said - not everything, of course - in order to
drive the message home.

The delegation of Botswana appreciates the efforts
made by the permanent members of the Security Council
regarding nuclear security assurances. We consider the
draft resolution before us to be a noteworthy contribution
towards the adoption of further measures to be undertaken
by the nuclear-weapon States to safeguard the security of
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons. We also consider the separate
statements made individually by each nuclear-weapon
State regarding negative security assurances to be a
significant gesture of goodwill towards meeting the
concerns of the non-nuclear-weapon States. Like others,
we wish these statements were all categoric in committing
these States to the non-use of nuclear weapons against
non-nuclear-weapon States. We most appreciate the fact
that at least one of the statements came close - but only
close - to meeting all our concerns. The rest, I am
afraid, are nothing more than statements of good
intentions - solemn as they are. The road to protection
against nuclear weapons is not paved with good
intentions.

It is the understanding of my delegation that the
draft resolution before us is not being presented on a quid
pro quo basis relative to the issues before the 1995
Review and Extension Conference of the States parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
It is our hope that this draft resolution is intended to help
and/or influence, positively, the deliberations in the

 

Conference. While fully cognizant of the importance of this
draft resolution, my delegation remains convinced that the
assurances it offers non-nuclear-weapon States should have
been a clear and unequivocal statement of intent on the part
of nuclear-weapon States on the non-use of nuclear
weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States. In fact, it
would have been even more reassuring if the present draft
resolution had come in the form of a legally binding
international instrument. The separate statements we
referred to earlier on negative security assurances made by
the nuclear-weapon States would thus form part of such a
legal instrument, which could then be annexed to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

The non-nuclear-weapon States have contributed
immensely to the maintenance of international peace and
security by deciding to forgo the development, acquisition
or possession of nuclear weapons. The world is today a
relatively safer place to live in thanks to their vision and
generosity. Their decision to forgo the right to have nuclear
weapons in their defence capabilities should be matched by
a more positive recognition by the nuclear-weapon States
that they have a right to protection against the use of such
weapons. This is the barest minimum required as a true confidence-

building measure amongst non-nuclear-weapon States that

forgoing possession of nuclear weapons was not a
miscalculation which will leave them perpetually vulnerable
to the threat of these weapons.

In fact, non-nuclear-weapon States should also be
asking for protection against the use of nuclear weapons
even in the case of a conflict between nuclear-weapon
States, because the fallout would affect them all in the same
way. It is therefore only fair that the non-nuclear-weapon
States should expect to be met half way by their partners in
the Non-Proliferation Treaty that enjoy the privileged
monopoly of possessing nuclear weapons. They have given
up the sovereign right to acquire these weapons for the sake
of world peace and stability. Their concerns should
therefore be accorded serious thought and understanding.
Their right - and I emphasize "right" - to seek and
receive protection must be recognized.

My delegation very strongly holds the view that in the
final analysis the ultimate assurance against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons is the complete
elimination of those weapons. We are hopeful that
Article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons will remain a constant reminder to the
nuclear-weapon States of their obligations under the Treaty.

