Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would first like to congratulate Kuwait on iits
initiative to convene this open debate. It is an important
topic, which is dear to us. Moreover, Belgium had the
honour of presiding over one of the first open debates
on this issue 10 years ago (see S/PV.5968).

The review of working methods should take place in
the broader context of the cross-cutting considerations
that the United Nations is currently undertaking. I
am thinking of the Secretary-General's reforms and
the concept of sustainable peace, which call on us
to address the root causes of conflict. The Security
Council cannot function in a vacuum but must act
consistently in line with the work of the United Nations
and of the region. That is a guarantee of legitimacy for
the Council, which is expected to work in the interests
of international security.

Of course, Belgium does not wish to overhaul
the institutional architecture of the United Nations
nor do we wish to burden the Council with tasks or
missions that duplicate those entrusted to other bodies.
We simply want the Council to benefit from all the
dynamism, observations and information generated
by the United Nations system as a whole in order to
improve its effectiveness and the relevance of its action.
Coordination, common understanding and partnerships
are the triptych that we would like to see take shape.
Allow me, inter alia, to put forward some ideas.

First and foremost, with regard to the relationship
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, we encourage all initiatives to galvanize
that relationship. The activities of the Commission
should contribute to enriching the Council's discussions,
which requires well-coordinated programmes of work.
That is true not only for meetings of country-specific
configurations but also for meetings devited to a region
or a topic. The discussions on the strategy for the Sahel
are a good example in that regard. In addition, the
Council could invite the Chair of a country-specific
configuration of the Commission to participate in
closed consultations, for example, following a visit by
the Commission to the country concerned.

Secondly, with regard to regional partnerships,
I believe that the Council would only benefit
from strengthening its exchanges with all relevant
stakeholders in a crisis or conflict situation. I am
thinking primarily about regional actors. The special
envoys of a regional organization involved in a peace
process should be almost automatically invited to
Council debates, whether open or closed. That, of
course, goes both ways: clearly, United Nations envoys
could also contribute to deliberations at the regional
level. Moreover, we support the opening up of the
Council to speakers who alert us to mass atrocities, such
as the Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide
and on the Responsibility to Protect.

Within the Council, it is necessary to continue to
consider how to further promote cooperation on the
penholder role. For example, it goes without saying that
elected members from a region affected by a crisis or
with a specific expertise have an increased role to play.

I also welcome the progress made with respect to the
involvement of troop- and police-contributing countries
in Council debates. The practice of tripartite dialogues
among troop-contributing countries, the Security
Council and the Secretariat must continue, both formally
and informally. We believe that this dialogue needs to
be further strengthened in terms of the preparation of
meetings, the degree of interaction among participants
and transparency of expected outcomes.

Finally, I wish to stress the importance of
respecting procedural guarantees in the context of
the implementation of the various sanctions regimes.
Concrete measures have already been proposed by the
Group of Like-Minded States on Targeted Sanctions, of
which Belgium is an active member. Progress remains
to be made and we will continue to lend our attention.
In the short-term, I call on the Security Council to
appoint a new Ombudsperson as soon as possible to
assist the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida. and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, with respect to
delisting requests. It is an important post and has been
vacant since last year.

