Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me first
express our deep appreciation to our four briefers today
for their briefings, leadership and action.

Recent attacks have demonstrated the increasingly
precarious security situation in the Sahel. We commend
the decision of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to join forces to counter terrorism, transnational
crime and the smuggling of drugs, weapons and human
beings. That decision demonstrates the willingness of
the G-5 Sahel countries to take ownership of their own
security and deserves the full support of the Council
and that of the wider membership of the United Nations.
We therefore pay tribute to the important efforts of the
United Nations, the European Union and the African
Union to support the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel.

We fully recognize that it is not an easy task to set
up a regional force in the complex security and political
environment the Group is dealing with. We therefore
warmly welcome the significant steps already taken by
the G-5 Sahel and its member States. However, it is also
clear from the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/432)
that some important challenges remain. In that context,
I will focus on three elements that we believe will define
the Joint Force's future and determine its chances of
success: first, the need for an integrated approach;
secondly, adherence to human rights and the rule of
law; and thirdly, adequate financial resources.

First, on the need for an integrated approach, as
the Secretary-General emphasized in his report, the
Joint Force's success is directly linked to progress on
the peace process in Mali, a point also just made by
our colleague from Sweden. The parties involved must
take the necessary steps to ensure enduring peace in
Mali. As I said, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force is an essential
means for countering terrorism, transnational crime and
human smuggling. However, we must realize that those
are only symptoms. The underlying root causes must
also be addressed to bring lasting peace and stability.
In that regard, we welcome the G-5 Sahel's development
agenda and the initiative by France and Germany to
increase international coordination and cooperation
with the launch of the Alliance for the Sahel.

That brings me to my second point, on the
importance of human rights, the rule of law and the
police component. The Joint Force can be effective only
if it enjoys the trust of the population. The worrying
news of human rights violations in Mali shows the vital
importance of rigorous monitoring and accountability
mechanisms. We welcome the commitment of the
G-5 Sahel and the Joint Force to the African Union's
Compliance Framework on Human Rights, Conduct and
Discipline and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and to
ensuring proper legal follow-up, which they made very
clear at the Sahel conference in Brussels in February.

The follow-up meetings held in the region are
important first steps, but further progress in the coming
months will be essential. To ensure adequate follow-up,
we encourage the G-5 Sahel to speedup the establishment
of its police component, which should include an
adequately trained and equipped investigation team.
A strong police component is Vital to taking effective
action against terrorism, transnational crime and the
smuggling of migrants, threats that not only undermine
the stability ofthe Sahel but also pose a serious security
concern to Europe. Sufficient resources should be made
available to step up these efforts. The same applies
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) Justice and
Corrections Section, which plays an important role and
should be strengthened. As a proud troop-contributing
country to MINUSMA, we will continue to offer our
support for efforts to curb such threats.

That brings me to my third point, on the importance
of adequate financial resources. We fully recognize
that sustainable and predictable long-term financing
will further contribute to the Joint Force's legitimacy
and effectiveness. I would like to point out here that in
addition to our contribution via the European Union,
as Ambassador Vale de Almeida just highlighted, the
Netherlands has committed an additional €5 million on
a bilateral basis. We look forward to further tangible
progress on the Force's operationalization as soon as
possible, something that will be especially needed for
the human rights framework and police component
in the next few months. We stand ready to discuss a
more sustainable way of financing in due course. We
recognize the importance of MINUSMA's support
in further operationalizing the Force, but we want
to reiterate that this cannot come to the detriment of
MINUSMA core tasks.

In conclusion, the coming months will be crucial in
deciding the future of the Joint Force. Let us turn funds
into equipment, commitments into training and words
into action, and let us work together to achieve concrete
progress on the ground.

