The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Iraq in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sumaida'ie
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2005/69l, which contains the
text of a letter dated 31 October 2005 from the
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

I should also like to draw attention to document
S/2005/687, containing the text of a letter dated
31 October 2005 from the Permanent Representative of
Iraq addressed to the President of the Security Council.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2005/704, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Denmark, Japan,
Romania, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America.


The President (spoke in Russian): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1637 (2005).

I will now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements in explanation of
vote.


