Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Mr. President, I
will start by joining others in expressing our warm
appreciation to you for the role you have played as
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999). Your remarkable contribution
regarding the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1390 (2002) and 1455 (2003)
has helped to ensure the significant success of the work
of the Committee. The leadership you have shown is an
example of the kind of role that a proactive Chairman
can play in the implementation of Security Council
resolutions, and we are very thankful to you for this.

The resurgence of the Taliban in Afghanistan in
past months clearly demonstrates that the Al Qaeda
network is far from being defeated and dismantled and
that it continues to represent a real threat to peace and
security and a challenge to the international community
as a whole.

We share the views of the Chairman regarding the
role that country reports play in the Committee's
analysis of how better to deal with the combat against
terrorism. However, in my delegation's opinion, the
Committee needs to address the reasons that lead to
reporting weakness and are responsible at least in part
for the low response from Member States in submitting
their reports to the Committee, as called for in
operative paragraph 6 of resolution 1455 (2003). The
Counter-Terrorism Committee is an important
mechanism for evaluating the level of States'
compliance with sanctions regimes and for ensuring a
much broader monitoring approach.

As the Committee needs international cooperation
to fulfil its mandate, we believe that the improved
guidelines of the Committee will facilitate this process
and encourage Member States to comply with their
obligations under Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 1455 (2003). We also underline
the importance of the consolidated list maintained by
the Committee, which is rightly described in the report
as a key tool in this regard. Full implementation of the
financial sanctions, arms embargo and travel ban is
basically dependent on the credibility of that
consolidated list.
When it comes to the capacity and working
methods of the sanctions Committee, we speak from
our own experience. One of the most important lessons
we learned is that while the primary responsibility for
implementing sanctions rests with the Member States,
effective implementation depends upon strong
coordination and communication between them and the
United Nations. The sanctions committees, the United
Nations Secretariat and the regional organizations play
a critical role in establishing a framework of
procedures for sanctions implementation, providing
support to Member States and making sanctions more
effective and efficient.

The creation of independent panels of experts and
monitoring mechanisms has been a welcome
innovation in the application of United Nations
sanctions. This is another lesson learned from our own
experience. Such expert groups have made a most
important contribution to improving the nature and
scope of sanctions. Their status as independent bodies
has facilitated the task of identifying and shaming
sanctions violators, which is an important facet of their
work. We therefore commend the role that the
Monitoring Group has been playing in furthering the
work of the 1267 Committee. We hope the Group will
preserve its independence and analytical reporting to
the Council.

With respect to operative paragraph 6 of
resolution 1455 (2003), it should be recalled that
Angola has submitted its report to the Committee, as
called for in the resolution. Due to the need to improve
and make the measures more adequate and effective
with respect to the challenges of implementing
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1390 (2002) and 1455 (2003),
the Government of Angola has been taking initiatives
related to the prevention and suppression of terrorism.
Thus, concerning the freezing of financial and
economic assets, the National Bank of Angola operates
in complete harmony with its investigation and
research organs, such as the financial crimes
investigation units and the organs entrusted with the
supervision and monitoring of the banking, financial
and credit sectors, as well as the preparation and
investigation of cases which are reasonably believed to
show signs of money-laundering or related offences.

The migration office has set up a national
migration control system, which can be used to
transmit information to all border checkpoints. The
same method is used for circulating updated United
Nations lists in order to prevent listed individuals from
entering Angola or to detain such individuals so that
legal proceedings may be brought against them.

We are indeed convinced that international
cooperation provides the foundation upon which
countries can strengthen their capacities to implement
the measures imposed under the Security Council
resolutions on Al Qaeda, the Taliban and associated
entities and individuals. The Republic of Angola
remains keen to strengthen cooperation with
international and regional organizations, in particular
to enhance its work with Interpol.

While important progress has been made, further
efforts are still required since - as is mentioned in the
report of the Monitoring Group - unfortunately, many
of Al Qaeda's sources of funding remain undiscovered,
and they continue to receive funds from charities,
deep-pocket donors, businesses and criminal
individuals, including in the drug trade. Therefore,
action must be decisively continued.

Finally, let me conclude by saying that in the long
term, while we must continue to resolutely address and
defeat the threats of terrorism, we must not lose sight
of the root causes of terrorism, which are often
exploited by terrorists, particularly their ring leaders -
the underlying political, social and economic problems
prevailing in several regions in the world.

