Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish
to begin by expressing our sincere thanks to you,
Mr. President, for having convened this timely and
important meeting. We would also like to express our
gratitude to the Permanent Representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for his proposal that this
meeting of the Security Council be held to consider the
report of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on
the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/ 12/48). We commend the
Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, the Arab Group and other Member
States for supporting Libya's proposal.

Less than a year ago, the military machine of the
Israeli occupier regime created an unprecedented,
horrific human tragedy in the Gaza Strip, which
resulted in the strangulation and slaughter of the
innocent and defenceless people of Gaza, especially
women and children, for more than 20 consecutive
days. The Zionist regime, which knows nothing about
respect for humanity and human rights, also targeted
each and every human being, house and infrastructure
in the Gaza Strip and resorted to unimaginable criminal
acts, such as the bombardment of innocent children and
women sheltered in buildings declared safe by the
United Nations. By committing those barbaric crimes,
the Israeli regime once again challenged the credibility
of the international community and the civilized world,
in particular the United Nations and the Security
Council, and undermined the most basic values for
which the civilized world stands.

During the Gaza crisis, a majority of Member
States were unanimous in calling on the United Nations
and the Security Council to take all measures necessary
to put an immediate end to the brutal and callous
crimes perpetrated by the Israeli regime in Gaza. The
Islamic Republic of Iran, together with many other
Member States, firmly urged the United Nations,
especially the Security Council, to take urgent
measures to stop the Israeli attacks, which bore all the
characteristics of collective punishment, crimes against
humanity and war crimes.

We supported the resolution adopted by the
Human Rights Council calling for, inter alia,
condemnation of the Israeli regime's military
operations in the occupied Palestinian territory,
particularly in the Gaza Strip; the immediate cessation
of the Israeli regime's military attacks throughout the
occupied Palestinian territory, particularly in the Gaza
Strip; and the immediate withdrawal of its military
forces from the Gaza Strip. Likewise, we strongly
supported the Council in its decision to dispatch an
urgent independent international F act-Finding Mission
to investigate all violations of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law
committed by the Israeli occupying Power against the
Palestinian people throughout the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in the Gaza Strip.

As members are aware, in the absence of any
effective measure on the part of the Security Council,
the Human Rights Council mandated Judge Richard
Goldstone to lead a team to investigate those crimes
and to report to the Council. Despite the fact that the
Goldstone report was issued rather late and reflects
only partial and minimal aspects of the various crimes
committed by the Israeli regime in Gaza, it contains
important recommendations for the Security Council,
including, inter alia, a request that the Council require
the Israeli regime to report to it within six months on
the investigations and prosecutions that it should carry
out with regard to the violations identified by the
Mission.

We strongly echo the voices of wakeful
consciences throughout the world, including the
majority of Member States, in calling on the United
Nations to take decisive action concerning the crimes
of the Zionist regime in Gaza, including those
described in the Goldstone report. We also believe that
the recommendations contained in the report should be
considered a valid basis for the prosecution of those
Israeli politicians, military commanders, personnel and
citizens who were involved in the Gaza massacre.

We should act collectively to demonstrate our
unqualified support for the cause of Palestine, on the
one hand, and to save the image and the credibility of
the United Nations, on the other. We must resolutely
combine our strong political will in order to prove to
our nations that the Organization never appeases
oppressors and that there can be no impunity for those
who have committed war crimes and crimes against
humanity.

We must work hard to confront the crimes revealed
in the report and prevent the application of double
standards in the process of bringing the criminals to
justice. There is no doubt that this meeting's response to
the report will convey a clear message to various
audiences - first, to the international community as a
whole, concerning the effectiveness and efficiency of the
United Nations system in maintaining international peace
and security; secondly, to the perpetrators of crimes such
as these, concerning the level of seriousness with which
we confront their criminal acts; and thirdly, to the
victims of war crimes, who deserve fair and adequate
support from competent regional and international
organizations.

That being said, it is expected that the Security
Council, in line with its responsibility to uphold and
protect international peace and security, will take the
recommendations of the Goldstone report fully into
account. We consider this meeting to be a true test of
the Council's credibility and reliability, and sincerely
hope to see it move in the right direction. If it does not,
we cannot expect the world, especially the victims of
the heinous crimes perpetrated in Gaza by the Israeli
regime, to keep believing in the United Nations and
other international organizations as their best source of
support.

I wish to reject the baseless allegations that the
representative of the Zionist regime made in her
statement against my country this morning. Needless to
say, the allegations represent yet another smear
campaign by that regime in its vain attempts to divert
attention from its own nuclear arsenals, State terrorism
and atrocities in the region.

Before concluding, I wish to reiterate the
unwavering support of my people and my Government
for the Palestinian people in their rightful and
legitimate efforts to exercise their right to
self-determination.

