Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I would like to join
previous speakers in thanking Special Representative
Shearer and Chair Mogae for their comprehensive and
insightful briefings.

My country is concerned about the slow
implementation of the South Sudan Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan, since it remains the only viable option
for achieving sustainable peace, and we appreciate
the work of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) in organizing the anxiously
awaited high-level revitalization forum, which aims to
include all parties in the effort to effectively implement
the Agreement. At the same time, we must ensure that
the national dialogue launched in May is truly inclusive
and transparent. Such a dialogue requires a much wider
collaboration among the Transitional Government, the
African Union, the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) and IGAD. We also commend the
efforts of Presidents Museveni and Konare', as well as
other stakeholders, to bring peace to South Sudan.

The crisis in South Sudan can end only if all these
peace initiatives are well coordinated. We support the
communique adopted on 20 September at the African
Union Peace and Security Council ministerial meeting
on the situation in South Sudan, and join others in
underscoring how important it is that all stakeholders
speak with one voice, thus avoiding mixed messages
being sent to the parties in South Sudan. The support
of the African Union, working closely with the United
Nations, is integral to calming intentions and making
improvements on many fronts. But we must also
acknowledge that the conflict in South Sudan cannot
be resolved or managed exclusively through political
negotiations, because security and development are
interdependent. If we are to address complex causes
of conflict we must design effective strategies for
international assistance in many areas, including
sustainable economic growth, infrastructure and
road-building, intercommunal reconciliation and
preservation of the environment.

We are seriously concerned about the fact that,
despite the ceasefire declaration and generally
limited mobility, owing to the rainy season, military
operations have continued in Jonglei, Upper Nile
and the Equatorias, leading to a sharp escalation in
humanitarian-access incidents, extreme food insecurity
and the numbers of refugees and internally displaced
persons. We therefore urge all parties to restore the
permanent ceasefire and immediately stop attacking,
arresting and detaining UNMISS and humanitarian
personnel. It will be important to make the perpetrators
of such violations accountable, and we welcome the
recent progress made in establishing the Hybrid Court.
Kazakhstan also appreciates the progress achieved in
deploying the Regional Protection Force, which will
play a key role in protecting civilians and improving
the security environment. We welcome the decision of
the Kenyan Government to participate in the Regional
Protection Force and hope that the remaining issues
will be resolved speedily and the deployment process
completed on time.

In conclusion, Kazakhstan emphasizes the need for
the regional and international communities to foster
constructive understanding and trusting, mutually
beneficial relations if we are to achieve the goal we
all share of peace and security in South Sudan. We
therefore believe that Mr. Shearer's latest meeting
with President Kiir represents the beginning of an
improved working relationship between UNMISS and
the Transitional Government.

