Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
first like to welcome to New York the President of the
Somali Republic, His Excellency Mr. Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed, whose participation in this meeting of
the Council testifies to his Government's commitment
to all initiatives aimed at finding a solution to the long-
standing crisis in Somalia. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Augustine Mahiga for his detailed briefing,
his presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Somalia (S/2012/283) and his
ongoing commitment in support of peace and stability
in the country.

The commitment of the international community
to peace and institution-building in Somalia since the
last report (S/2012/74) gives grounds for optimism
about the country's future in the light of the progress
made, even if there remains a need for further progress
in the transition process. That commitment has allowed
the Transitional Federal Government and its allied
forces to exercise their authority beyond Mogadishu,
particularly in important strategic cities in the south
and central part of Somalia and in newly recovered
areas. Moreover, real progress has been made in terms
of security, the drafting of the constitution, political
openness and reconciliation and good governance,
despite the delay in implementing the road map due to
the lack of resources and the crisis that now exists
within the Transitional Federal Parliament.

Notwithstanding that progress, a number of
important questions remain with respect to the
implementation of the agreed principles. For example,
we would mention here the need not to limit provisions
in the draft constitution having to do with fundamental
rights and freedoms. Moreover, as was noted by the
International Contact Group on Somalia and the
London Conference, it is necessary to take appropriate
measures against spoilers of the peace process.

In terms of security, despite repeated attacks in
March, especially the explosion that took place in April
at the National Theatre of Mogadishu, which the
Council firmly condemned in a press release, it is
undeniable that Al-Shabaab continues to lose ground,
even while it has aligned itself with other militia in
Puntland. As indicated in the report of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission of 20 March, the
defections that have taken place in its ranks are likely
to further weaken that terrorist movement.
None of that would have been possible without
the work done by the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), whose operational effectiveness
allowed for the achievement of encouraging results. In
that respect, Togo welcomes the establishment of the
Military Operations Coordinating Committee, whose
cooperation with other bodies has allowed the structure
of the enhanced force headquarters to be reworked and
wide-scale operations to be conducted in a number of
sectors.

The hope that is being reborn in Somalia thanks
to the efforts of the Transitional Federal Government
and the international community must not lead us to
overlook the fact that it is primarily up to the Somalis
themselves to provide for the security of their country.
They are the only ones who can sustainably establish
the security and stability that the population has
aspired to for a number of decades. It is also urgent to
achieve an independent security sector as soon as
possible. We share the opinion that the independence of
the sector requires strategic planning and orientation,
training and equipping the military and the police,
modernizing the justice and prison systems, and
establishing a programme for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of combatants who
have abandoned Somali rebel groups. Togo takes this
opportunity to once again thank the European Union,
the United States, the United Kingdom and all other
partners that are providing different forms of
substantial support to AMISOM. and to the Somali
Government forces.

The report indicates that piracy continues in the
high-risk area and is seen through increasingly
ambitious attacks, a hardening of violence and an
upsurge in the amounts of ransom demanded. Togo
believes that piracy can only be eliminated by
combining enforcement activities and broader efforts
for stabilization in Somalia, by promoting good
governance and the rule of law, by strengthening
Government institutions and by promoting
socio-economic development.

All of those actions require substantial logistical
and financial means, which neither Somalia nor the
States of the subregion can find by themselves.
External partners therefore need to continue to support
those States in the fight which, once won, will be
beneficial not only for peace in the subregion but also
for freedom of commerce and navigation.
On the humanitarian side, Al-Shabaab's ban
imposed on United Nations humanitarian organizations
and non-governmental organizations working in areas
under their control remains in force, as indicated in the
report. The ban contributes to the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in the regions in the southern
part of the country, which is the homeland of the vast
majority of those affected by the crisis, who are
suffering in particular from malnutrition.

Moreover, reports indicate that targeting killings
by Al-Shabaab are taking place in areas they have
recently lost. Cases of rape and sexual violence against
displaced women and girls have also been noted. Togo
believes that Al-Shabaab's violent behaviour in areas
they are losing is unacceptable and requires more
vigilance and spontaneous reactions from Government
forces and AMISOM. in securing areas taken from the
terrorist organization.

Togo welcomes the 23 March Human Rights
Council resolution requesting the Secretary-General to
draft a report containing concrete proposals for a more
integrated approach across the United Nations system
for the protection and promotion of human rights in
Somalia. We hope that the international conference on
Somalia to be held in a few days in Turkey will be an
opportunity to further debate the question.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
country's appreciation to the troop-contributing
countries, AMISOM, donor countries and organizations
for the invaluable sacrifices they continue to make to
provide for a return of stability to Somalia and to
maintain peace and security in the entire Horn of
Africa region.

