While there has been an overall decline in violent conflicts over the past two decades, peacelessness has prevailed. Today fissiparous tendencies, fuelled by ethnic and religious tensions, increasing socioeconomic divisions and the marginalization of "we the peoples", underdevelopment, scarcity of resources, international instability, climate change and now the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, are the most recognized contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity. But unjust global governance and lack of political will also contribute to peacelessness and conflict. When States are denied an equal voice, when the rule of law is violated with impunity and internationally agreed agreements are not respected or implemented, States are forced to find solutions elsewhere. When the United Nations abrogated its responsibilities at the behest of the Powers at the time, the Eritrean people were forced to wage a bloody 30-year armed struggle for independence. When the United Nations, the African Union, the European Union and the United States refused to shoulder their moral and legal obligations as witnesses and guarantors of the Algiers Agreement between Eritrea and Ethiopia, or to enforce the final and binding delimitation and demarcation decisions of the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission, Eritreans were forced to defend their nation, hence the prolonging of the national service programme. Today Eritrea and Ethiopia enjoy warm and cordial relations in spite of the international community's silence and abrogation of responsibility, because the current leadership of Ethiopia decided that it was time to abide by its treaty obligations and the rule of law. The unjust nine-year-long Security Council sanctions against the State of Eritrea, from 2009 to 2018, also contributed to the prolonging of the conflict and to the peacelessness that held back development and peace in the region. A mishandled global war on terror exacerbated peace and security in the Horn region; lives were needlessly lost and opportunities, too. The illicit flows of arms and overall global militarization also have their consequences. The hopeless and the poor have been lured into transnational criminal networks that have wreaked havoc in societies everywhere. The current pandemic has forced us all to pay heed to our vulnerabilities and structural flaws. Social justice remains the only response to the growing economic inequalities within countries and regions. Our interconnected and interdependent world requires an invigorated multilateral system that is responsive, one that will leave no voice unheard. As we enter the Decade of Action on the Sustainable Development Goals, it is imperative that we all work together and redouble our efforts to mitigate the setbacks due to COVID-19, in order to fully realize the aspirations of our peoples as envisioned in Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda. Today, 25 years after Beijing, we are faced with stark reminders that women still bear the brunt of most calamities; with COVID-19, it is no different. But without peace, there can be no development. The Security Council must not be used to advance the agendas of the powerful against small and vulnerable nations; it should serve as the moral voice for all and work to preserve and promote peace.
