The President: I should like, at the outset of the
meeting, to acknowledge the presence at the Council table
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Costa Rica, His
Excellency Mr. Fernando Naranjo. On behalf of the
Council, I extend a warm welcome to him.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central America: efforts towards peace

Report of the Secretary-General (S/1996/1045 and Add.1 and 2)

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Guatemala, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Martini Herrera
(Guatemala) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on Central America: efforts
towards peace, documents S/ 1996/ 1045 and Add.l and 2.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/l997/49, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/ 1997/23, which contains the text
of a letter dated 10 January 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Guatemala to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the text of a letter of the same date from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala addressed to
the President of the Security Council.

Members of the Council have received photocopies
of a letter dated 16 January 1997 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the texts of two agreements
pertaining to the Guatemala peace process, which were
signed by the Peace Commission of the Government of
Guatemala and the General Command of the Unidad
Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca under the auspices
of the United Nations in December 1996, which will be
issued as document S/1997/51.

Members of the Council have also received
photocopies of a letter dated 20 January 1997 from the
Permanent Representative of China to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the position paper of the Chinese
Government on the authorization of the deployment of
military observers in Guatemala by the Security Council,
which will be issued as document S/1997/53.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.

I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Costa
Rica, His Excellency Mr. Fernando Naranjo.


