Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the five Nordic countries - Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway.
Let me add that it is with some degree of humility
that I address the Chamber today, as one of my first
official actions as Norway's Ambassador to the United
Nations. I look forward to getting to know everyone in
the coming weeks and months.

The Nordic countries would like to commend
Egypt for initiating this debate, which leads up to the
high-level open debate on peace operations to be held
during Ethiopia's presidency next month.

The concept of sustaining peace marks a paradigm
shift in our approach to prevention, conflict resolution,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It requires more
holistic strategies, while drawing seamlessly on all the
tools at the disposal of the United Nations along the
continuum between conflict and peace. It is consistent
with the reviews conducted over the past few years and
is at the core of Secretary-General's vision for reform
of the United Nations - a vision to which the Nordic
countries fully subscribe. I would like to focus on three
areas in particular where the Nordic countries believe
the Security Council can contribute to sustainable peace.

First, we believe that the Security Council should
include a long-term perspective in its mission mandates.
Mandates should be based on a joint United Nations
analysis that considers the root causes of a conflict
in order to lay the foundations for lasting peace. In
our view, the recent mandates for the transitions of
the United Nations Missions in Liberia and Haiti
provide interesting lessons that may inspire other
mandate processes.
In Liberia, the mandate charged the Secretariat with
developing a peacebuilding plan in close coordination
with the Government and the United Nations country
team. It specifically emphasized the important
convening role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
in developing such a plan, a role that the PBC's Liberia
configuration has played and will continue to play. In
Haiti, the Council has decided to establish a follow-on
peacekeeping mission - the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti - to ease the transition
as the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
winds down, thereby enabling Haiti to consolidate the
gains it has made towards sustainable peace. Those
two examples offer different lessons that could be
included in a catalogue of best practices for transitions.
We propose that Member States and the Secretariat
develop a catalogue of this kind, which could guide
the Secretariat in drawing up future reports to the
Council and form the basis for well-informed mandate
discussions in the future.

Secondly, United Nations peace operations should
be made more people-centred and inclusive and should
engage more actively with local communities. That
was one of the key recommendations of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations. In our
View, more attention should be paid to this aspect
when mandating and designing peace operations.
Missions should be enabled to engage more actively
with local Governments and communities, including
women and young people. The participation of women
must be ensured at all levels. A more people-centred
approach requires close coordination with United

Nations country teams in order to avoid duplication and
maximize results on the ground.

Thirdly, ensuring predictable and sustained
financing for peacebuilding is crucial. Peacebuilding
should not be dependent on voluntary contributions
alone. When large missions wind down and withdraw,
a large amount of funding and a considerable source
of revenues and economic activity are lost. That may
result in severe economic challenges for the country
concerned, which in turn could undermine the transition
process. Close consultation between the Council and the
PBC is needed in order to reduce the negative economic
consequences of transitions.

We look forward to the Secretary-General's
forthcoming report on sustaining peace, which we hope
will include guidance on how revenue gaps of this kind
can be prevented and bridged in future.

