Lord Malloch-Brown (United Kingdom): I
should like to start by joining those who have thanked
President Compaore for convening this debate. We
have a lot to learn from his own experience in his
successful mediation in Togo and Cote d'Ivoire.

But I think today we have benefited from a
wealth of knowledge and direct experience around this
table. Not just our friend Lakhdar Brahimi, but so
many foreign ministers and the Secretary-General have
contributed with their own experiences, alongside other
leaders who have spoken. In fact, it strikes me that
everybody who has spoken at this table today has
arrived at their seat at the table, not insignificantly,
through their own direct experience as mediators.
Thus, in some ways this has almost been more like a
mediators' workshop than a normal meeting of the
Security Council. I think that is a tribute to the
President for convening this debate today. It does help
us put an international spotlight on what can be done to
ensure that the international community's mediation
efforts are more effective in helping to resolve conflict.

A recent study showed that more than 90 per cent
of recent conflicts were resolved by mediation, not by
victory on the battlefield. Of course, failure to generate
durable peace agreements leads all too often to a
resumption of war. Conflict costs Africa an estimated
$18 billion a year - a figure it can obviously ill afford
as a region.

The United Nations is playing an increasingly
important role in mediation efforts, as of course is the
African Union (AU). The 2005 World Summit pointed
to the need to build the United Nations mediation
capacity, and we welcome the establishment of the
Mediation Support Unit. There is more to be done,
however, to give the United Nations the flexibility and
resources it needs. In that regard, the United Kingdom
supports the strengthening of the Department of
Political Affairs by the General Assembly. It is also
critical to build the capacities of regional
organizations, and we welcome the AU's lO-year
capacity-building programme. It has an important role
to play, as we saw earlier this year in Kenya, Cote
d'Ivoire and elsewhere.

We should remind ourselves of successful
mediation efforts undertaken in recent months. It was
under AU auspices, but with strong United Nations
support, that Kofi Annan led the international
community's efforts in Kenya, as Mr. Brahimi
described. The current Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, played a critical role in Burma after Cyclone
Nargis. He worked closely with the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and other partners
in the region to broker a deal with the Government that
allowed aid to flow to survivors. We applaud the
Secretary-General's strong leadership and continue to
offer our full support for his engagement on Burma.

We hope that the United Nations, ASEAN and the
broader international community can bring the same
unity of purpose and dynamism to bear in breaking the
political deadlock in that country. The Council has
made its expectations of the Burmese regime clear. We
should remain united in demanding a fair and
transparent political process there, beginning with the
release of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. While we welcome
the release today of a veteran journalist and close
associate of hers, U Win Tin, we cannot forget the
1,000 or so political prisoners who remain in captivity
and the ongoing arrests of political activists. We hope
that all will be released.

We welcome the appointment of Mr. Bassole as
the joint AU-United Nations Chief Mediator on Darfur.
He has our full support as he seeks to build a political
process to address a conflict which remains the most
serious challenge facing this Council. He should be at
the centre of the process, providing support and
encouragement and pulling together all the parties,
both local and international. At the same time, we call
on the Government of the Sudan to cooperate
substantially on all aspects of the Darfur problem and
to create the conditions in which mediation stands a
chance of succeeding.

The agreement between Morgan Tsvangirai and
Robert Mugabe in Zimbabwe was the product of a long
and difficult mediation effort led by President Mbeki,
with the support of the United Nations and the AU. We
welcome the agreement. We want it to work. It offers
the prospect of a new path towards political stability
and recovery for Zimbabwe, which has been blighted
by appalling governance for so many years. What is
crucial now is action on the ground. The new
Government should be formed as soon as possible, and
we are ready to provide generous financial support to
that Government as we see evidence of it introducing
real and credible reforms. The challenge of improving
the lives of ordinary Zimbabweans begins now.

Those are all recent examples of mediation at
work. We need to learn the right lessons from them.
Mediation requires strong and capable leadership, a
coherent international effort in support of that
leadership, and the resources to make sure it can
deliver. But we should not see mediation in isolation.
Today's debate builds on the Council's debates in April
on peace and security in Africa and in May on post-
conflict peacebuilding, under the presidencies of South
Africa and the United Kingdom, respectively. Peace
agreements have too often fallen apart. That is often
due to the lack of an implementation plan, but also
because we do not have the right linkages between
mediation processes and the critical recovery and
peacebuilding phase.

That is why we believe so strongly that we need
to build coherence across the conflict spectrum. That
should be a theme of the reports commissioned on the
basis of these Security Council debates. Through these
we can not only improve the effectiveness of mediation
and ensure that the agreements reached are sustained,
but also, I hope, strengthen the role of the Security
Council through each phase of conflict prevention, the
mediation of conflicts, conflict resolution and the
implementation of peace agreements - as well, of
course, when mediation fails, of the peacekeeping
process itself.

