Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the choice of the theme for the
present debate. The full text of our statement will be
shared accordingly.

The history of humankind has indeed been marked
by conflicts, conquests and wars for the control of
areas of influence, as the concept note (S/2016/103, annex) points out. However, the same history is replete
with examples of the continued struggle of oppressed
peoples for their freedom, self-determination and
independence. The Charter of the United Nations was
written by the people and for the people. The doctrine
ofthe Charter is based on a reaffirmation of the faith in
basic human rights and in the dignity and worth of the
human individual. The Charter bases the development
of friendly relations among nations on respect for the
principles of equal rights and the self-determination
of peoples. It is precisely due to those fundamental
principles of the Charter that 193 States, free nations,
are gathered under the roof of the United Nations.

The Charter does not in any way limit the privilege
of freedom to any people. It would be utterly unfair to
downplay the many achievements of the Organization
in promoting peace and security during the past 70
years. However, we should also admit that there has
been an erosion of trust in the world order, given the
proliferation and intensity of conflicts. Negotiations
on peace agreements often confront fundamental
difficulties, not least because the voices of the affected
people are drowned in the justification and abuse of
the principles of sovereignty, non-interference and
territorial integrity.

Sovereignty entails responsibility. Therefore, when
sovereignty harbours a political culture of repression,
systematic violation of human rights and disregard for
the rule of law, it effectively cultivates conflict. When
a sovereign leader drives the discourse of intolerance
and hatred, he flouts the responsibility of sovereignty.
It is therefore as much about the responsibility of
Government as it is about sovereignty.

The people of Nagorno Karabakh have effectively
won their right to self-determination and freedom out of a
struggle against decades of discrimination - historical
as well as socioeconomic and political injustice. The
continued cultivation of hatred and aggression against
the people of Nagorno Karabakh, the entrenched culture
of systematic violations of human rights in Azerbaijan,
their continued war-mongering and effective refusal
to achieve a swift and negotiated peace agreement
mediated by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Minsk Group co-Chairs
represent an actual physical threat to the people of
Nagorno Karabakh. The consolidated support of the
international community to the negotiating process
within the agreed format is of the utmost importance,
particularly in order to deny the unwilling party the
privilege of procrastination, deviation from agreed
principles of the settlement and forum-shopping.
Once again, Armenia highly values the support by the
international community and the United Nations, and
of the Secretary-General in particular, rendered to the
OSCE Minsk Group co-chairmanship in the peaceful
resolution of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.

Over the years, the broad concept of prevention
has been gradually and effectively taking centre stage
in the function of the maintenance of international
peace and security. The responsibility of States to build
peaceful and effective societies is a primary guarantee
against conflicts. The evolving agenda of the United
Nations, notably the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1)
recognizes in no ambiguous terms the interlinkages
among peace, security, development, human rights,
responsible Government and the rule of law. Enhanced
international cooperation to that end is therefore
compelling, not least when viewed strictly through the
prism of the maintenance of international peace.

The requirement of systematic and careful analyses
of information to detect deteriorating situations requires
the sustainability of strengthened and reliable data
sources. The United Nations system, with its multiple
reporting mechanisms and extensive field presence,
is one such important source. Enhanced cooperation
with regional organizations also serves the purpose of
expanding data-gathering. Sources of information are
multiple. However, the affected people whose actual
physical security is at risk are the ultimate voice in
analysing situations. The Secretary-General makes a
cogent argument in his report entitled One Humanity,
SharedResponsibility, in that people want to be safe and
free from violence, persecution, oppression and fear.
They want to be treated with dignity and to know that
their lives matter. Indeed, that is the central tenet of the
Charter. It should also be central to the international
order.

The capacity to channel early signs of deteriorating
situations into the United Nations system, not least to
the Security Council, remains a vital objective. In that
respect, we commend the Secretary-General and the
United Nations system for their continued efforts. We
recall that one such important tool in that respect is the
Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes.

Finally, swift action on early signs, however, remains
a challenge, as it concerns heightened sensitivities to
preventive engagement and compatibility of political
will among Member States. It should also be noted that
deteriorating situations are further exacerbated against
a background of the deterioration in the international
political context, in which major international and
regional actors expand the scope of disagreements
among them, and to which smaller States are particularly
vulnerable.

