Mr. Saltanov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): This is not the first time in recent months
that the Security Council is meeting to discuss the
question of the Middle East. That illustrates the
mounting concern in the international community
about the deteriorating situation in the region, which is
having a very negative effect on international stability
and security. That is why the initiative by the State of
Qatar to hold today's Council meeting is both timely
and important.

We must note that the situation throughout the
Middle East region is dangerously unbalanced - a
trend that is unfortunately growing. Several hotspots of
tension have arisen in the region, which are to a great
extent interlinked and mutually influencing. That is the
Middle East, and we must take that reality into
account. The lack of resolution to one conflict situation
there creates others, as well as overall regional
instability. The search to a solution to the problem of
the Middle East therefore requires an integrated

approach. It also requires collective multilateral efforts
that include the participation of directly interested
parties, States in the region, as well as the international
community. Unilateral steps, and the use of force in
particular, can only serve to further to aggravate the
conflict.

It is particularly urgent to lend fresh impetus to a
negotiated settlement to what is both the oldest and
newest conflict in political history, namely, the Arab-
Israeli conflict. That is of course one of the main
problems of the Middle East. We have the reference
points for a search for mutually acceptable outcomes.
They are contained in the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, the Madrid terms of reference and
the Quartet Road Map. The Arab Peace Initiative also
has the positive potential to provide for the full
normalization of relations between the Arab countries
and Israel. Recently, efforts have been made in the area
that is central to a settlement in the Middle East,
namely, Palestine and Israel, including the assistance
of key regional parties and the international mediators
of the Quartet, towards restoring the political process.
An important step taken in that area, namely, the
ceasefire agreement in Gaza, must, in our view, be
made comprehensive and be extended to the West
Bank. We must try to achieve a complete cessation of
violence, terrorist acts and incitement to terrorism,
wherever those may originate. It is equally important to
support the willingness to enter into direct dialogue
that was expressed by both the Prime Minister of
Israel, Mr. Olmert, and the President of the Palestinian
Authority, Mr. Abbas.

Nevertheless, there has been no breakthrough so
far. In order to eliminate the obstacles to dialogue, we
must remove the remaining sensitive issues for both
parties. Those include the release of the Israeli soldier
and a solution to the fate of the Palestinians detained in
Israel. There is also another element that is slowing
down the Palestinian-Israeli summit - that is the fact
that a coalition Palestinian Government has not yet
been formed - a Government that is capable of
reflecting in its programme and activities the well-
known criteria set out by the Quartet.

The situation in the Palestinian territories,
especially in the Gaza Strip, in particular the socio-
economic and humanitarian situation, remains
extremely difficult. The continuing blockade, severe
restrictions on movement of people and goods and the
closing of the crossing points affect, above all,
ordinary people and create a mood of pessimism and
hopelessness among the Palestinian people. That state
of affairs can no longer be tolerated and the situation
must be resolved.

In resolving those important issues, we must not
lose sight of the strategic goal - the achievement of a
just settlement to the Palestinian problem on the basis
of the principle of creating a sovereign, democratic,
territorially contiguous Palestinian State, existing side
by side with Israel in peace and security. The main
instrument for achieving that is the Road Map, which
was approved in the unanimous adoption of Security
Council resolution 1515 (2003) and which has received
international legal status.

It is extremely important that the document be
accepted by both parties - the Israelis and the
Palestinians. It may, of course, be implemented through
mutually linked agreed steps by both parties. That is
the approach that prevails in the Quartet. The Road
Map is a generally recognized and effective instrument
for international assistance in the situation in the
Middle East, and it will serve as the basis for our
future work.

The events of the past year, the crisis in Lebanon
and Israeli operations in the Gaza Strip have confirmed
the argument that peace in the Middle East, by
definition, can only be comprehensive and must cover
all negotiation tracks - Palestinian, Lebanese and
Syrian. Russia is in favour of a speedy resumption of
collective efforts towards peace through negotiations,
including halting the occupation begun in 1967 and
ensuring normal conditions of security and
development for all the States of the region, including
Israel. It must be recognized that the deadlock in one
of the areas of negotiation is holding back progress in
other areas. For that reason, steps aimed at reviving the
Syrian and Lebanese parts of the peace settlement are
so important.

In the view of my delegation, the time has come
to take a fresh look at the proposal to convene an
international conference on the Middle East. We spoke
in favour of that idea last year. It is gaining growing
recognition in the world and in the region and is in
accordance with the Road Map, in which an
international conference was prescribed as an
important element of progress. However, such a major
event, whose task we see as relaunching the peace
process in the Middle East, must be well organized and
must receive the approval of all of the interested
parties.

In conclusion, allow me, on behalf of the Russian
Federation to express our great appreciation for the
substantial contribution made by the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, Mr. Kofi Annan, in
consolidating the efforts of the international
community to solve the problems in the Middle East.

