Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to join other delegations in
expressing our sincerest condolences on the passing
away of a great statesman, on both the national and
international stage, former United States President
George Herbert Walker Bush. We convey our sympathy
to his family and to the American people for this loss.

Let me also express our sincere congratulations
to Cote d'Ivoire on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council. We wish it every success. We also
pay tribute to China for its excellent presidency during
the month of November.

First of all, we would like to express our sincere
congratulations to the Secretariat and Special Adviser
Karim Asad Ahmad Khan and his team for their great
efforts since the Council adopted resolution 2379
(2017), on 21 September 2017, which required the
Secretary-General to appoint an investigative team to
support the efforts of the Iraqi Government to establish
responsibility for the crimes committed in Iraq by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh).
Our delegation is very pleased that, following a very
complicated, arduous and difficult process, Mr. Khan
has presented us with the first report on his work (see S/2018/1031), following his appointment on 13 July.

The report of the Investigative Team, which we
consider preliminary given the recent start of the
Team's activities and the complexity of the work it
must carry out, basically illustrates the details of the
strategic vision for the activities that the Investigative
Team will carry out as an independent and impartial
mechanism pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017). There
is no doubt as to the great and eager expectations for
future reports to be presented to the Council on the
crimes ofthe Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, given
the monumental and terrifying details that have been
emerging about crimes committed by Da'esh during the
period between June 2014 and December 2017, during
which Da'esh occupied, controlled and operated with
impunity in large areas of Iraq, committing all kinds of
crimes that involve serious violations of international
law, human rights law, international criminal law and
international humanitarian law, and which constitute
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
Several witness accounts confirm that during its
occupation Da'esh carried out serious crimes against the
civilian population in the territories under its control.
More than 200 mass graves have been discovered that
hold the remains of many thousands of men, women
and children - atrocious loss of human life, with the
attendant terrible, horrendous suffering.

In view of the devastating magnitude of those
crimes, which are being discovered and will continue
to be in future, and with the aim of clearly establishing
responsibility so as to ensure proper accountability
for those responsible for such acts, it is necessary that
the international community and the United Nations
provide the Investigative Team all the necessary support,
including basic infrastructure, funding, logistical
means, other resources and, even more important, as
Mr. Khan states in his report, solidarity and unanimous
support from the Council, its members and the States
Members of the United Nations. That support should
include clear political will so that that the Team can
successfully carry out its work and eventually expose
to the light of day all of the crimes that have been
committed, including identifying the perpetrators.
That work - which should always be carried out while
observing impartiality and independence, offering
collective support to Iraq and adhering to optimal
international standards and practices, with focus on
those with greater responsibility in the commission
of the crimes and in close collaboration with other
international agencies in the region with competence
on the issues - will allow the international community
not only to know the magnitude of the crimes and
their perpetrators and ensure accountability, but will
inevitably awaken awareness of the need to stop and
prevent the repetition of such acts in other armed
conflict settings.

In conclusion, our delegation wishes great courage,
determination and success to Mr. Khan and his entire
team in the formidable and complex mission that has
been entrusted to them by the United Nations. At
the same time, we assure him of the support of the
Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea in
his duties.

