Mr. Owada (Japan): The indiscriminate use of
land-mines is among the most pressing and dangerous
problems confronting us today. The numbers are staggering:
there remain more than 100 million uncleared land-mines
in 68 countries around the world, primarily in areas of
conflict; and between 2 million and 5 million additional
land-mines are being laid each year. They are a grave
humanitarian problem, causing unspeakable suffering
among innocent civilian populations, and they continue to
pose a serious obstacle to post-conflict national
rehabilitation and development.

It is essential that the international community as a
whole address this dire situation, because war-ravaged
countries simply do not have the wherewithal to deal with
it on their own. The United Nations, for its part, has been
addressing this problem since 1994 through, for example,
the establishment of the Voluntary Trust Fund for
Assistance in Mine Clearance, through the convening of a
Conference to review the 1980 Convention on Prohibitions
or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons, as well as through the International Meeting on
Mine Clearance in Geneva. My delegation believes that the
United Nations must mobilize its strength to continue and
reinforce such efforts. It expresses its appreciation to the
Federal Republic of Germany for its initiative in holding
this formal meeting of the Security Council.

The Government of Japan has contributed more than
$20 million to the mine-clearing activities of the United
Nations in Cambodia, Afghanistan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and elsewhere. At the International Meeting
on Mine Clearance held in July last year in Geneva,
Japan pledged an additional $2 million to the Voluntary
Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine Clearance. This had
already been disbursed by March this year.

Speaking on that occasion, I underscored the need to
enhance United Nations-based international cooperation in
clearing land-mines that remain in areas where armed
conflict has been settled and in strengthening efforts to
deter the use of land-mines in the future.

In particular, Japan emphasized at the Geneva
Conference that the international community, in tackling
the issue of existing land-mines, must address this
intractable problem in a comprehensive way, focusing its
efforts in three interrelated directions: first, strengthening
the mine-clearance activities of international agencies,
with the United Nations as the centre of coordination;
secondly, promoting the development of new technologies
for land-mine detection and clearance; and, thirdly,
strengthening international assistance for the rehabilitation
of land-mine victims.

At the G-7 Summit in Lyons earlier this summer, the
Prime Minister of Japan, Ryutaro Hashimoto, proposed
convening an international conference to discuss this
three-pronged effort at the senior official level in Tokyo
early next year.

But our efforts should go further than that. We must
tackle the root cause of the problem: the use of this
inhumane weapon called the anti-personnel land-mine. It
is important that demining activities be coupled with swift
and determined action to prevent a further proliferation of
land-mines. Otherwise, the money and efforts that the
international community puts into demining will be
largely wasted.

At the Review Conference of the States Parties to
the Convention on Conventional Weapons (CCW) in
Geneva this spring, it was decided to strengthen
restrictions on the use and transfer of anti-personnel
land-mines within the framework of the CCW. It should
be noted in this context that there is emerging within the
international community a new momentum towards the
global ban on the use of anti-personnel land-mines. The
Government of Japan has decided to support such
international efforts.

 

In fact, Japan announced last June that it had decided
to undertake the following initiatives on its own, pending
an agreement to be reached on a global ban: Japan will
appropriately advance necessary measures to modify its
anti-personnel land-mines into self-destructing ones; Japan
will not plan new acquisitions of non-self-destructing anti-
personnel land-mines; Japan will not make operational use
of non-self-destructing anti-personnel land-mines, even in
cases where their use is permitted by the strengthened
Protocol on land-mines; and Japan will promptly pursue the
study of such alternatives to anti-personnel land-mines as
will not inflict damage on civilians.

In this spirit, the Government of Japan wishes to
cooperate with like-minded countries in joining efforts
towards a global ban on anti-personnel land-mines.

It is important to recall in this connection that if we
are to be serious about our efforts, the problem of
commercial transfer of land-mines from the manufacturing
countries to the areas of conflict will have to be the subject
of our careful scrutiny. Japan has been strictly adhering to
the policy of refraining from the export of land-mines; it
strongly urges other countries to follow this example.

Let me turn now to a specific point raised by the
Federal Republic of Germany. Until now, the problem of
land-mines has been discussed chiefly as a humanitarian
issue and in terms of the obstacles mines pose to national
reconstruction and development. Indeed, land-mines can
present a major hindrance to establishing lasting peace,
which is a prerequisite for national reconstruction and
rehabilitation in the post-conflict situation. But at the same
time, they can also seriously compromise the safety and
security of personnel involved in United Nations peace-
keeping operations. As we have seen in Cambodia, the
Golan Heights and Rwanda, demining efforts are sometimes
indispensable to enabling peace-keeping missions to fully
discharge their mandates. Thus, it would seem reasonable
and appropriate that, when considering future peace-keeping
operations, we should keep in mind this aspect of the
situation under consideration and include in their mandates,
as appropriate, a demining function, in addition to strictly
peace-keeping functions such as the observation of
disengagement of forces and of cease-fires. This would
have the added advantage of contributing to peace-building
activities through the creation of a safe environment to
work in, during the phase of continuum leading towards
full-fledged post-conflict reconstruction and development.
With this in mind, my delegation is supportive of the
German proposal to consider the demining function within
the framework of the peace-keeping activities of the
United Nations.

In conclusion, my delegation strongly hopes that the
present formal consultation in the Security Council will
give a powerful momentum towards establishing a truly
effective framework for working towards a global ban on
this reprehensible weapon.

