Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom understands and shares the deep
frustration with the lack of progress on the Middle
East peace process and the unacceptability and
unsustainability of the status quo. A just and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is long
overdue. We will continue to spare no effort to turn our
ambition - the creation of a sovereign, contiguous and
Viable Palestinian State, living in peace and security
side by side with Israel - into reality.

We have long believed that direct negotiations
towards a two-State solution should be on the basis of
clear, internationally agreed parameters. I recall that
in February 2011 I set out in this Chamber our View
of what those should be (see S/PV.6484), in a joint
explanation of vote by the United Kingdom, France
and Germany on a draft resolution on settlements
(S/20ll/24). We therefore welcome the idea ofa Security
Council resolution on the Middle East peace process
that sets out those parameters. However, agreeing on
such a resolution requires proper time for consultation
and negotiation of the draft resolution, including on
its timing. We consider President Abbas a man of
peace, and understand the pressure that the Palestinian
leadership has been under to act and its frustration with
the lack of progress, but we are disappointed that the
normal and necessary negotiation did not take place on
this occasion.

The United Kingdom supports much of the content
of the draft resolution (S/2014/916). It was therefore
with deep regret that we abstained on it. The United
Kingdom stands by the parameters I set out here in
2011, which were reiterated by the European Union
Foreign Affairs Council conclusions in July. Our views
on settlements, including in East Jerusalem, are clear.
They are illegal under international law, an obstacle to
peace and seriously damage the prospects for a two-
State solution. All settlement activity, including in East
Jerusalem, should cease immediately. We call on all
parties not to take unilateral steps that would make the
search for a peace based on negotiations harder.

Given the fact that today's draft resolution was not
adopted, the United Kingdom would like to work with
partners to revisit the idea of a parameters resolution
on the Middle East peace process in 2015. We are
convinced that it is possible, with further time and
effort, to secure, for the first time ever, a resolution that
commands full Security Council support.

