Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): As this is the first
time that my delegation has addressed the Security
Council this month, let me begin by congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of August. Allow me
also to extend congratulations to your predecessor,
Ambassador Mignonette Patricia Durrant, Permanent
Representative of Jamaica, on her stewardship of the
Council's activities last month.

We have listened attentively to the previous
speakers. Many have referred to recent acts of
violence, including the incidents that caused the death
of United Nations peacekeepers from Australia,
Bangladesh, Nepal and New Zealand. Let me take this
opportunity to join those who have spoken before me
and extend the Indonesian delegation's heartfelt
condolences to the bereaved families in this hour of
sorrow, and our deepest sympathy to the Governments
and the peoples of Australia, Bangladesh, Nepal and
New Zealand. Consistent with my Government's
policy, we reiterate our strong condemnation of all acts
of violence, including the most recent, where three
United Nations staff members involved in humanitarian
work were injured, which led to the suspension of the
repatriation efforts of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the
International Organization for Migration (IOM). We
look forward to the results of the joint investigations
that are currently under way.

Time and again, irresponsible quarters have
described these acts of violence as being sanctioned by
Indonesia. One has claimed, for example, that

"clashes between the pro-Jakarta groups and
peacekeepers have become more frequent
recently, and there is growing speculation that
sections of the Indonesian armed forces have
been arming and training the gangs".

It has also been suggested that "attacks by pro-
Indonesia militias operate with impunity". While no
one is denying that certain incidents have indeed
occurred, we must nevertheless keep in perspective all
the rumours that abound. Allegations have been made
that the militias are now better equipped and better
armed, and that they are wearing camouflage uniforms.
But this does not mean that they are supported by the
Indonesian armed forces, as such material can be easily
acquired on the black market. Let me recall the reports
that armed groups were active in central and western
East Timor and that militias were burning houses,
reports which later proved to be groundless.

Indonesia fully shares the concerns expressed in
this Chamber; as on previous occasions, we would like
to reiterate that we are determined to take the necessary
steps to ensure security and to prevent such incidents
from recurring. Indeed, one such step was taken on 12
November 1999, when the so-called militia groups
were formally disbanded. But we must not forget that
the refugee problem is a complex, complicated and a
multi-dimensional one.

Under the agreed Memorandum of Understanding
between Indonesia and the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), each side is
responsible for providing security on its respective side
of the border. In order to avoid the occurrence of
incidents in border areas, Indonesia proposed to
UNTAET to undertake joint patrols, establish joint
border posts and exchange military liaison officers.
That proposal was unfortunately rejected by UNTAET.
For its part, the Indonesian armed forces always barred
armed persons from entering East Timor. It has
confirmed that it detained the leader of one militia
group, who had been organizing a 200-man force for
cross-border strikes. But once such armed groups
manage to cross the border, UNTAET, being
responsible for security in the territory of East Timor,
has a clear, robust and unequivocal mandate to take the
necessary action to maintain that security. We would
certainly welcome the remark by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General that "those
who dare to disrupt the public order in the country will
pay a very high price" being translated into concrete
action, for that is precisely what is expected of
UNTAET.

Motivated by a strong desire to resolve the
refugee problem, my Government has announced its
intention to deal with it in a comprehensive manner
within a period of three to six months. That decision
was taken so as not to run the risk that international
attention to this issue would wane and that the
thousands of refugees still in the camps would continue
to languish there. We are of the view that if the
problem is addressed comprehensively, acts of
violence, killings and tension could be significantly
abated, if not eradicated altogether.

Essential to this process is the registration of
refugees. We acknowledge the role of the United
Nations in trying to determine how many people want
to remain in Indonesian territory and how many want
to return to East Timor. In this respect, the Government
of Indonesia is determined to do its utmost to assist and
will not allow extremists to get in the way.

For this purpose, a comprehensive plan of action
is presently being formulated in order to expedite the
resolution of the refugee problem. The elements of the
plan would include the following: first, the
continuation of existing programmes for repatriation to
East Timor or resettlement within Indonesian territory;
secondly, the closure of refugee camps closest to the
border; thirdly, the relocation to temporary transit
camps away from the border of those refugees who
choose to remain in Indonesia, prior to their permanent
resettlement in West Timor or in other parts of
Indonesia; and fourthly, the transfer to transit camps in
East Timor of those refugees who choose to return to
East Timor, before they are processed for travel to their
final destinations in East Timor.

We are also mindful of the economic and
financial consequences, because the continued
existence of the camps in West Timor has imposed a
heavy economic and financial burden not only on the
central Government but also on the province of East
Nusa Tenggara. This burden has a direct bearing on the
local population, who are already impoverished.
Conversely, the return of refugees to East Timor,
many of whom are skilled in farming, small business
and administration, would be essential for the future
development of East Timor.

It must be underlined that the voluntary nature of
the decision of each and every individual refugee is
sacrosanct throughout the process of registration. The
closure of the camps and the relocation of refugees,
either to temporary transit camps in West Timor or to
transit camps in East Timor, will be carried out in a
sensitive and humane manner, preceded by an intensive
public information campaign among the refugees.

As we are all aware, such an undertaking requires
significant funding. Bearing in mind that the issue of
refugees is a collective responsibility, the international
community is also being called upon to assist in this
process. We hope that, as testimony of the continued
concern and commitment of the international
community, the necessary assistance will be
forthcoming from donor countries and relevant
international organizations.

It is understandable that some refugees may have
doubts, or even fears, of returning to East Timor due to
uncertainties still prevailing. There are approximately
130,000 refugees remaining in camps in West Timor.
Their sense of frustration is heightened by the fact that
the pace and progress of the much-needed assistance
has not met their expectations. Understandably, they
are profoundly concerned, especially about their
physical security, as well as about employment
opportunities and job security, food scarcity and lack of
other basic necessities; they see a bleak picture of what
the future holds for them in East Timor.

The success of the repatriation process will
therefore depend on many aspects, among them the
ability of UNTAET to provide certainty, not only in the
economic and social fields, but more importantly in the
area of security. Having followed closely the
developments that are taking place in East Timor, we
consider that the most fundamental issue to be
addressed as a matter of priority is the attainment of
true and genuine reconciliation between and among the
East Timorese, which, unfortunately, has so far been
elusive.

Lest we forget, it is a historical fact that conflict
had already existed between and among the East
Timorese even before 1975. That it continues until the
present day clearly is not because of Indonesia's
design. Violence in the refugee camps not only occurs
because of lingering political differences between those
who are pro- independence and those who are pro-
integration, but it is also committed out of a sense of
frustration at living under abnormal circumstances,
which has a demoralizing effect.

Undoubtedly, reconciliation is therefore of
paramount importance. So long as the root causes
remain unsolved, the attainment of a true and genuine
reconciliation will continue to elude us and thereby
hinder the resolution of this complex and challenging
task relating to refugees.

The Government of Indonesia is intent on
fostering close and mutually beneficial relations with
East Timor and is determined to make its utmost efforts
towards this end, including through the urgently
necessary task of promoting true and genuine
reconciliation among East Timorese of all political
persuasions. Accordingly, the Indonesian Attorney
General is making final preparations to name those
suspected of involvement in the events following last
year's popular consultation. This is the culmination of
protracted investigations and reflects the firm
commitment of the Government to bring to justice the
perpetrators of violence. All this is being done within
the framework of building a new era of amity and
friendship that will benefit the two peoples as the
foundation of a bilateral relationship between the two
countries.

Many issues, however, remain to be addressed.
These include questions of the border, assets, education
for East Timorese, archives, creation of a land corridor
linking East Timor with the enclave of Oecussi and
cultural artefacts. It is in this regard that a delegation
from Jakarta recently visited Dili to discuss with
UNTAET the issue of the establishment of a Joint
Border Committee consisting of civilian
representatives from UNTAET and the Indonesian
Government to demarcate the boundary between West
Timor and East Timor. It is unfortunate that UNTAET
has yet to provide comments on the document
addressing this issue, which was submitted to it some
time ago.

It is therefore imperative that extra efforts from
all the concerned parties be made so that the East
Timor chapter can finally be brought to a close.

