Mr. Gahutu (Burundi) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to express, on behalf of my
delegation, my sincere thanks to the President of the
Security Council for having organized this meeting on
the situation in Burundi. Since this is the first time I
have taken the floor since your accession to the
presidency of the Council, Sir, I should also like to
offer our best wishes for your success in discharging
your duties this month. We are convinced that your
experience and your human and intellectual talents will
help to give a fresh impetus to the work of the Council.
At the same time, I cannot neglect to take this
opportunity to pay due tribute to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Japan, for the excellent
work he accomplished last month.

My delegation welcomes the presence among us
of Mr. Charles Petrie, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General for Burundi. Given that this is the
first time I have spoken publicly since his appointment,
my delegation should like to wish him every success in
his new role. We assure him of the full cooperation of
the Government of Burundi in the execution of his
mandate.

This meeting is timely, as only a few days have
passed since the launch on 5 May of the official two-
Week campaign period leading up to the communal
elections to be held on 21 May. The elections will be
contested by between 23 of the 44 political parties
officially recognized under Burundian law.

As all those present here are aware, the
presidential elections will take place on 28 June. The
public will decide among candidates for deputy on
23 July, while senators will be chosen one week later,
on 28 July. The electoral cycle will end on 7 September
2010 with the election of councillors at the colline level.

Despite the monumental work required to
organize such an electoral marathon, today we can say
with confidence that the 2010 elections will take place
to the satisfaction of the Burundian people and the
international community alike. Several early signs and
the important phases already completed point to the
successful holding of these elections. Without giving
an exhaustive list, I shall now mention some of the
steps already taken.

The National Independent Electoral Commission
has been established, as have a consensus electoral
code and calendar. A voter registration operation was
carried out with great success, as was a countrywide
census. In contrast to those of 2005, which were held
while the Forces nationales de liberation was still
underground, the 2010 elections will be held in a calm
and peaceful military-political climate.

Plans for election security have been carefully
developed and will be executed with professionalism in
order to avoid any potential problem that might
compromise the smooth conduct of the elections. The
security measures taken by our Government, which
have been operational since the beginning of the
electoral campaign on 5 May, seem to be working very
well. To show the importance of the security aspect of
the elections, the Government has just made $2 million
in additional funds available to that end. Some donors
have also made contributions, for which we express
great thanks.

The presence of a great number of regional and
international observers is a further guarantee of the
holding of free and transparent elections. The President
of the Republic, through various forums, has invited
observers to deploy in great numbers to supervise the
correct holding of the elections so as to ensure that no
one will be able to play the bad loser by resorting to
false claims of electoral fraud.

Press freedom is reaching new heights. A synergy
of media has already been established to cover the
elections. The majority of the mass media signed a joint
media action plan charter in 2010, committing
themselves to pooling their resources and respecting
professional principles of balance, fairness and respect
for pluralism in their election coverage. A total of 15
local public and private radio stations have joined
forces to cover the campaign. Journalists have fanned
out throughout the country to bring the highlights of the
electoral campaign to the public in four languages -
Kirundi, French, English and Kiswahili. We already felt
the positive effects of this approach in 2005, and its
repetition this year will cement the success of this
exercise, which could thus serve as an example on our
continent.

An environment favourable to the successful
holding of elections has been established. This
environment is already real and can be seen on a daily
basis, as attested by the fact that the partners are
increasingly turning to dialogue as a natural habit. A
number of meetings have been organized between the
Ministry of the Interior, the Independent National
Electoral Commission, political parties, civil society
organizations and the media to provide for the
discussion of various issues related to the elections.

We estimate that, in fact, pre- and post-electoral
activities are just as important as the elections
themselves, which will make it necessary to provide
support activities before, after and during the electoral
period in order to learn lessons, develop capacities and
create institutional memory with a view to improving
electoral processes in Burundi and establishing en
exemplary democracy for our region.
The communal election campaign that began on
5 May across the country is proceeding normally and
no major incidents have been reported. That augurs
well for the remainder of the electoral process.

The political climate and the legal and operational
frameworks for free and transparent elections already
exist. With regard to financing, it should be noted that
the revised total budget for the five polls comes to
$30 million. A few weeks ago the basket fund deficit
was $20.8 million; now, that deficit has been reduced
thanks to new and additional contributions.

As I have said, the Government of Burundi has
made fresh efforts and has contributed $2 million for
election security costs. Belgium, France, Germany,
Luxembourg, the United Kingdom and the United States
have also made new contributions. The Peacebuilding
Fund has made $3 million available, and we thank the
Fund for that shot in the arm in support of the electoral
process now under way. The managers of the electoral
basket fund have made savings of $4 million in various
areas.

Less than two weeks remain before the start of the
first round of elections, set for 21 May, the budget for
the electoral cycle remains in deficit. To be sure, the
situation is less alarming than it was at the time of the
meeting of the Peacebuilding Commission on 24 March,
but it still demands due attention from our partners, to
whom we urgently appeal for additional funding to
make up this deficit. My Government hopes that the
partners who work with us daily on the peacebuilding
process in Burundi will be engines for mobilizing and
disbursing the additional financial resources still
necessary. We all hope that the 2010 elections will be a
shared success.

Eagerness to ensure funding for the elections
should not eclipse the other needs of Burundi and its
people in the area of long-term development. The two
10-35583

campaigns for the mobilization of resources should
thus take place simultaneously to create an
environment conducive to the holding of free,
transparent and peaceful elections. The electoral cycle
under way is the longest electoral marathon in
Burundi's recent history. It will last four months, and
in the meantime the socio-economic engine must
continue to run and must be fed with fuel. By "fuel"
we mean aid for long-term development projects and
future foreign investment in Burundi. In particular, I
am referring to the national strategy for the socio-
economic reintegration of conflict-affected populations
and the priorities identified during the first conference
of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Burundi, which
should be the object of sustained attention by the
international community.

I wish to conclude by thanking Burundi's
regional partners, the entire international community
and all those from near and far who have invested their
time and energy working for the cause of peace in
Burundi. My delegation assures the Council that
Burundians are more determined than ever to pursue
the culture of dialogue in resolving electoral conflicts
before, during and after the elections. We are also
firmly resolved to succeed in the challenge of holding
free, transparent and peaceful elections. We did so in
2005 and promise the international community that we
will do so again and make Burundi a haven of peace
and an example of successful democracy on the
African continent and, in particular, in our subregion.

