Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me join others in welcoming Deputy Prime
Minister Eamon Gilmore, and in thanking him for his
presentation. I congratulate him on assuming the
chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and wish him every
success in his mandate.

Guatemala is convinced that regional and
subregional organizations can make an important
contribution to further strengthening the multilateral
system, including in the maintenance of international
peace and security. I am sure that, under Ireland's
chairmanship, the OSCE will promote dialogue and
cooperation with the United Nations. Cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE is a
concrete product of an alliance that has helped to
promote peace and security in Eastern Europe, the
Caucasus and Central Asia. We therefore call attention
to several timely initiatives on themes that are on the
agenda of the Security Council.

In Afghanistan, the OSCE has actively
participated in efforts to enhance political dialogue,
increase national capacities and support the democratic
process. In that regard, Guatemala notes with
satisfaction the close coordination between the OSCE
and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan. We recognize the assistance offered by
the Government of Afghanistan in the areas of border
security, police training and the struggle against drug
trafficking.

With respect to the situation in Kosovo, the
OSCE also plays a constructive role, in close
coordination with the United Nations and the European
Union, in an environment of great challenges.
Guatemala recognizes the work that has been
accomplished, among other things, to strengthen the
rule of law.

We note the priorities outlined by Ireland for its
chairmanship in 2012, and we are pleased to learn that,
alongside the efforts to resolve long-lasting conflicts,
attention will also be paid to a renewed commitment to
democracy, the rule of law and human rights, as well as
to new avenues for promoting freedom of expression in
the digital era. We welcome its decision to hold a
meeting in Dublin in April to share its experience in
conflict resolution. We agree that every conflict
situation is different, but it is also true that there are
always lessons learned and experiences to share,
especially from a regional perspective.

Finally, Guatemala joins other countries in
expressing its support for the vision and priorities
Ireland has established for the OSCE's work this year.
We look forward with interest to fruitful cooperation
between that organization and the United Nations.

