Mr. Serry: Before I brief the Council on
developments in the Middle East over the past month,
allow me to share a personal experience.

Last week, I attended the Palestine-Jordan soccer
match in Hebron, in the company of the Palestinian
Prime Minister, the Governor of Hebron and the Mayor
of the city. Despite all the problems of the unresolved
conflict and occupation, which are on painful display
in parts of Hebron, so much of what I witnessed there
that evening filled me with hope. The Palestinian
security forces provided exemplary public security.
The Palestinian flag flew proudly. The Palestinian
people, in their thousands, cheered the home side to an
honourable draw with their neighbour, Jordan, whose
very presence was symbolically powerful.

Today we have a Palestinian Authority that is
more than a partner for peace. We have a player ready
to meet its responsibilities, determined to insist on its
rights and desperately in need of support and
enablement - from Israel, from the region and from
the world. The Palestinian Government is resolved to
complete preparations for statehood in less than two
2

years. I am convinced that they can do it, if indeed they
have not already. In a few short years from now, any
one of our national teams could play soccer against
Palestine, not in area A of the Palestinian Authority but
in a contiguous State of Palestine that is a full and
sovereign State Member of the United Nations living
side by side with the State of Israel in peace.

We all know that there are obstacles to this goal,
and they can at times seem overwhelming. But it can
be achieved, and it simply must be. The failure to do
so, I believe, would deepen the conflict to a point from
which it will be very difficult to recover, with profound
and lasting consequences.

That is why the current moment is so important,
and why all parties must cease finding excuses and rise
to their responsibilities. United States Special Envoy
George Mitchell is in the region as part of continuing
efforts towards the early resumption and conclusion of
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations. Those efforts are at a
critical stage and have our strong support.

We take this opportunity to remind the Council of
the commitments made to the Quartet by the
Government of Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) in November 2008, which formed
the basis of Security Council resolution 1850 (2008).
We believe that any resumed negotiations should build
on that work, that robust third-party support will be
helpful to the parties and that the end goal of a two-
State solution based on the 1967 lines and the
resolution of all core issues can, and must, emerge
quickly and meaningfully.

But for negotiations to be enabled, it is critical
that the parties commit to, and implement, their Road
Map obligations. In that regard, continued Israeli
settlement activity remains a source of deep concern.
In addition to ongoing construction, on 7 September,
Israeli Defence Minister Barak authorized the
construction of a further 455 housing units in several
settlements in the West Bank, including around
Jerusalem and in the Jordan Valley. Moreover, on
8 September, the Israel Lands Administration accepted
bids for the construction of 486 apartments in the
settlement of Pisgat Ze'ev, in East Jerusalem.

The Secretary-General issued a statement on
9September stressing the illegality of settlement
activity and calling on Israel to implement its
obligations under the Road Map to freeze all settlement
activity, including natural growth, and to dismantle
09-51668
outposts erected since March 2001, as called for by the
Quartet. We also reiterate the Quartet's call for the
cessation of provocative actions in Jerusalem,
including demolitions and evictions.

Members of the Council will recall the Quartet's
support for dialogue among all States in the region in
the spirit of the Arab Peace Initiative. We hope that
countries in the region stand ready to take positive
steps towards Israel if indeed negotiations resume
based on the implementation of Road Map obligations.
We also strongly re-emphasize the importance of
fostering peaceful coexistence throughout the region
through the conclusion of peace agreements between
Israel and Syria and Israel and Lebanon on the basis of
Security Council resolutions, in a manner that is
mutually reinforcing of efforts to establish the State of
Palestine. In addition, we would urge intensified
support to the Palestinian Authority as a point of
common regional action.

As I indicated in my introduction, on 25 August
the Palestinian Authority announced its agenda to
complete, within the coming two years, the building of
institutions of a State apparatus in order to form the
basis for the creation of an internationally recognized
Palestinian State. That agenda of self-empowerment,
which is reflected in concrete security and economic
improvements on the ground and more ambitious plans
for the period ahead, will be a powerful complement to
a renewed political process. It must be enabled and
supported. The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee meeting to
be held here in New York on 22 September will be an
opportunity for renewed commitment in that regard.

During the reporting period, the Palestinian
Authority continued to ensure law and order in West
Bank cities and towns. The trend of reduced Israeli
military operations evident since June 2009 continued.
However, between 20 August and 15 September, 50
Palestinians were injured and three were killed in
actions by the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) in the West
Bank, among them a 15 year-old boy. The Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
recorded 35 settler attacks on Palestinians, some of
which occurred in the context of the so-called price-tag
policy, whereby settlers attack Palestinian communities
to resist any attempts to remove settlement outposts.

Overall, OCHA reports that 619 obstacles to
movement remain in place in the West Bank, including
69 permanently staffed checkpoints. However, Israeli
09-51668

Government steps to ease closure measures reported in
recent briefings have resulted in a qualitative
improvement in movement and access. During the
reporting period, Israel eased the operation of a
checkpoint, which should improve access to the Jordan
Valley. Yesterday, Israel announced that it would begin
the removal of 100 earth mounds in several West Bank
cities. United Nations staff have witnessed actions
being taken in that regard, although most of those
obstacles are not included in the official United
Nations count.

We strongly encourage the Government of Israel
to build on those positive steps with more far-reaching
measures consistent with its policy of facilitating
increased movement and economic activity. In that
context, we remain concerned that Israel has not
approved the minimum required frequency for the
Wataniya mobile telephone operator, which would
allow commercial viability. That is essential for the
Palestinian economy and for PA revenues.

The Palestinian Authority has continued its
reform and fiscal stimulus efforts. The economy grew
by 5.4 per cent in the second quarter of 2009 as
compared with the same period in 2008. However,
shortfalls persist in meeting recurrent budgetary needs.
Timely donor support is vital in order to maintain the
liquidity of the Palestinian Authority, to help it avoid
borrowing from domestic banks and to enable it to
sustain its reform agenda.

There have also been important political steps on
the Palestinian side under the leadership of President
Abbas. On 26 August, the Palestinian National Council -
the PLO's legislative body - met in Ramallah. It was
the first such meeting since 1988. Six new members
were elected to the PLO Executive Committee.

President Abbas has indicated his intention, in
accordance with Palestinian law, to decree that
presidential and legislative elections be held in the
West Bank and Gaza upon the expiry of the term of the
current Palestinian Legislative Council, in January
2010. Hamas has, however, stated that it will not
permit the holding of elections in Gaza before an
agreement on national unity is reached.

On 10 September, building on seven rounds of
dialogue since the early months of this year, Egypt
presented a comprehensive proposal to resolve the
outstanding issues dividing the Palestinians, based on
the holding of elections in the first half of 2010. We
3
reiterate our call for the reunification of Gaza and the
West Bank, as called for by the Quartet, and urge all
factions to engage positively in internal dialogue under
Egyptian auspices.

The situation in Gaza remains unsustainable and
not in the interests of anyone concerned. Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009) contains the elements
of a more strategic approach, but key elements remain
unfulfilled. As efforts are made to relaunch a
meaningful political process, the situation in Gaza
cannot be left to further deteriorate and unravel.

There is an uneasy informal calm, but it is
inherently fragile, and violent incidents continue.
During the reporting period, two rockets and
11 mortars were fired from Gaza and there were
18 IDF shallow incursions and three air strikes, as well
as several incidents in which the IDF opened fire on
Palestinian fishermen. Six Palestinians were killed -
two of them children - and 16 injured, while one IDF
soldier was injured by a mortar. We continue to call for
an end to violence and for full respect for international
law by all parties.

We note with grave concern that, according to a
statement by Hamas leader Khaled Mashal on
10 September, Hamas continues to buy and
manufacture weapons and to smuggle them into Gaza.
Extreme radical groups are also active in Gaza. Hamas
reportedly arrested some 160 supporters of the radical
group Jund Ansar Allah in the last days of August, after
explosives had been laid near a key Hamas security
installation; some have recently been released.

Israeli Corporal Gilad Shalit remains in captivity
after almost 39 months. We continue to call for access
to be granted to him, as well as for his release.
Discussions are continuing with a view to securing his
release and that of a number of the nearly 10,000
Palestinians currently in detention in Israel.

Owing to Israel's blockade, no Palestinian exports
were permitted during the reporting period and there
has been no significant improvement in the inadequate
levels of access reported in previous briefings. Food
and medical supplies make up the bulk of imports. As
stressed in a recent report of the Humanitarian
Coordinator, immediate humanitarian needs include
agricultural inputs, water and sanitation equipment,
material for shelter repair and educational material.
The urgent entry of those items must be facilitated by
the Israeli authorities. The longer-term consequences
of the blockade are deeply worrying in terms of
deteriorating public infrastructure, environmental
degradation, the destruction of livelihoods and the
incubation of despair and frustration among a
population half of which is made up of children.

As the Council is aware, in early June the
Secretary-General presented Israel with a proposal for
United Nations-led civilian reconstruction activities in
Gaza, beginning with suspended projects comprising
housing, medical clinics and schools. The proposal is
fully supported by the Palestinian Authority and the
Quartet. I have had extensive and constructive high-
level discussions with the Israeli Government on the
proposal. A United Nations working-level negotiating
team, comprising the Office of the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, has had constant and
positive dialogue with Israeli officials on the technical
details, including United Nations monitoring and
verification procedures. The United Nations has left no
reasonable stone unturned in this matter.

However, I must inform the Council that we have
not received a positive response from Israel. That is
deeply regrettable. The Government cites the continued
detention of Gilad Shalit as the key obstacle to
allowing even limited civilian reconstruction. I
reiterate our appeal to the Government of Israel to
allow without delay the entry of material into Gaza in
order to make a meaningful start in addressing the
massive civilian recovery needs.

More positively, Israel has announced the
approval of three United Nations water and sanitation
projects, drawn from a list proposed to the previous
Israeli Government some 15 months ago by the
Secretary-General. As highlighted in a recent report of
the United Nations Environment Programme,
underground water supplies in Gaza - upon which 1.5
million Palestinians depend for agriculture and
drinking water - are in danger of collapse. Some 80
million litres of untreated and partially treated sewage
are discharged into the sea daily, with potentially grave
public health and environmental consequences for
Gaza, southern Israel and Egypt. The approvals given
for the three United Nations projects, as well as that
given to the World Bank for work on a sewage project
in northern Gaza, can be only a beginning. A
09-51668
considerable scaling-up will be required if urgent water
and sanitation needs are to be met.

Finally, the report of the fact-finding mission on
the Gaza conflict, mandated by the Human Rights
Council and headed by Justice Richard Goldstone, was
released on 15 September. The mission was tasked to

"investigate all violations of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law that
might have been committed at any time in the
context of the military operations that were
conducted in Gaza during the period from
27 December 2008 and 18 January 2009, whether
before, during or after".

The report will be formally presented to the Human
Rights Council on 29 September.

I now turn briefly to Lebanon. Three months after
the 7 June parliamentary elections, efforts to form a
Government reached a new standstill on 10 September,
when Prime Minister-designate Saad Hariri stepped
down after the opposition had rejected his Cabinet
proposal. On 14 and 15 September, President Sleiman
conducted a new round of consultations with all
parliamentary blocs. As a result of those consultations,
he reappointed Mr. Hariri as Prime Minister-designate
and tasked him with forming a Government. The
Secretary-General hopes that the Lebanese will
continue working towards the goal of a unity Cabinet.
Allow me to add that it is important to form a
Government speedily in order to ensure that the gains
towards stability in Lebanon achieved through the
elections are not eroded by a prolongation of the
current political stalemate.

With regard to southern Lebanon, on
11 September two rockets were launched against Israel
09-51668

from the area of Al-Qulaylah. Israel retaliated by firing
12 artillery shells. The firing of the rockets constituted
a clear violation of resolution 1701 (2006). The United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the
Lebanese Armed Forces have intensified joint
operational activities. On 11 September, UNIFIL
shared with the parties the report on the investigation
into the Khirbat Salim incident. Israeli air violations
continued on a daily basis.

I am in close touch with my Quartet colleagues
regarding the efforts to create conditions for resumed
negotiations and to secure the commitments required
under the Road Map; the important State-building
efforts of the Palestinian Authority; the unsustainable
situation in Gaza, including the efforts of the United
Nations to begin civilian reconstruction; and the
broader regional dimensions. There is unity of purpose
on all those issues, as well as a determination to focus
all political energies on conflict resolution in the
crucial few years ahead. There is an important
opportunity to lay the basis for progress as leaders
gather for the general debate of the General Assembly
next week, and Quartet principals will meet on
24 September. Above all, the parties must take
responsibility and seize this opportunity. Now is the
time to make the commitments necessary to relaunch
negotiations and to see them through to a two-State
solution and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in
the region.

