Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We are
encouraged that you, Sir, should chair this debate.
Mauritius has so ably led the Council this month, for
which much credit is owed to our friend Ambassador
Jagdish Koonjul and his team. Let me also complement
the President of the Economic and Social Council,
Ambassador Ivan Simonovie of Croatia, who, by his
effective participation here today, underscored the
relationship between the two sister Councils.

Let me join you, Sir, in welcoming the statement
made by Secretary General Amara Essy of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU). He has provided
us with an insight into the challenges confronting
Africa and also, broadly, into how the region hopes to
confront them. Appreciation is due to Deputy
Secretary-General Louise Frechette for presenting the
outlines of cooperation between the United Nations and
the OAU.

The high-level representation of both Council and
non-Council members in today's meeting demonstrates
the importance we all attach to the situation in Africa.
Bangladesh, has had the privilege to date to coordinate
the group of least developed countries, which includes
34 countries from Africa. We therefore cannot but
identify ourselves with African issues, which find such
resonance in our heart, whether they be about
cooperation or about conflicts. While cooperation is
beginning to mark many intramural regional groupings
in Africa, it is its strident conflicts that still attract our
attention.

Two such conflicts in the Great Lakes challenge
the United Nations and the African leadership: those in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Burundi.
We believe that, in both cases, peace is possible if
regional actors can be persuaded to cooperate, to
compromise and to take bold decisions.

The Security Council obviously cannot resolve
these alone. Its resolutions are not implemented
automatically. The role of the regional and subregional
organizations is critical. That was also so in the case of
the conflicts between Ethiopia and Eritrea and in Sierra
Leone; it remains so in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in Burundi. The making of peace in the two
volatile and embattled subregions 4 West Africa and
the Great Lakes - has figured prominently on the
Council's agenda.

One significant lesson we have learnt from our
membership of the Council is that it is hard pressed to
maintain peace and security alone, its mandate
notwithstanding. Based upon that realization, we often
called upon and sought help from other organs, such as
the Economic and Social Council; the funds,
programmes and agencies of the United Nations; the
Bretton Woods institutions; civil society, including
non-governmental organizations; and, most of all,
regional and subregional organizations. All these
stakeholders need to play their roles and make their
contributions, especially in Africa.

Africa has dominated the agenda of the Security
Council in the past few years. Individual African
conflicts representing peacekeeping, conflict
prevention and post-conflict peace-building scenarios
demanded constant action and follow-up. Bangladesh
sought to make its positive contribution in this regard
during the period of its membership. For instance,
during our presidency in March 2000, the Council
issued a presidential statement in document
S/PRST/2000/10 on post-conflict peace-building that
focused on disarmament, demobilization and
rehabilitation (DDR).

An issue we have confronted has been the
question of the financing of DDR. The dependence on
voluntary contributions to such a critical component of
peace-building remains a dilemma before us. The
importance of a predictable, adequate and sustained
funding of DDR has been demonstrated in Sierra
Leone. This will certainly confront us in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi. The
question returned to the Council last February.

Earlier this month, Sierra Leone celebrated the
end of one of the bloodiest civil wars in Africa.
Bangladesh rejoiced with the people of Sierra Leone.
As the largest contributor of peacekeepers to the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, it was
gratifying for us to see the war end, particularly so
because we sent our Blue Helmets in the face of
adversity when the military and political situation, if
viewed objectively, would have dictated otherwise. As
Chairman of the Sierra Leone sanctions committee,
Bangladesh took the initiative to break the nexus
between diamonds and the conflict. We are pleased to
have been able to make this significant contribution to
peace in Sierra Leone.

I mention the case of Sierra Leone in particular
because it represented a test case for United Nations
peacekeeping; because it demonstrated the crucial
importance of the role of the regional actors; and
because it proved that, given the political will, the
United Nations can succeed in its peace and security
missions even in the most complex situations.

Going beyond the apparent purview of the
Security Council, I should like to place this meeting in
the broader context of some of the most recent and
upcoming events. The Fourth High-level Meeting on
Cooperation between the United Nations and Regional
Organizations, held last February, focused on post-
conflict peace-building. The Council addressed this
issue only a day before the Meeting and expressed
support for the initiative to hold the High-level
Meeting, which came after a two-and-a-half-year
interval.

The Secretary-General, if I may recall, identified
five areas of cooperation with regional organizations:
negotiating and implementing peace agreements;
promoting security and stability; working for good
governance, democratization and human rights;
promoting justice and reconciliation; and finding a
better way to combine emergency relief with longer-
term development assistance. We would expect a
progress report at the fifth conference, but if such
exercises as the Council's resolutions and presidential
statements are to be more meaningful, progress will
need to have taken place.

The Meeting also had a report on conflict
prevention, outlining steps taken since the Third
Meeting in 1998. The two missions4 post-conflict
peace-building and conflict prevention- are deeply
interrelated. In fact, post-conflict peace-building,
which involves the challenges of reconciliation and
reconstruction, is aimed at preventing the recurrence of
conflict. The world's attention was specifically drawn
to conflict prevention by the Secretary-General's June
2001 report. Bangladesh had the privilege to play a
lead role in ensuring due follow-up by the Council,
leading to the adoption of resolution 1366 (2001).

The report of Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa identified a number
of areas for action. The Council was prompt in
adopting a series of resolutions - 1196 (1998), 1197
(1998), 1208 (1998) and 1209 (1998). These
instruments require systematic follow-up. The
international community has not always matched
commitments in Africa with corresponding action in
terms of follow-up and implementation. That partly
explains the tragedies of present-day Africa.

In addressing conflict prevention, we recognized
once again that many of the conflicts are rooted in
endemic poverty and underdevelopment, weak or non-
existent institutions, the absence of good governance,
and gross and systematic violations of human rights.
This recognition inevitably leads us to what was
underscored at the Third United Nations Conference on
the Least Developed Countries, in Brussels last year.
The Brussels Declaration and Programme of Action for
the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-
2010 represents the commitment of the international
community to address the socio-economic challenges
facing the 49 most impoverished countries, 34 of
which, as I said before, are in Africa.

Africa needs capacity-building to take advantage
of the market access opening up to them. The
Integrated Framework for capacity-building in trade,
coordinated by six international agencies 4 the United
Nations Development Programme, the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund, the World Trade
Organization (WTO), the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development and the International Trade
Centre 4 must be put in place immediately. To benefit
from trade, one must have the wherewithal to conduct
commerce. Without this, for Africa, the outcome of the
Doha WTO Ministerial Meeting will be meaningless
and poverty will remain a threat to peace.

Civil wars have created the world's largest arms
bazaar across Africa. As a killer, small arms rival
HIV/AIDS. The adoption of the Programme of Action
on Small Arms has been a major achievement. If
implemented, it can make a great difference to African
lives.

The records of the past are mixed and often
disappointing. The future appears more promising. We
recognize several new initiatives. Two major world
conferences- both important for Africa- on this
year's calendar are the International Conference on
Financing for Development, in March, and the World
Summit on Sustainable Development, in September.
Within Africa, we have noted a number of
initiatives4 the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) Council of Ministers, in February;
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) Council of
Ministers, in March; and the OAU Summit, in July.
The New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD) is another major undertaking. However, care
must be taken that their results are implemented.
Africa's margin for tolerance of failure is inexorably
shrinking.

Africa, and the cause of peace and progress, must
receive priority attention in all of these forums. We
must ensure that Africa is the meeting point of our
global and international efforts.

I would like to conclude my remarks with one
appeal, concerning refugees and internally displaced
persons. Last year, the Council held a debate with Mrs.
Sadako Ogata, drawing special attention to the
humanitarian situation in Africa. The daily ordeal of
the men, women and children uprooted from hearth and
home, humiliated and persecuted, tells a horrendous
tale. Let us recognize their problems and call for an
end to their sufferings. Let this Council meeting be a
watershed that will make a difference in their lives. Let
us bring to fruition to the confidence expressed so long
ago by the Roman general Pliny the Elder that "Ex
Africa semper aliquid novi" - "There is always
something new out of Africa".

