Ms. Skare (Norway): I am speaking today on
behalf of Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my
own country, Norway.

We are concerned about the continued increase
in verified violations and abuses against children.
This trend can and must be reversed. First and
foremost, parties to conflict must respect international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Protecting
children and upholding their rights is not only positive
for the individuals involved and their communities;
it also contributions to successful reconciliation,
reintegration and development. It is therefore closely
linked to broader conflict-prevention efforts and the
sustaining peace agenda.

We should give special priority to education in
emergencies, especially the education of girls. The Safe
Schools Declaration, which was launched in Oslo in
2015, has been endorsed by 95 States so far. It is the
key initiative in this context. The main objective is to
prevent the military use of schools and stop attacks on
schools during armed conflicts. We are encouraged by
the positive response to the Declaration and the joint
efforts to implement it.

The continued silence and stigma related to sexual
and gender-based violence, exploitation and abuse is of
particular concern. The international conference in May
held in Oslo, entitled Ending Sexual and Gender-based
Violence in Humanitarian Crises, sent a strong message
that strengthening the prevention of, and response to,
sexual and gender-based violence is a humanitarian
priority. It gave visibility and recognition to the key
role of national and local organizations, including local
women's organizations.

Children involved in armed conflict not only need
protection and comprehensive support and care, but
also justice. In that regard, we want to recognize the
crucial work of Justice Rapid Response in strengthening
accountability for international crimes and human
rights violations against children through the provision
of highly specialized child-focused expertise.

Last year's unanimous adoption of resolution
2427 (2018) set out a framework for the reintegration
of children associated with armed forces and armed
groups. Successful reintegration is in the best interest
of the child, but also in the best interest of societies.
The human rights of children formerly associated with
armed groups or violent groups must be fully respected,
in line with international law, including the Convention
on the Rights of the Child.

Resolution 2427 (2018) also stresses accountability
for all violations and abuses against children, not only
the gravest crimes. In the process, the Council set a new
standard for the prevention of human rights abuses and
violations of international humanitarian law. Resolution
2427 (2018) must now be translated into reality.

We reiterate our strong support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. Ms. Gamba plays an essential role
at the global, regional and national levels by advocating
for children's protection and rights and providing
practical guidance.

In conclusion, the Nordic countries urge all States
Members of the United Nations to ensure that children
in armed conflict get the attention and protection to
which they are entitled.
