Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
thank the Nigerian presidency for organizing today's
open debate and for its choice oftheme, which addresses
issues that the Security Council has to deal with on a
daily basis. I would also like to acknowledge and thank
the Secretary-General for enriching our discussion this
morning through his presence, which again is a way of
sending a clear message that regional organizations and
their joint work with the Security Council are important
to his own agenda as Secretary-General. And I thank
Nigeria for the excellent concept note (S/2015/599, annex) it prepared for the debate.

Angola believes that strengthening global,
continental and subregional cooperation is critical to
the ability of the entire international community to
achieve peace, security and sustainable development.
In that context we must stress the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union in
several innovative missions, as well as the continued
engagement of the United Nations with regional
organizations on the basis of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, as exemplified by their
interaction and consultations on developing a shared
understanding of the root causes of conflicts. In that
regard, the creation of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union is a milestone in that cooperation
and partnership.

We have recently witnessed the resurgence in
Africa of attempts to achieve unconstitutional changes
of Government and other threats that are undermining
national and subregional stability and affecting our
peoples' human rights, progress and well-being. The
nature of the threats to peace and stability in Africa
has changed recently, with the appearance of terrorist
groups, particularly Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram, in
Kenya, Somalia, Nigeria, Chad and Cameroon. In that
connection, we commend thejoint response to the threat
of Boko Haram represented by the creation of a joint
force, to which the Council has pledged its support.
The security of off-shore platforms and the danger of
piracy, particularly in the Gulf of Guinea, is a matter
of regional and global concern as well and deserves the
full attention of the international community, especially
the Security Council.

The African Union's launch of the African Capacity
for Immediate Response to Crises (ACIRC), which
seeks to create a robust rapid-reaction force aimed at
providing a capacity for managing and responding to
security situations around the continent, is an important
development. While the technical aspects of ACIRC are
still being finalized, we believe that with the support
of the African States, Africa's main partners and the
United Nations, it will become a reality, representing a
major gain in combating current and future threats to
peace and security on the continent.

We reiterate that the primary responsibility for
guaranteeing peace and stability is national. We
welcome the initiatives of subregional organizations
such as the Southern African Development Community,
the Economic Community of West African States, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
for their contributions to addressing subregional
security. Angola strongly supports African ownership in
addressing and responding to contemporary challenges
to regional peace and security on the continent.

In conclusion, I would once again like to thank you,
Madam President, for bringing to the Security Council
this important topic, so crucial to peace and security in
the world today and in the future.

