Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Haiti, which includes Argentina, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, France, Guatemala, the United States,
Uruguay and my own country, Peru.

We thank the President for organizing this debate
to discuss the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/840) on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). The report covers the
main events that have occurred since the publication
on 12 July of the previous report (S/2017/604) and the
progress that has been made as MINUSTAH comes
to a close. It also covers the establishment of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH).

The Group of Friends welcomes the presence of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore Braithwaite, and thanks her
for her detailed briefing. As MINUSTAH's mandate
comes to an end, we would like to thank Ms. Honore,
particularly for her role in supporting the political
process in Haiti, professionalizing the police and
maintaining a safe and stable environment.

The Group acknowledges the work of all the
previous Special Representatives who have contributed
to the stabilization of Haiti and wishes to pay special
tribute to the former Special Representative for Haiti,
Mr. Hedi Annabi, who gave his life in the service of
peacekeeping during the earthquake of2010. The Group
also recognizes the important role that MINUSTAH
has played in guaranteeing the stability and security
of Haiti, expresses its deep appreciation to the staff
of MINUSTAH and to all Member States that have
contributed to the Mission, and pays homage to those
who were injured or lost their lives in the performance
of their duty.

The strengthening of the rule of law and
democratic institutions and the establishment of a
political culture conducive to democratic stability and
the improvement of socioeconomic conditions are key
elements for achieving greater security, stability and
prosperity in Haiti. The Group of Friends reaffirms
the primary responsibility of the national Government
for implementing its strategies for peacebuilding and
peacekeeping in order to address the interconnected
nature of Haiti's challenges. The Group of Friends
acknowledges that, eight months after President
Jovenel Moise took office, Haiti continues to take steps
to further consolidate its democracy and stability,
and we encourage the Haitian authorities to conduct
indirect elections to form municipal, departmental and
interdepartmental councils and assemblies, as provided
for in the Constitution. The Group also notes that the
overall security situation has remained relatively stable
and has not been affected by the ongoing withdrawal of
MINUSTAH's troops and the reduction of the United
Nations Police (UNPOL) presence.

The Group believes that strengthening the Haitian
National Police (HNP) is one of the most important
contributions that the successor Mission will make to
further consolidate the stabilization of Haiti and in that
regard welcomes the continued increase in its capacity
to ensure public order and provide security to Haitian
citizens and takes note of the objectives of its strategic
development plan for 2017-2021. We have noted the
implementation of a revised approach to mentoring and
counselling conceived as part of the Mission transition
strategy towards MINUJUSTH and observe that
UNPOL has continued to work with the HNP in order
to strengthen its capacity to handle the issue of sexual
and gender-based violence.

The Group of Friends underscores the importance
of national ownership and reiterates the vitality of the
commitment of the Government of Haiti to strengthen
the rule of law and continue to make progress in the
justice and security sectors. The Group of Friends
commends the efforts of the Government of Haiti to
address a number of major problems facing the country,
including by intensifying its flagship programme, the
Caravan of Change. The Group agrees with the call
of the Secretary-General for moving forward on a
joint legislative agenda and underlines the need for
MINUJUSTH to support the Government in achieving
progress in the performance of the judiciary.

The Group of Friends reiterates that there can be
no true stability or sustainable development in Haiti
without strengthened democratic institutions and
credible democratic processes. In that context, the
Group emphasizes the importance of promoting the rule
of law through the strengthening of Haitian institutions
and encourages the Government of Haiti to advance
in the fields of justice and human rights, including the
empowerment of women and their full participation in
decision-making.

The Group of Friends recognizes that strengthening
national human rights institutions as well as respecting
human rights, including respect for women and
children and due process, combating crime and sexual
and gender-based violence, putting an end to impunity
and prolonged pretrial detention and providing
accountability, are essential to safeguarding the rule of
law and security in Haiti, including access to justice. In
that regard, the Group takes note of the conclusion of
the Secretary-General's report that prolonged pretrial
detention and prison overcrowding remain a serious
human rights problem.

The Group of Friends reaffirms its solidarity with
and commitment to the people and the Government
of Haiti in their pursuit of stability, reconstruction,
recovery, socioeconomic development and democratic
consolidation, and recognizes that Haiti continues to
face multiple development challenges that require the
implementation of structural reforms.

The Group of Friends welcomes the General
Assembly's resolution 71/161 on the new United Nations
approach to cholera in Haiti, which aims to renew the
Organization's efforts to eliminate cholera transmission
and care for victims of the disease. In that regard, the
Group of Friends would like to take this opportunity
to invite Member States, regional, international and
bilateral donors, financial institutions, the private
sector and other donors to provide greater voluntary
financial support and other appropriate support for
the new approach. We note that the United Nations
country team will be responsible for implementing
the new approach, with the coordination of a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and welcome
the 10-year national plan for the elimination of cholera
as the basis of the new Government's policy on the issue,
as well as the renewed engagement of the Government
with the United Nations and other international partners
to that end.

The Group of Friends notes that although
significant progress has been made, Haiti continues to
face significant humanitarian challenges as well as a
vulnerability and particular exposure to natural hazards.
In addition, the Group affirms that progress in Haiti's
reconstruction and social and economic development,
supported by effective and coordinated international
assistance and an increase in its institutional capacity
to benefit from that assistance, is crucial to achieving
sustainable stability, and reiterates the need for security
to be supported by sustainable development, efforts in
which the Government of Haiti will play a leadership
role with the help of the United Nations country team.

The Group of Friends welcomes the Secretary-
General's report of 5 October submitted pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2350 (2017). We believe that
MINUSTAH has succeeded in stabilizing Haiti and that
it is time to begin the transition to a new United Nations
presence, focused on strengthening Haiti's rule-of-law
institutions, providing support and capacity-building
for the National Police and participating in human rights
monitoring and reporting, as set forth in paragraph 66
of the Secretary-General's report.

The Group notes that MINUSTAH has continued
to implement its comprehensive withdrawal as well as
the joint MINUSTAH-country team transition plan,
with a View to ensuring a gradual transfer of tasks and
assets to MINUJUSTH, the Haitian authorities, the
country team and other partners, so that the Mission
can close on 15 October and so that the mandatory
core areas, including the good-offices function and
the commitment to the rule of law, justice reforms,
police development and human rights addressed by
MINUSTAH, will be taken up to MINUJUSTH on
16 October, while United Nations support in the areas
of governance will be implemented through the country
team, if resources permit.

The Group of Friends also welcomes the fact that
MINUJUSTH will work closely with the country team
to ensure a smoother transfer of the tasks necessary for
carrying out the reform of the rule of law.

