Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should like
to congratulate Egypt once again on its accession to the
presidency of the Security Council, and thank you, Sir,
for organizing this open debate on the theme "United
Nations-African Union peace and security cooperation:
Chapter VIII application and the future of the African
Peace and Security Architecture".

The founding fathers of the United Nations were
eager to include in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations provisions to support the efforts of
regional and subregional organizations in the field of
peace and security because they fully understood that
world peace is indivisible. They also understood that
the establishment of effective partnerships between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations on questions relating to the maintenance
ofinternational peace and security is also indispensable.

To that end, the recommendations of the joint
African Union-United Nations panel established under
resolution 1809 (2008) adopted recommendations
on modalities for support to African Union (AU)
peacekeeping operations. The first part of the panel's
report (see S/2008/813) stressed the importance of
enhancing the strategic relations between the AU and
the United Nations and operationalizing channels of
joint action between the AU Peace and Security Council
and the Security Council in genuine partnership and
direct coordination, including in decision-making and
shared responsibilities pursuant to the mandates of the
two organizations. That is why the relationship between
the AU and the United Nations has been strong and
extensive. The two organizations have made progress in
supporting their mutual relations, according to opinions
expressed in the 2006 Declaration entitled "Enhancing
United Nations-AU Cooperation: Framework for the
Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme for the African
Union".

With respect to promoting cooperation between the
United Nations and the AU in the maintenance of peace
and security in Africa and the need for the peaceful
settlement of disputes, that should top the list of our
priorities, including mediation on border issues, early
warning and logistical capacity-building. We look
forward to further close coordination, particularly with
regard to the support provided by the United Nations
to the Framework for the Ten-Year Capacity Building
Programme for the Africa Union and the fields of
peacebuilding and peacekeeping. The financing of
regional peacekeeping operations continues to occupy
a central role with regard to defining and organizing
relations between the two organizations.

With regard to peacekeeping, the delegation of the
Sudan would like to underscore the cooperation between
the Secretariat and the AU Commission in the context
of the United Nations African Union Mission in Darfur
(UNAMID). Such cooperation has proven useful since
the previous African Union Mission in Sudan operation
became ajoint operation between the two organizations
on 31 December 2007 under resolution 1769 (2007). The
Mission has become an example of cooperation between
the AU and the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. In that regard, we
recall the joint report submitted by the Secretary-
General and the Chairperson of the AU Commission
on the hybrid operation in Darfur (see S/2007/307)
in June 2007. The report stressed that UNAMID had
an exclusively African nature and component, while
the United Nations provided financial, technical and
logistical support, including technical advice in various
fields. The Mission thereby symbolizes cooperation
between the two organizations.

The time has come to implement a road map for
the drawdown of UNAMID, especially since we have
already turned the page on the conflict and the situation
in the five states has normalized. Internally displaced
persons in different parts of Darfur have returned to
their homes and started living their lives normally.
In addition, more than 100,000 returnees returned to
their homes after the roads between Jebel Marra and
other major areas in Darfur and in the Sudan had been
secured.

Moreover, we would like to point out that primary
school students recently sat for exams under stable
and secure conditions for the first time in 13 years.
Council members probably followed the administrative
referendum in Darfur on the implementation of the
provisions of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
and how the referendum was carried out in a free and
transparent manner. The results, which were declared
on 23 April, all supported the maintenance of the status
quo, that is, the choice of the states, by a majority of
97.72 per cent.

I would also like to cite yet another example that
demonstrates the successful cooperation between the
African Union and the Organization through regional
mediation mechanism, such as the High-Level Panel
on Illicit Financial Flows from Africa, headed by
Mr. Thabo Mbeki, which plays an important role in the
maintenance and promotion of peace in the Sudan and
between the Sudan and South Sudan. Such constructive
cooperation must be promoted, and the mechanisms
must be given time to resolve the pending issues
between the two countries.

I would like to stress that the Government of the
Sudan endorsed and signed the road map prepared by
the high-level mechanism to promote the comprehensive
peace process in the Sudan, while the opposition
continues to obdurately refuse to sign it. We therefore
call on the Council to bring pressure to bear on those
who have so far refused to sign the road map so that
everybody can concentrate their efforts on building and
reconstruction.

Lastly, my country would like to welcome
presidential statement S/PRST/2016/8, which
underscores the increased contribution of regional and
subregional organizations in complementing the role
of international organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security and in enhancing the
capacity of national legal systems to undertake their role
in the area of accountability. I would like to reiterate
the statements made by previous speakers that regional
and subregional organizations have a comparative
advantage in achieving peace and security because they
are familiar with the local cultures of conflict areas. We
also pay tribute to the Security Council and appeal to
it to give such organizations time to find the necessary
solutions.

