Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his insightful briefing. I
would also like to welcome Prime Minister Ivica Dacie
and Prime Minister Hashim Thaci back to the Council
today.

Since the last Council meeting on this issue in
March (see S/PV.6939), there have been constructive
developments in the political dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina. The Republic of Korea congratulates both
sides on reaching the historic agreement of 19 April
within the framework of a dialogue facilitated by
the European Union (EU). The agreement is a major
breakthrough in the normalization of relations and
also represents a big step forward for regional peace
and security. In that regard, we commend both Prime
Ministers for demonstrating their political courage and
taking a flexible approach to finding compromise. We
also applaud the European Union High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Catherine
Ashton, for her tireless efforts and personal dedication
in facilitating this ground-breaking agreement.

What is required now is the full and effective
implementation of the agreement on the ground. In that
vein, it is encouraging that a new round oftechnical talks
on the implementation has already begun in Brussels.
However, the path to full implementation could be
easily littered with serious obstacles. The biggest
challenge at this juncture is the strong resistance and
scepticism of ethnic Serbs living in northern Kosovo.
Taking into consideration that the 19 April agreement
primarily concerns the status of the four municipalities
in northern Kosovo, implementation simply cannot
work without their cooperation. Therefore, we would
like to emphasize that it should be carried out in an
inclusive and participatory manner that allows the full
participation of Kosovo Serbs. It is also imperative that
all police and judicial authorities in northern Kosovo
be integrated into Kosovo's institutional framework, as
both sides have agreed.

However, genuine sustainable reconciliation cannot
be achieved overnight. The old tensions are still far
from fading. Lingering mistrust presents huge obstacles
to a constructive dialogue. This is all the more reason
why the political dialogue must be complemented by
confidence-building measures. In our meeting in March,
we suggested educational initiatives and an awareness-
raising campaign as effective confidence-building
measures, and today I am please to note that the recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/254) describes
some meaningful progress in the educational sector.

We believe that instilling the values of tolerance and
inter-ethnic understanding in future generations is the
first step towards restoring trust among communities.
We therefore call on both sides to further strengthen
their efforts to promote intercultural education and to
facilitate interchange among students. Furthermore,
Kosovo must uphold its commitment to ensuring the
full safety of all ethnic minorities. Without it, people
will find it difficult to have a sense of safety, trust and
confidence in their system.

In that context, a series of incidents targeting the
staff of the Mitrovica North Administrative Office
and attacks on returnees continue to be of particular
concern. We condemn such attacks. We also call on the
Kosovo authorities to redouble their efforts to better
protect all ethnic minority communities.

Finally, the Republic of Korea would like to
commend Special Representative Zarif and the entire
team of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We hope that UNMIK
will further strengthen its close cooperation with the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the
Kosovo Force and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, thereby making a substantial
contribution to lasting peace and genuine reconciliation
in Kosovo.
