Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I should like to associate
myself with the words of condolence addressed to the
Government and the people of Bangladesh following
the death of peacekeepers from that country in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This tragic incident
once again confirms the importance of ensuring proper
security for United Nations peacekeepers as they serve
and do their very important job for the entire
international community.

We are grateful to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Hasegawa, for having
introduced the progress report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET) and for the very useful additional
information he gave about developments in that
country.

In recent months, Timor-Leste has made further
progress towards self-sufficiency. We take note of the
successful start-up of the process of elections to local
Government bodies, the further establishment of
legislative structures and the ongoing consolidation of
public institutions. We deem it important that the
domestic political situation in the country as a whole
has remained stable.

However, we agree with the Secretary-General's
conclusion that the progress achieved by the Timorese
is insufficient, as Timor-Leste has not yet met the
criteria for an independent State, despite the fact that
the Government and the people, with the support of the
United Nations, are making very intensive efforts in
that area. That applies first and foremost to public
administration, the police and border control.

After 20 May of this year, when UNMISET's
mandate expires, the country will still require
multifaceted international assistance in order to ensure
security, stability and development. That is precisely
why Russia supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General - agreed to by the Government of
Timor-Leste - to extend UNMISET's activities, in a
scaled-down configuration, for a period of up to one
year. During that period, an ongoing United Nations
presence should be maintained in the country.

We welcome the improvement in Timorese-
Indonesian relations, and we hope that the bilateral
Truth and Friendship Commission that will soon be
starting work there will help to strengthen cooperation
between the two States and facilitate a speedy solution
to the remaining unresolved questions, including the
investigations into the serious human rights violations
committed in East Timor in 1999.

The full settlement of the question of State
borders is of great importance for ensuring security and
sustainable development in Timor-Leste. We look
forward to prompt solutions in this area that are
agreeable to all parties concerned.

In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm the
support of the Russian Federation for the work being
done by Mr. Hasegawa and by the entire staff of the
Mission he heads as they discharge the extremely
important mandate of that Mission.

