Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.
I have listened carefully to the statements by the
representatives of Palestine and Israel. I warmly
welcome Mrs. Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Indonesia, and thank her for her presence here today
and her statement.

The question of Palestine is at the core and root
of the Middle East issue. Its resolution is crucial to
achieving peace and development in this region. At
the moment, the conflict in the Gaza Strip continues.
The West Bank is frequently attacked, and settlement
activities are still going on, while Palestinian homes
continue to be demolished. At the same time, we are
seeing challenges to the possibility of a two-State
solution. Efforts to achieve a resumption of the dialogue
between Palestine and Israel show no progress, while
the risk of escalation of the conflict cannot be ignored.

China is deeply worried about the current
developments. The Council and the international
community should maintain a united front and adopt
a long-term perspective in advancing a political
settlement of the Palestinian question. Using violence
to quell violence will not solve any problems. China
strongly opposes any acts of violence against civilians.
We urge the parties concerned to bear in mind the
security and safety of the local populations and
the crucial importance of peaceful coexistence by
exercising restraint and thereby preventing the situation
from escalating. The grave humanitarian situation in
the Gaza Strip does not serve regional stability. We
hope that the relevant parties will lift the blockade
of Gaza quickly and entirely. China regrets Israel's
decision to close schools run by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East in East Jerusalem, and we call on the
international community to increase funding to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and help Palestine improve
its economic circumstances.

The fundamental path to resolving the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict is through a two-State solution. The
international community should adhere to the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for
peace and the Arab Peace Initiative, among other things,
in working to intensify efforts for a resumption of talks

and for achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution to the Palestinian question. Any new initiative
should be aimed at making a two-State solution a
reality. Concrete action should be taken to implement
resolution 2334 (2016) and to end all settlement
activities in the occupied territories and the demolition
of Palestinian homes and property. Steps should also be
taken to prevent violence against civilians.

The question of the final status of Jerusalem is
a complex and sensitive one. It underpins any future
settlement of the Palestinian question as well as the
future of a two-State solution. The parties should act
with prudence and follow the principles of respecting
historical pluralities, upholding fairness and justice,
implementing international agreements, striving for
peaceful coexistence and adhering to the relevant United
Nations resolutions and international consensus so as to
reach a solution through negotiations that accommodates
the interests of all sides. The international community
should stay united in advocating for a resumption of
peace talks between the two sides as soon as possible.
The parties should meet halfway, avoid any action or
rhetoric that might exacerbate the situation and refrain
from any unilateral measures that could undermine
trust, with a view to creating the necessary conditions
for a resumption of dialogue and expediting the
intra-Palestinian reconciliation process. Parties that
can bring serious influence to bear on the Middle East
issue should also play a constructive role.
China has always been committed to moving the
Middle East process forward and has been supportive
of the Palestinian people's just cause, that of regaining
their legitimate national rights. We support the
establishment of an independent and fully sovereign
State of Palestine based on the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. We support Palestine's
greater integration into the international community.
In line with His Excellency President Xi Jinping's
four-point proposal promoting a political settlement
of the Palestinian question. China will step up its
communication and cooperation with countries of the
region and work to maintain peace and stability, uphold
fairness and justice and promote common development
in the Middle East, thereby playing a proactive and
constructive role for peace in the region.

