Mr. Fulci (Italy): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union, and the following countries
also associate themselves with this statement: Poland,
Cyprus, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Romania and
Slovakia.

Let me begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of March. Your skill, experience, foresight and
wit are our best guarantees of a very profitable month. At
the same time, I wish to thank the Permanent
Representative of the United States, Ambassador Albright,
for her eminently professional, dedicated and incisive
leadership in the month of February.

At a formal meeting of the Security Council on 29
January 1996, the European Union made clear its views on
the situation in Burundi and on how the tension could be
defused and the stalemate in the political dialogue ended.
The formal statement made on that occasion expressed
full support for the efforts of the United Nations and the
regional organizations concerned, particularly the
Organization of African Unity. The European Union also
pointed out that the only way to permanently end the
crisis was through a political solution. The statement
underlined the hope for a renewal of the spirit of
reconciliation in Burundi. Another potential humanitarian
catastrophe in the region can be averted only if all the
interested parties realize that there is no Viable solution
outside of dialogue. War and violence must be discarded
as an option, and we all must strive in this direction.

During the last month, a number of developments
have taken place that, in our view, can greatly contribute
to the search for renewed peace and stability. The
situation in the country seems to have improved
somewhat, due to stronger cohesion within the
Government. The strong willingness of the international
community to address the situation and keep it under
constant review has also had an influence on the political
situation in Burundi.

The United Nations, the Organization of African
Unity and the European Union have mobilized their
efforts and are working in close coordination. This is a
critical factor. Once again we wish to express our
confidence in the capacity of the Secretary-General and of
the eminent personalities, especially former Tanzanian
President Nyerere, to promote a climate of trust, of
confidence between the parties. The Special Envoy of the
European Union for the Great Lakes region, Mr. Aldo
Ajello, will give them his full support. Mr. Ajello will
stay in close contact with the Government of the countries
of the region in order to avoid duplication of initiatives.

For the reasons I have mentioned, we believe that
the draft resolution that the Security Council will vote on
today contains all the elements that are needed, at this
stage, to support the progress we have been witnessing
along the path of dialogue, which should be strengthened
and broadened. The draft resolution is also very clear
when it warns the parties that the international community
may be forced to change its attitude if there are acts of
violence and attempts at destabilization.

We believe it is right to encourage the
Secretary-General to continue consultations for further
steps toward supporting a comprehensive dialogue and for

 

a possible response, in the unfortunate event of widespread
violence and a serious deterioration in the situation.

Political support is important, as is the willingness of
the international community to concretely assist the
Government of Burundi in development programmes for
rehabilitating the country. The European Union is the
largest donor in Burundi. The Union and its member States
are already contributing in the critical fields of humanitarian
and human rights assistance, as well as assistance to the
judiciary and to the police. The European Union's
willingness to provide this much-needed assistance will
nevertheless depend to a great extent on the Government's
continuation of its efforts at dialogue and reconciliation.

I shall conclude by expressing our great satisfaction
over the inclusion in the draft resolution of a strong
reference to the need to intensify the preparations for
convening a Regional Conference for Peace, Security and
Development in the area. We understand that the
Conference needs careful preparation, and that a number of
uncertainties have yet to be overcome. Still, it is our strong
belief that such a Conference can provide a significant
opportunity to address, within a broader perspective, issues
of political and economic stability; humanitarian questions;
and issues of peace and security in the area.

