Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): We firmly believe that
today's Security Council debate can make a significant
contribution to the development of a culture of
protection within and outside the United Nations.
Austria is fully committed to furthering the cause of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict and
therefore highly appreciates the Secretary-General's
proposal on a specific working group.
Too often, the principal victims of armed conflict
are women and children, on whose shoulders lies the
future of society. We fully support Security Council
resolution 1612 (2005) and its monitoring and
reporting mechanism, which is an important instrument
for protecting children in armed conflict.

Regarding the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security, I think everyone agrees that we have to
intensify our efforts. On the basis of our national action
plan, Austria is working with its partners to put the
commitments of resolution 1325 (2000) into practice
not only in the European Union and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, but, of course,
especially also in the United Nations.

We are deeply shocked by the appalling level of
sexual and gender-based Violence in conflict situations
throughout the world. We read reports on this almost
on a daily basis. These acts are horrendous crimes for
which those responsible must be brought to justice.
They also have far-reaching implications for the
development of affected societies in general. For this
reason, Austria has increased its support to campaigns
against sexual Violence and assistance programmes for
victims of sexual violence, especially in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We call on the Security Council to mainstream
the fight against gender-based violence throughout its
work and to make full use of the range of measures and
tools available, including the imposition of targeted
measures and referral of situations of serious Violations
against women and children to the International
Criminal Court. We also call on Member States to
strengthen the rule of law and fully utilize
accountability mechanisms to bring to justice the
perpetrators of these violations.

Austria is also committed to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict by striving for a ban on
cluster munitions that cause unacceptable harm to
civilians, the destruction of cluster munitions stocks
and a prohibition of their transfer, swift and efficient
clearance of contaminated areas and comprehensive
assistance to victims of these weapons. Currently, as
has been pointed out, more than 100 States are
gathered in Dublin to conclude a legally binding
instrument on the basis of the Vienna Document on
cluster munitions of December 2007. Austria believes
that such an instrument should prohibit the use,
production, transfer and stockpiling of cluster
munitions.
It should also establish a framework for
cooperation and assistance that ensures adequate
provision of care and rehabilitation to survivors and
their communities, clearance of contaminated areas,
risk education and destruction of stockpiles of
prohibited cluster munitions. A successful outcome of
the Dublin conference will mark a crucial step in better
protecting thousands of civilian lives during armed
conflict.

On the national level, Austria has enacted a law
totally banning cluster munitions. As a consequence,
we will destroy all stocks of this heinous weapon
within the next three years. Austria views its national
ban on cluster munitions as a concrete contribution to
the protection of civilians and calls on other countries
to follow suit.

