Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me begin by
joining the previous speakers in thanking Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, for his briefing on the current situation in the
Middle East. This monthly consideration by the
Security Council of the Middle East issue is taking
place against developments that affect the daily lives of
the peoples in the region, as well as the efforts to bring
peace to the region.

Peace in the Middle East was given an impetus in
Annapolis in November 2007, when Prime Minister
Ehud Olmert and President Mahmoud Abbas reached a
historic joint understanding that outlines commitments
from both sides for the resumption of peace
negotiations. We remain confident that both leaders
will do their utmost to realize the Annapolis goals. We
are particularly encouraged that the parties have begun
negotiations on core issues.

The continued support of the international
community remains pertinent. The Paris donors
conference is a commendable instance of such a
23
contribution by the international community. We
welcome the progress that has been made as a follow-
up to the Paris conference.

The Annapolis conference marked a new chapter
in negotiated solutions to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Its outcome provides a framework for
concrete results, including a peace treaty between the
two nations. However, the actual outcome of this on-
going dialogue has yet to show clear movement in the
direction of a solution to the conflict. Serious
challenges clearly remain. Indeed, during this period
the vicious cycle of violence has continued, in
particular in the Gaza Strip. As Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe noted, this month has been a month of
heavy bloodshed.

The humanitarian crisis in Gaza is dire and
unacceptable. The people of Gaza have been suffering
not only from the closing of border crossings, but also
from repeated military incursions by Israel. Unless it is
addressed comprehensively, the situation in the Gaza
Strip risks jeopardizing the promise that emerged at the
Annapolis conference. We delved into the situation in
Gaza extensively during the Council's open debate and
follow-up consultations last week.

Today we wish to emphasize once again the
importance of a common Council response to this
unfolding humanitarian catastrophe. The Council
cannot remain silent - that would indeed be a
deafening silence. It is therefore a source of deep
disappointment that despite serious and well-
intentioned efforts, consensus has not been achieved.
In the absence of such consensus, forums such as
today's meeting are, in the view of my delegation,
invaluable in providing the opportunity for views to be
expressed.

We continue to believe that an inter-Palestinian
dialogue is crucial to the success of the peace process.
Dialogue is critical to moving the peace process
forward, so as to build consensus and curb the violence
that continues to erupt. With different sides advancing
positions that sometimes oppose and contradict one
another, deadlock characterizes the current political
process and prevents progress. As we prepare to move
forward with this process, we believe that it is
imperative that efforts be made to facilitate dialogue
among the Palestinian sides.

On Lebanon, we remain concerned over the
continued political impasse that paralyzes the

Government in the country. Lebanon's election of a
new President has now been postponed 13 times. In a
moment such as now, there is an urgent need not only
for political consensus among contending factions, but
also for breakthroughs that could end the political
stalemate in the country. In this regard, Indonesia
welcomes the efforts of the Arab League Secretary-
General, Mr. Amr Moussa, in consulting with and
encouraging various quarters in Lebanon to achieve
unity and execute the presidential election. We
recognize the importance of the three-point plan
proposed by the League.

A presidential election must be realized in
accordance with the Lebanese Constitution. Its
continued postponement could cause harmful effects to
the unity of the country. We believe that the process
should be nationally owned; it should be done from, by
and for the Lebanese. All parties concerned must now
break the current impasse and build a consensus that
leads to the election of a President.

The Middle East conflict has been so prolonged.
The need to find a peaceful, just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement to the conflict is absolutely
critical. The Government of Indonesia is committed to
helping achieve an end to this protracted and bitter
conflict, which has been wearing on the parties for far
too long. In particular, our commitment and support for
the Palestinian cause is total and unwavering. We hope
that multilateral efforts, including by the Security
Council, the Quartet and the Arab League, can
maximize their full potential in contributing to the
achievement of a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
in the Middle East, based on relevant resolutions of the
Council, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
and 1515 (2003), the Madrid terms of reference, the
principle of Land for Peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

