Mr. Sen (India): At the outset, please accept my
felicitations, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. We are happy to
participate in today's joint debate on three Security
Council items, whose implementation requires not only
the fullest collective effort by the entire membership,
but also their fullest participation in processes that
affect the collective security of all nations equally. I
will limit my remarks to a few comments, proceeding
from my last statement on this subject, in March this
year, before this body (see S/PV.5855).

To begin with, let me reaffirm India's abiding
determination to work to conclude the long-pending
effort to finalize a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism, moving beyond debates that
essentially miss the larger point. Such a convention
must be agreed upon to create a strong interlocking
network of Member States, international organizations
and specialized agencies working in unison to counter
terrorism. The adoption of such a convention through
the exercise of the lawmaking powers of the General
Assembly would be in the interests of all Member
States and would reinvigorate the multilateral and
collective dimensions of counter-terrorism efforts.
India continues to call upon the world to act as one in
denying terrorists, their ideologues and their financiers
access to arms, funds and means of transportation for
their deadly goods, as well as safe havens.

If those overarching goals are to be achieved,
there is also a need for a more genuinely inclusive
approach to be adopted by the Security Council, taking
along the larger membership of the General Assembly.
While India remains committed to fully cooperating
with all existing counter-terrorism mechanisms, as a
State with long experience in dealing with terrorism,
we are of the view that better cooperation between the
Council and the General Assembly will provide our
collective efforts greater legitimacy and ownership.

There are also operational benefits to be achieved
from greater collective pragmatism in tackling
terrorism through multilateral mechanisms. Not the
least of those potential benefits is better
implementation of the resolutions relating to counter-
terrorism, namely resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004) and their successor
resolutions.

However, to reach that stage of pragmatic, goal-
based cooperation, we need to do much more than we
have done thus far. It is also unclear whether better
implementation of those resolutions can be secured by
upgrading their existing mandates, as in the recent case
of resolution 1810 (2008), or by working to identify
genuine barriers to better implementation and
promoting a more collaborative system of extending
assistance and utilizing available regional expertise and
appropriate technologies. Implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), including reporting, remains a national
responsibility on the basis of national legislation,
arrangements and regulations. There may also be merit
in an approach that provides incentives for cooperation
rather than the current effort to continually raise the
bar for implementation by adding newer and more
intrusive reporting obligations, irrespective of whether
those are currently described as voluntary tasks.

That apart, however, I also wish to reiterate at
this juncture India's continuing emphasis on the need
for closer and more comprehensive international
cooperation to root out the phenomenon of illicit
activities such as clandestine proliferation of sensitive
technologies, which could contribute to the
manufacture of weapons of mass destruction.

The Security Council should also consider
whether its existing procedures need some overhauling,
in particular with regard to the sanctions regime
imposed upon Al-Qaida and Taliban operatives, entities
and their supporters. While at one level the effort to
improve modalities for review and delisting is to be
welcomed, there is also a need for the Council to
examine its own practice of selectively evaluating the
provision of information that it seeks from Member
States, which, for unrelated and procedural reasons, is
sometimes not utilized.

With regard to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED), we are encouraged by the positive
efforts of the dynamic new Executive Director. Greater
dialogue and consultation with all Member States and
better operational coordination with the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force is the correct
way forward for a mechanism that eventually has a
larger responsibility to the entire membership of the
United Nations.

Ultimately, we will collectively benefit from the
furtherance of the ongoing process of making the
CTED a completely professional, apolitical body that
goes beyond analysis of reports. However, the CTED
can only transcend the minutiae of examining reports
and preliminary implementation assessments once it is
no longer perceived as a largely political body, but as
an apolitical, professional organization.

In conclusion, I would venture the following
suggestions.

Better coordination between the various arms of
the Council's counter-terrorism mechanism must begin
at home. In other words, inter-related aspects of the
work of the 1267 Committee, the 1540 Committee and
the CTC should be dovetailed with those of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force. Those
tasks should also be more closely linked with the core
tasks of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, INTERPOL, the International Civil Aviation
Organization, the International Maritime Organization
and others.

While supporting the greater emphasis on the
extension of technical assistance bilaterally, regionally
and internationally, we should keep in mind the
primary task of ensuring the fullest implementation of
the relevant Council resolutions before we take the
process forward to more technical and potentially
intrusive areas of implementation that may add to the
sense of report fatigue among many Member States.

India remains willing to provide all assistance in
the larger effort to counter the threat of terrorism. Our
commitment to do so is already on record, in India's
fifth report, submitted to the CTC in March 2007. We
are willing to share information with other relevant
United Nations mechanisms that work in those fields.
Such assistance can be provided by India bilaterally or
multilaterally, especially to countries that are
themselves not directly threatened by terrorism but
whose participation is vital to the success of the larger
international effort.

Our comments here today are in the spirit of
pressing for further forward movement in bringing
existing mechanisms to deal with terrorism closer
together in operational terms. We welcome more
efforts to use such open dialogues as a mechanism to
build closer cooperation within the international
system. We therefore look forward to working in a
pragmatic manner to alter the regrettable perception
outside these walls that the role of the United Nations
in combating terrorism is limited to statements and
speeches and does not include concrete measures. For
that, we must not only work to foster better
institutional cooperation and "jointedness" - if I may
use the word - within the international system, we
must also focus on implementing goals that can be
achieved before mandating new and potentially
challenging commitments.

