Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): May I
at the outset, Sir, say to you how very pleased I am to
see you presiding over the work of the Council for the
month of March, not just because you represent
Guinea, a friendly country, but also because you
personally have already made an enormous
contribution to the work of our Council in the context
of other duties.

I should like to take this opportunity to thank also
the German delegation, Minister Fischer and
Ambassador Pleuger for their very effective leadership
during the month of February.

I should like first of all to thank Mr. ElBaradei
and Mr. Blix for the briefings they have just given us.
The Bulgarian authorities have analysed in depth the
report submitted to the Council by Mr. Blix. The
update he has just given us is a useful addition and
confirms the conclusions that we ourselves had arrived
at during our careful reading of this important
document.

I should like also to thank Mr. Blix, Mr.
ElBaradei and their teams for their professionalism and
for their dedication to their work.

The picture painted by Mr. Blix in his report is
nuanced. While the Iraqi authorities are cooperating
with regard to the procedural aspects of inspections -
in particular by ensuring unlimited access to sites
placed under the supervision of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) - so-called substantial cooperation is
still not satisfactory, and Iraq's attitude leaves
something to be desired. Given this lack of substantive
cooperation, the report concludes, quite rightly, that
thus far the major objective of resolution 1441
(2002) - the disarmament of Iraq - has not yet been
achieved.

Mr. Blix has informed the Council that results in
the area of disarmament have to date been very modest.
Of course, in recent days, as he has just told us, Iraq
has made additional efforts. To date, 34 prohibited Al
Samoud 2 missiles have been destroyed. Bulgaria
welcomes this development. The destruction must
continue at a sustained, or even more rapid, pace.
However, more than three months after the adoption of
resolution 1441 (2002), no significant breakthrough has
been made regarding the quantities of chemical and
biological weapons which are considered to be missing,
especially anthrax and VX gas.

These valuable but unfortunately partial
successes in inspections would not have been possible
without the international community's constant
pressure on Iraq. The unanimous adoption of resolution
1441 (2002) was the major and most effective form to
date of diplomatic pressure. Having said that, let us
face the evidence: it is the threat of the use of military
force and even the very presence of a significant
number of American and British soldiers on the borders
of Iraq that make resolution 1441 (2002) truly credible.
In spite of this necessary inevitable linking of
diplomacy with force, Iraq's cooperation remains
insufficient. It is neither immediate nor unconditional
nor active, as provided for under operative paragraph 9
of resolution 1441 (2002).

On 5 February 2003, Bulgaria declared that Iraq
was still in material breach of resolution 1441 (2002)
and of other relevant Security Council resolutions. It is
with great regret that I am led today to reiterate that
observation.

In spite of the absence of any real change in
Iraq's attitude, war is not inevitable. We are convinced
that the use of force is only a last resort once all
diplomatic means have been exhausted. Bulgaria
associates itself with the declaration of the European
Council of 17 February in Brussels, which states that
"The Iraqi regime alone will be responsible for the
consequences if it continues to flout the will of the
international community and does not take this last
opportunity".

The draft resolution submitted for consideration
by the Security Council by the delegations of Spain,
the United States and the United Kingdom, as well as
the memorandum circulated by France, Germany and
Russia (S/2003/214, annex), are not incompatible. Both
documents, as in fact the declaration of the European
Council of 17 February 2003 states, observe that
inspections cannot go on indefinitely. The
memorandum emphasizes that pressure on Iraq must be
increased. Bulgaria associates itself with that strategy,
which it has been advocating since it realized that the
Iraqi declaration of 7 December 2002 is not very
credible.

Following this state of affairs, my country
believes that the draft resolution is an effective means
to increase pressure on Iraq to comply with relevant
Security Council resolutions. Iraq continues to defy the
will of the international community to see it disarmed.
Only under pressure does it give the appearance of
disarming. Consequently, Bulgaria is prepared to
support the draft resolution. The adoption of such a
resolution would be a logical continuation of the efforts
of the Security Council to make Iraq understand that
patience has its limits.

We have taken due note of the amendments just
introduced to the Security Council by the delegation of
the United Kingdom. We shall study them carefully. At
first glance, I must say that they go in the direction
desired by my delegation, which is to seek consensus
once again in the Security Council.

For Bulgaria, the unity of the Council remains
both an objective to be achieved in order to preserve
the credibility of the United Nations and
multilateralism in general, but also a means to achieve
Iraq's disarmament. Nothing can replace diplomacy,
particularly multilateral diplomacy, in the days to
come- imaginative, innovative and courageous
diplomacy. In the days to come dialogue among the
members of the Council must be intensified, since
dialogue alone can allow for positions which today
seem a bit too set, a bit too rigid, to be brought closer.

For Bulgaria, which is an old European nation
and a recently re-established democracy, the stakes are
large. The unity of the Council would mean both
overcoming unproductive divisions within the
European Union and strengthening transatlantic ties.

In joining its voice to those of the overwhelming
majority of Council members, Bulgaria appeals
solemnly to all Council members. Let us make an
additional effort for the peaceful disarmament of Iraq.
The very credibility of the United Nations and the
Security Council are at stake. Let us rise to the
moment. Peace will only have a final opportunity
through our regained unity.

