Mr. Doss (spoke in French): It is an honour for
me to provide once again an overview of the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of the
status of implementation of the mandate that the
Council gave to the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) in December 2008. As the Council is
currently discussing the future of the Mission, I shall
concentrate on the remaining challenges in the peace
process and on our proposals for addressing those
challenges in the near future.

(spoke in English)
Members have received the Secretary General's
report (S/2009/623), and I have little to add in the way
of fresh information, except on the situation in
Equateur province. Government forces have retaken
the town of Dongo, where the incidents began three
weeks ago. MONUC has dispatched a military and
civilian team to the area to help prepare the way for the
return of the population and to facilitate the arrival of
humanitarian assistance.

In the east, we have focused our efforts on
containing and reducing the threat posed by the main
foreign armed groups in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, namely the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) and the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA). October and November have
seen significant numbers of surrenders and candidates
for voluntary repatriation from both groups. Since the
beginning of the year and until mid-December, more
than 1,400 FDLR combatants have surrendered,
roughly three times the average of previous of years.

There are also a growing numbers of LRA
combatants surrendering; the most important was the
surrender of Charles Arop, who commanded operations
at the time of the Christmas massacre at Faradje last
year

Kimia II - the operation against the FDLR -
will be completed on 31 December. The operation has
focused on disrupting and dispersing FDLR forces in
order to end their control of population centres and to
weaken their capacity to exploit the country's natural
wealth. That objective has been largely achieved,
although we do recognize that there have been very
serious and tragic humanitarian consequences.

I wish to emphasize, however, that these
operations were not expected to completely dismantle
the FDLR, which has been entrenched in the Kivus for
more than a decade. The FDLR remains a potent threat
and they will seek to return to their former strongholds
and punish the population for collaboration with
governmental forces if they are allowed to do so. I am
pleased to report therefore that a new directive was
approved this morning by the Chief of Staff of the
Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo (FARDC) and the United Nations Force
Commander. Under this directive, the FARDC and
MONUC will now concentrate on holding ground
recovered from the FDLR and preventing attacks on
civilians in areas of vulnerability, while undertaking
09-65284
focused interventions against any centres of command
and control where the FDLR may have regrouped.
Protection of civilians will be at the core of these
operations.

As we have said before to the Council, the
menace of the FDLR can be ended only by a
combination of measures: military pressures allied to
incentives for surrender; proper State control of the
trade in mineral and other resources; and judicial
proceedings against the expatriate elements that
continue to fund, encourage and assist criminal
activities in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. This is an agenda for action that obviously goes
beyond MONUC's mandate and means and requires
regional and international support

The latest report of the Group of Experts on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (see S/2009/603)
provides ample evidence of the critical role that
expatriate leaders play in funding, organizing and
directing the activities of the FDLR in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The report also
underscores the importance of cracking down on illegal
trading networks that have funded the FDLR and other
armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The Governments of the region and beyond
should work together and identify ways and means to
control and regulate the trade in minerals and other
natural resources to ensure that companies importing
minerals from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
exercise due diligence.

At the same time the Congolese Government
must ensure the progressive demilitarization of the
mining areas and prevent its own armed forces from
exploiting these resources. The Group of Experts has
pointed to collusion by some FARDC elements with
the FDLR, which we deplore. But we should also
recognize that the FARDC has dislodged the FDLR
from its former strongholds and has not wavered in its
determination to deal with the FDLR - which until a
year ago was certainly not the case. However, the
Government needs to move expeditiously to establish
State authority in these areas while also prosecuting
those who commit human rights violations.

We welcome the arrest of two individuals
indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda among the FDLR leaders in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda, which
was followed in November by the arrest in Germany of
09-65284

the Chairman of the FDLR and his deputy. This is the
first time that FDLR leaders have been indicted for
crimes committed by the group in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - crimes that continue
unabated to this day. I urge other countries to follow
Germany's lead by initiating legal proceedings against
other members of the FDLR political leadership that
are involved in supporting the crimes that are
committed in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The Council has stipulated that MONUC support
for the FARDC is contingent upon respect for human
rights, international humanitarian law and refugee law.
In line with the guidance received from United Nations
Headquarters, we have adopted a policy conditioning
MONUC's support for any operations, a policy which
is already being applied. That policy has been shared
with the Government and underpins President Kabila's
own zero-tolerance initiative, which is a vital
ingredient in the fight against impunity and the
protection of civilians.

Unfortunately, with the recent round of
integration and demobilization of Congolese armed
groups, the problem of discipline in the FARDC has
worsened. That is not a new problem, as previous
waves of integration have brought many undisciplined
and untrained elements into the army. That was the
price of peace. It is essential, therefore, that security
sector reform address this recurring problem through a
structured process of vetting and training and by
ensuring that the security forces are paid regularly and
on time. MONUC is currently drawing up a vetting
procedure, which we are sharing with our partners who
are also engaged in military cooperation with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Since my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6203), events on the ground in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have underlined the many
challenges that we face in efforts to implement the
provisions of the mandate that it has entrusted to us.

The first challenge, of course, is protection.
Human rights violations continue on a wide scale in the
east, particularly in the Kivus. There have also been
several cases of attacks on human rights defenders in
other parts of the country. The humanitarian situation
in the Kivus remains precarious, and overall
displacement remains high despite recent returns by
internally displaced persons (IDPs) from camps around
3
Goma. Sexual violence continues unchecked. Armed
groups, together with uncontrolled elements of the
FARDC itself, are responsible for most of those
violations.

MONUC has finalized and is implementing,
together with other United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations, a multifaceted
protection strategy. Every day, in many areas of the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUC is
helping to protect tens of thousands of civilians under
the threat of imminent danger. We have continued to
deploy joint protection teams; we are mapping conflict
and identifying "must protect" areas in cooperation
with local military and civilian authorities; and
additional mobile and temporary operating bases have
been established in South Kivu, Ituri and both Ue'le'
districts for the immediate protection of vulnerable
populations.

In Bas Uele, where our presence is still limited,
the deployment of an additional battalion will enable
the Force to accompany humanitarian agencies on
short-term missions to previously inaccessible
locations where critical humanitarian conditions are
reported. Fifty-eight of those forward bases are now
operational. I have visited a number of them in some
very remote parts of the Kivus, and I can assure the
Council personally that local people greatly appreciate
our presence and the protection that MONUC provides
to them.

The Council is aware, however, of the dilemma
faced by MONUC, which is inherent in the mandate
that enjoins us to give the highest priority to the
protection of civilians, while at the same time working
with the FARDC, which includes elements that have
been responsible for human rights violations, to disarm
groups, such as the FDLR, that have been a constant
threat to the people of eastern Congo for over a decade.
There is no easy answer to that dilemma and we are
looking to the Council for clear guidance in that
respect.

The second challenge is integration, which is
tenuous and is creating renewed tensions and
uncertainties in the Kivus. There are two main reasons
for that: residual armed groups which are reluctant to
integrate or demobilize, and the ex-Congres national
pour la defense du people (CNDP), which has not yet
dismantled its parallel military and administrative
structures in some areas that were previously
controlled by the group. Lack of progress on
outstanding issues related to the 23 March agreements
is often used as a pretext for reluctance to complete
integration and support the extension of State authority.
The Government needs to reach out to recalcitrant
groups and to address their grievances, but all
stakeholders have to understand that maintaining
parallel structures or militias is incompatible with the
peace process, and that the Government has the right to
use appropriate means to impose its authority on those
who continue to challenge it, albeit within the
framework of international human rights and
humanitarian law.

At the same time, the Government should make
every effort to overcome the shortcomings that have
hampered military and police integration. The
Commission on the Allocation of Military Ranks
should strive for a rapid conclusion to its proceedings
in order to clarify the status and function of all newly
integrated officers. Now that the census of the army
has been completed by the European Union Mission of
Assistance for Security Sector Reform, salaries should
be paid on time and mechanisms should be established
to make sure that payments reach the rank and file. The
garrisoning of troops who are not essential for ongoing
operations and protection purposes should start
immediately, and the FARDC should identify the
battalions designated for training so that the FARDC
and MONUC can proceed with vetting and with the
separation of those who do not meet the standards of
professional security forces in order to build a
reasonably sized force that can progressively take over
security responsibilities from MONUC, as the
Secretary-General has recommended in his report.
Newly deployed and integrated police should be
regularly paid as well and properly equipped.
Furthermore, funding for the continued reintegration of
former combatants into civilian life will have to be
secured.

Eventually, all these efforts will have to be
channelled into a comprehensive security sector reform
process at the national level. The police component of
that process is largely on track, with a three-year action
plan and a longer-term strategic perspective. However,
army reform is still in an embryonic stage, and justice
sector reform requires renewed momentum. The
Government's army reform plan is under examination
in parliament. Once approved, the long-promised
discussion with those international partners willing to
09-65284
assist in its implementation should be convened
without further delay.

The third challenge involves IDPs and refugees,
who have started returning. In some return areas,
security conditions are still very volatile and have been
exacerbated by conflicting land claims and the
competition for mineral resources. These problems
have been aggravated by undocumented border
crossings and by allegations that ex-CNDP elements
have created protected areas for returnees. We need to
be very clear on this: yes, returning IDPs and refugees
have the right to protection, but it is the role of the
State, and not of armed groups, to provide such
protection. A privatization of protection tasks would
only lead to the re-emergence of ethnic militias, with
the potential to unravel the integration process and
spark renewed ethnic violence.

The Governments of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and its three eastern neighbours, Uganda,
Rwanda and Burundi, are negotiating tripartite
agreements under the auspices of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, with
the support of the United Nations country team, is
preparing support programmes for reintegration that
will benefit not only the returnees, but also the
communities that they are joining.

While those negotiations are ongoing, ways of
managing the flow of returns should be sought and a
comprehensive mechanism put in place to address
related land conflicts. We have urged the Government
to establish the permanent conciliation committees
foreseen in the 23 March agreements for that purpose.

The efforts to stabilize the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo can be sustained only if they are
supported by nationwide efforts to consolidate
democracy and to improve governance, in particular
financial management, as well as to promote socio-
economic recovery, and to encourage business
investment and employment, a point recently
emphasized by President Kabila in his state of the
nation address. It is a truism that there can be no
development without peace and security and that peace
and security cannot be maintained in an environment of
continued social and economic hardship. An integrated
peacekeeping mission like MONUC can assist in
creating a favourable environment in terms of peace
and security and, together with the United Nations
09-65284

country team and other partners, help the Government
to lay the foundations for longer-term recovery and
development. The Integrated Strategic Framework,
which is currently under preparation, is a pointer in
that direction.

As the Council requested in resolution 1856
(2008), we have now concentrated almost all our
military forces in the east. More than 95 per cent are
now in that part of the country.

A significant number of United Nations police
and civilian personnel have also been reassigned to the
eastern provinces. The progressive transition to the
East is therefore practically complete, although we are
continuing to close some facilities in the western
provinces. In recent years, United Nations agencies
have also focused on the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo and have very few resources, including
staff, allocated to the western part of the country. That
means that they do not have the capacity to take over
MONUC responsibilities without considerable
additional support from the donor community.

Before I conclude, let me say a few words on
MONUC's future. MONUC's current mandate is
elaborate, complex and covers a wide range of tasks. It
has allowed us a valuable degree of flexibility in a
rapidly evolving political and military environment.
But sometimes it has raised expectations beyond the
Mission's resources or capabilities. I would hope,
therefore, that future mandates will simplify the range
of tasks that the Mission is expected to undertake.

During the first half of 2010, we expect to have
more clarity on the evolving situation in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the impact of
measures to enhance the protection of civilians, the
integration process and a timetable for elections. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations should then be
in a better position to propose a realistic plan for
MONUC and its reconfiguration.

I would add, if I may, a mention of something
that happened 10 days ago in Dongo, which the
members of the Council may or may not be aware of.
But I think it points to the work that MONUC does.
Ten days ago, a helicopter with civilian staff, as well as
some elements of the force, arrived in Dongo to
resupply our military observers there, who were trying
to see what was happening in the outbreak of violence.
On arriving, the helicopter was attacked by some of the
insurgents. Members of the crew were wounded. They
managed, nevertheless, to evacuate wounded soldiers
who were guarding the helipad. The rotors were hit, the
fuel tank was hit, and the crew still managed to take off
and fly everybody to safety 130 kilometres away in the
Republic of the Congo, across the river. Their heroism
saved 25 lives.

I think that is a good illustration of what the
Mission does, day in and day out, that does not always
get the attention of the public and the media. I would
like to put on record our appreciation of the heroism of
that Russian helicopter crew, who, as I said, saved the
helicopter and its passengers from what almost
certainly would have been a much worse situation -
probably leading to the deaths of several of them.

(spoke in French)

On 30 June 2010, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of its
independence. Shortly after the birth of the new State
in 1960, the United Nations intervened to prevent the
6

break-up of the country. Many Congolese remember
that United Nations intervention with gratitude. In the
course of the past 10 years, MONUC has supported the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in its slow
emergence from the greatest crisis experienced by the
country since Katanga's attempted cessation. In that
time, MONUC has provided multifaceted support for
the establishment of the current institutions and for the
pursuit of the democratic process. It is important that
we continue to pursue and strengthen that process.

