Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Allow me at the outset to commend the
Secretary-General on his report on the situation in
Kosovo. I should like also to pay tribute to the work of
the Special Representative, Mr. Haekkerup. I am
grateful as well for the update just provided us by
Mr. Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, on the situation. All of this
information gives the Council a clear picture of the
conditions currently prevailing in Kosovo and will
allow it to determine the measures that need to be
taken.

As we consider the report of the Secretary-
General on United Nations activities in Kosovo, we
cannot but pay heartfelt tribute to all of the components
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), who daily are representing the
United Nations in the field and who are working, day
after day, to instil peace in the hearts of the people of
Kosovo and to create conditions of security for people
and for property. They are also carrying out, with skill
and dedication, the many indispensable tasks involved
in the setting up and smooth functioning of the Interim
Administration.

I think we can say, without lapsing into
triumphalism, that the legislative elections held in
Kosovo on 17 November last were a great success for
the international community. We are indeed gratified to
see that all sectors of society participated in them. We
welcome the results of the elections, which send the
message that a coalition is indispensable for
governance. Nor can we fail to experience genuine
satisfaction at seeing the atmosphere of peace and
security that prevailed during those elections. Indeed,
the Under-Secretary-General reminded us of this
earlier in his presentation.

The smooth holding of the elections has given
rise to many expectations as concerns the creation of
the necessary institutions and the normalization
process. Other important elements have contributed to
these hopes. The first was the signing in Belgrade on 5
November last by Mr. Haekkerup and Mr. Covic,
Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, of a Common
Document reiterating the principles enshrined in
resolution 1244 (1999). The second important fact is
the anticipated creation of a High-ranking Working
Group - as set out in the Document - which would
serve as a forum for dialogue and cooperation between,
on the one hand, UNMIK and the provisional
institutions of self-government, and, on the other, the
Yugoslav authorities.

These expectations, like roses, are in danger of
living only for one morning unless we attend to them,
because the challenges ahead are so great. The events
that transpired subsequently - to which the Secretary-
General refers in his report and which Mr. Guehenno
has recalled - are indeed sources of concern. The
difficulties involved in electing a president, the still-
tense relations among the inhabitants of Kosovo, the
murder that took place on 17 January 2002 - all of
this indicates how fragile, precarious and risk-laden the
situation is. This being so, the only possible course is
to be vigilant if we wish to capitalize on all of the
positive signs that we have noted.

Indeed, as the Council is aware, many aspects of
the task of rebuilding Kosovo have not yet been
addressed. We must consolidate the still-fragile
achievements that have been registered in the process
of Kosovo's renewal.

A nascent civil administration is gradually being
set up; a new multi-ethnic police force is taking its
first, as yet unsteady steps; economic networks are
emerging, but they still require structure; and finally,
the integration of minorities is slowly becoming a
reality.

These achievements are fragile, and we must
assist in their preservation and consolidation. We
believe that, in order to consolidate this positive
momentum, the following points should be given
priority attention in our plan of action.

First of all, we must strengthen security for
people and for property. We welcome the joint
UNMIK-KFOR activities, which have given the people
a sense of security, and we encourage the
implementation of the measures contained in
paragraphs 21 and 22 of the Secretary-General's report.

Secondly, all armed bands should be disarmed.

Thirdly, all minorities should be encouraged to
return. To that end, we should devise effective follow-
up measures as regards integration and security.

We believe that these measures deserve priority
attention, insofar as they are aimed at preserving the
existence of Kosovo. This requires that the province be
integrated into the great family of the Balkans. Its
consolidated unity must be maintained as an expression
of the commitment of all of Kosovo's components.
That unity requires mutual respect, mutual acceptance
and tolerance. To live and to survive, Kosovo must
internalize and live by the expression e pluribus unum.
This is a vast and lofty undertaking, without which
there cannot be peace, human rights or democracy in
Kosovo.

The United Nations and the relevant and
interested regional organizations must endeavour to
create, in and around Kosovo, the necessary conditions
for a sense of unity to emerge among the various
elements of society.

Let me reiterate: e pluribus unum.

I should like to conclude in the same way as I
began: by paying tribute to UNMIK, and in particular
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Hans Haekkerup, who has decided, for personal
reasons, to leave his post.

