Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank High
Representative Izumi Nakamitsu for her informative
briefing and you, Madam President, for having organized
this discussion in an open format. Transparency and
openness are extremely important and necessary for
objective discussions with sober assessments of exact
recent or ongoing developments. We certainly need such
a thorough approach, especially in the investigation of
incidents related to the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. The reports of the Fact-finding Mission in the
Syrian Arab Republic do not yet provide us with the
necessary clarity and objectivity, generating further
disagreement among Council members.

The position of Kazakhstan on this issue remains
firm and consistent. We do not tolerate the use of any
kind of weapon of mass destruction, including chemical
weapons. We support the prompt identification and
prosecution of all those responsible for chemical crimes.
However, the involvement of a party must be proved by
full, comprehensive and irrefutable evidence.

The issues of attribution and prosecution have
long represented a stumbling block in the work of the
Council. This impasse has prevented us from achieving
effective solutions. We, the members of the Council,
must rise above our geopolitical interests. Instead
of polarizing the deliberations with our views and
prejudices, we must all think seriously about further
joint and integrated action.

We must remember that the political settlement
of the Syrian crisis and the fight against the threat of
chemical weapons in Syria are closely interrelated.
We must not allow chemical incidents, deliberately
organized for destructive purposes, to undermine our
achievements in the political dimension and detract
from the prospects for long-awaited peace in Syria.
Existing threats should be considered in that context.

In the report of the Director General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) before us today (see S/2018/804), we see both
positive aspects and cause for concern. We agree with
the Secretary-General that the long-awaited destruction
of all 27 chemical weapon-production facilities in Syria
is an important step towards the full implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013). The report also indicates
certain progress in obtaining answers from the Syrian
Government on issues regarding its chemical weapons
declaration. We look forward to the further cooperation
of the Government of Syria with the OPCW in order
to eliminate all remaining ambiguities. We eagerly
await the results of the analysis by the Declaration
Assessment Team of the responses submitted by the
Syrian authorities.

At the same time, we are very concerned about
other circumstances. Questions remain unclear in the
following areas.

There is a lack of clarity about all ongoing
investigations of chemical incidents, including the
Douma incident, which would allow us to see how
and by whom chemical weapons have been used and
seriously affected the common people of Syria.

The lack of impunity and absence of preventive
measures do not allow us to effectively address the
continued threat of chemical-weapons use in the country
or the fear that chemical attacks are not only being used
as a tactical tool of warfare and liquidation of the enemy,
which is also unacceptable in our times, but also as an
instrument of terror that sows chaos among people to
achieve certain benefits for one particular party.

The provocative nature of such actions is a real
threat to our collective efforts to achieve peace and
stability in the Syrian Arab Republic. We should
not allow the politicization and polarization of this
serious matter, on which the fate of many depends. We
must also fight intentional provocations and planned
deliberate attacks.

Kazakhstan calls for constructive and patient
consultations and the tireless search for mutually
acceptable solutions for the benefit of the people
of Syria.

