I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this statement. The protection of civilians in armed conflict remains of utmost concern for the EU and its member States, and we welcome the opportunity today to speak on this important topic. We also welcome the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/366). The recent outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has not only created a global health crisis but has also had a severe impact on the protection of civilians. The direct and indirect effects of the pandemic are felt most strongly by populations already affected by humanitarian crises and conflict, including refugees and internally displaced persons as well as women, children, the elderly, people with disabilities and other persons in vulnerable situations. It is also a human rights crisis. A joint response that puts people at its centre, under the leadership of the United Nations, and that addresses the needs and the protection of the most vulnerable is the only way to address the magnitude of the COVID-19 crisis. The EU is committed to combining all efforts to tackle the pandemic's impact on those most vulnerable across the world through both targeted and direct local support as well as by ensuring the continued provision of life-saving health and essential services, including sexual and reproductive health-care services and responses to violence, inter alia, sexual and gender-based violence. The EU recalls that parties to armed conflicts bear the primary obligation to respect international humanitarian law and to meet the needs of populations under their control. They also bear the primary responsibility for human rights violations and abuses. It is vital that all parties to armed conflicts, State and non-State alike, respect their obligation under international humanitarian law to allow and facilitate the free passage of humanitarian relief. Unimpeded, fast and safe access to the people affected is the critical enabler to ensure the efficient and effective delivery of humanitarian aid and the unhampered flow of life-saving medicines, equipment and supplies. It is important that these be free of any taxes and levies and not subject to bureaucratic restrictions. It is also essential that sanctions and counter-terrorism measures not impede the delivery of principled humanitarian assistance in violation of international law and that they be in accordance with international humanitarian law, including through the introduction of humanitarian exceptions, as appropriate. While measures to contain the virus and mitigate its effects are taken, we must all ensure that adherence to international law prevails. The EU underlines the need for security forces to comply with international human rights law and the principle of non-discrimination and to exercise restraint when enforcing Government guidance as well as the importance of preventing harm to civilians. Looking at the broader context presented in the report, the EU is gravely concerned by the ever-growing number of deliberate violations of international humanitarian law and the continued high prevalence of civilian deaths and injury, as well as the destruction or damage caused to civilian objects such as schools and health infrastructure, including maternities, and religious sites. We are also concerned by the growing number of attacks on humanitarian personnel as well as those on medical personnel and facilities, including the recent attacks in Libya, Myanmar, Afghanistan and South Sudan. Such attacks are to be resolutely condemned. These also have a devastating impact on the safety and health of civilians and strongly undermine the fight against the global pandemic. The EU is fully committed to supporting collective efforts to strengthen the protection of civilians, by taking all appropriate measures to ensure respect for international law, including international humanitarian law and human rights; by taking all appropriate measures to address the protection needs of those most vulnerable; and by supporting the fight against impunity for serious violations. The EU and its member States urge universal respect for international humanitarian law. We call on all parties to conflict to respond to the appeal by the Secretary-General and to ensure that an immediate global ceasefire in the light of the pandemic is observed. Moving from the rhetoric of demanding respect for the law to its actual implementation and respect therefor requires constant engagement and concrete actions. Atthe thirty-third International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, the EU and its member States specifically pledged to strengthen the implementation and dissemination of international humanitarian law and the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Among other things, the EU will continue its efforts to strengthen the protection of humanitarian workers and health care facilities from attacks and to promote the full implementation of resolution 2286 (2016). Work is also being conducted with the armed forces to better institutionalize the protection of civilians in conflict by advocating the introduction of a protection- of-civilians component in training courses and exercises through the capacity- building of the military, the mobilization of local communities and civil-society- led tailored advocacy. The EU equally recognizes that the provision of trainings on international humanitarian law, including to non-State armed groups, is key to ensuring compliance with the law and should be pursued. On the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the two Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, we reiterate the importance of protecting children during armed conflicts, taking all the appropriate and necessary actions to reduce the impact of armed conflicts on their lives. The mainstreaming of a gender perspective is, in this context, of particular importance to sensitizing all actors on the differentiated impacts, specific needs and situation of women and girls in conflict situations. We strongly condemn the attacks against schools and universities, including the burning of facilities, the destruction of school equipment and the threats of attacks to which teachers and students are exposed. As such, we urge Member States and non-State actors to respect international humanitarian law and to facilitate access to education in armed conflict. In that respect, we also promote the protection of schools and education accessible to all in situations of conflict, supporting initiatives to roll out the Paris Principles and related commitments, and we take positive note of the efforts to promote and protect the right to education, including the efforts of Member States that have endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration. The EU underlines that the protection of civilians must be at the core of peacekeeping mandates. Taking a three-tiered approach to protection is key in that regard, as outlined in the Department of Peace Operations Policy on the Protection of Civilians in United Nations Peacekeeping. We also recall the adoption, five years ago, of the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians as an important tool for strengthening the effective implementation of protection mandates in peacekeeping. Peacekeeping, crisis management and political missions can also play a key role in the protection of civilians, in general, and the most vulnerable segments of the population, in particular, through their engagement with national authorities, security and military forces and capacity-building activities. We welcome that the reprioritization of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative commits us to launch and roll out a revised handbook on the protection of civilians and a new one on conflict- related sexual violence within the next six months to mission personnel in order to enhance mandate implementation. International humanitarian law and the protection of civilians are included in the planning and conduct of all civilian and military EU crisis-management missions and operations that promote peace and security in the context of the EU's common security and defence policy. In particular, the EU promotes increased systematization of international humanitarian law training within the armed forces, with an emphasis on the concept of training the trainers, and welcomes initiatives aimed at identifying concrete ways to strengthen international humanitarian law and the protection of civilians, especially by reinforcing linkages and coordination between civilian and military components. The EU is committed to addressing the root causes of climate change and environmental degradation through an ambitious global climate change mitigation and environmental protection policy, enshrined in the recent European Green Deal. Protecting the environment and safeguarding access to clean drinking water and sanitation can also help protect civilians, especially in humanitarian crisis and conflict settings, where people in particularly vulnerable communities tend to be most dependent on natural resources for food and livelihoods. The EU will continue to prioritize the protection of civilians in its humanitarian missions. We are committed to better addressing the needs of the most vulnerable, including women and children and those at increased risk due to disability, gender identity, sexual orientation, race, ethnicity, age, religion or belief. The EU is concerned that sexual and gender-based violence continues to be employed as a tactic of war, terrorism, torture and repression in various crises. The victims - women and girls, men and boys - often belong to the most vulnerable groups. The EU continues to support projects aimed at preventing and responding to sexual and gender-based violence and remains committed to the Call to Action on Protection from Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies initiative. In addition, we also reaffirm the importance of comprehensive and timely sexual and reproductive health-care services. The EU is equally committed to better addressing the needs of persons with disabilities in armed conflicts and to promoting their empowerment and meaningful participation in decision-making processes in all phases of humanitarian action. The EU welcomes the Inter-Agency Standing Committee Guidelines on Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities in Humanitarian Action, adopted last year, and fully supports their implementation. Armed conflict leads to forced displacement, internally and across borders, thus forcing people to ask for international protection and asylum. The EU is committed to supporting the assistance and protection of persons displaced by conflict, but also to assisting local host communities and their already scarce resources to help meet the challenges arising from protracted displacement. The EU closely follows and supports the work of the High-level Panel on Internal Displacement and actively advocates for the protection of the rights of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees. We also support durable solutions, including voluntary repatriation efforts of IDPs to their homelands through a humanitarian-development nexus approach and in accordance with international law, notably international refugee law. We recall that international law, in particular international humanitarian law and international human rights law, fully applies to the use of all weapon systems and that those who employ them remain responsible and accountable for their use. Ensuring compliance with international humanitarian law is particularly crucial as armed conflicts are increasingly being fought in urban areas, exposing civilians and civilian infrastructure to substantial risks. We recognize the challenges associated with the use of explosive weapons in densely populated areas and their impact on civilians. We call on all parties to armed conflicts to fully comply with the principles and rules of international humanitarian law. Promoting compliance with international humanitarian law and respect for humanitarian principles remains a top priority for the EU and its member States. We also reiterate our grave concern about the increasing harm and humanitarian consequences worldwide of attacks with improvised explosive devices, as well as their indiscriminate use and disproportionate effects in the perpetration of terrorist acts, in particular. The EU also remains gravely concerned about the situation in Syria, which is causing unacceptable suffering for civilian populations. The EU strongly condemns the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian Arab Air Force, as concluded by the recent report of the Investigation and Identification Team of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. The use of chemical weapons by anyone - be it a State or a non-State actor - anywhere, at any time and under any circumstances is a violation of international law. We condemn the unlawful alleged continuing use of incendiary weapons against civilians or military targets within a concentration of civilians in Syria. We call on all States not yet party to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons to join Protocol III, which prohibits the use of air-delivered incendiary weapons in concentrations of civilians, and we urge all States to fully comply with its provisions. In that context, we also urge the Security Council to renew the cross- border mandate in July so that life-saving assistance can reach populations in need throughout Syria. The fast pace of technological developments provides many opportunities but also entails risks. With regard to emerging technologies in the area of lethal autonomous weapon systems (LAWS), the EU emphasizes that human beings must control their use and must remain accountable for decisions over life and death in order to ensure compliance with international law, particularly international humanitarian law and international human rights law. We encourage the Group of Governmental Experts on emerging technologies in the area of lethal autonomous weapons systems to make progress in clarifying, reviewing and developing aspects of the normative and operational framework on LAWS. The fight against impunity for the most serious crimes of international concern is one of the shared values of the EU. The EU strongly supports international justice and accountability mechanisms. We promote the work and independence of the International Criminal Court as an important actor in the global fight against impunity, and urge all States Members of the United Nations to do the same, including by ratifying the Rome Statute. The extensive recommendations on accountability contained in the Secretary- General's reports on the protection of civilians remain very relevant today. Their implementation is our collective responsibility. Let us not shy away from our commitments.
