I am grateful for this opportunity to update the Security Council on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the activities of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in conjunction with the issuance of the most recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/919). My briefing today will touch on the continuing political tensions in the country the progress being made on the Mission's transition, and efforts to pursue a comprehensive approach to the protection of civilians. At the outset, I wish to emphasize that, notwithstanding the pandemic, MONUSCO has successfully maintained continuity of operations and mandate delivery by introducing a range of measures and procedures that have helped to ensure that the Mission is not a vector of transmission for the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Among other things, the Mission enhanced its internal screening and treatment capacity in order not to place an additional burden on the local medical system. A temporary halt was placed on troop rotations and staff returning from abroad were required to self-quarantine. Movements were also temporarily halted between Kinshasa, where the outbreak commenced, and the provinces where the Mission's operations are concentrated. Although MONUSCO's civilian and uniformed personnel had _ their professionalism and patience of sorely tested during this difficult period, they continued to carry out the Mission's work, demonstrating their adherence to United Nations values. In this context, I wish to reiterate my appreciation to the troop- and police- contributing countries of MONUSCO for their flexibility, particularly concerning the temporary halt on troop rotations, and to all Mission personnel, civilian and uniformed, for their unwavering professionalism and dedication during this time of great uncertainty. I am pleased to report that rotations have resumed and that all civilian personnel are present at their duty stations and working under appropriately flexible arrangements. In my previous briefings to the Security Council, I have underlined the dual nature of the current political situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo. On the one hand, I believe that, despite its internal differences, the political class accepts and even appreciates the opportunities offered by the ruling coalition between Cap pour le Changement and Front commun pour le Congo. On the other hand, there are persistent tensions between the members of the coalition that have threatened to undermine what has come to represent a key pillar on which the country's long-term stabilization rests. To this challenge we must now add another - the risk that politicking and positioning ahead of the 2023 elections will become the overriding focus, to the exclusion of the governance reforms and stabilization measures that the country needs. The current political dispensation remains fragile and could yet unravel. At the same time, it has the potential to sustain and advance the gains that have already been made, should all actors work towards this goal. It is as much a learning process for the members of the ruling coalition - who were political opponents and must now overcome their differences and build trust among one another - as it is for the opposition and civil society, who must learn to navigate a new political landscape and work to ensure that the peaceful transfer of power becomes a routine occurrence. In this context, I have spared no effort in the exercise of my good offices. I continue to meet regularly with stakeholders from across the political spectrum, both inside and outside of Government, to remind them of the delicate juncture at which the country finds itself and urge them to focus on implementing the reforms needed to address the pressing needs of the population and place the country on the path to long-term stability and sustainable development. In doing so, I have sought to impress upon all my interlocutors that there is a difference between normal political competition and behaviour that undermines the stability of the country. The Security Council will soon receive the joint strategy on the progressive and phased drawdown of MONUSCO. [am pleased to report that fruitful discussions are ongoing with the Government at the most senior levels to achieve a common understanding of the way forward. President Tshisekedi has underlined his wish for a gradual transition and a responsible exit of MONUSCO. He has stressed that this should be undertaken through a progressive transfer of tasks from MONUSCO to the Government, in coordination with the United Nations country team. Given the complexity of the conflict environment in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the joint strategy is based on a series of region-specific strategies, tailored to the particular needs of the six provinces, outside of Kinshasa, where the Mission is still present. There is agreement with the Government that in the coming years, MONUSCO will gradually consolidate its footprint in the three provinces where active conflict persists - namely, North and South Kivu and Ituri - while pursuing its work of good offices and institutional strengthening at the national level. As part of this process, the Mission should be able to withdraw from the Kasai region, which is in a phase of post-conflict consolidation, relatively soon. In Tanganyika, recent improvements in the security situation should enable the Mission to reduce its military footprint, despite continued domestic armed group activity in the north and low-level inter-community conflict in some areas. I have already touched on the security situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is described in detail in the report of the Secretary-General. I have consistently condemned the serious abuses and violations that continue to be committed against civilians. MONUSCO is working closely with the Government and the Congolese security forces to provide comprehensive responses in all areas affected by armed group violence. At the core of its current activities, the Mission remains focused on improving the implementation of its protection of civilians mandate, including by enhancing the performance of its peacekeepers and harnessing the technological capabilities at its disposal, such as unarmed aerial systems. The Mission will continue to work closely with the Congolese military and police to strengthen their ability to protect the civilians in the remaining areas of the country affected by insecurity. At the same time, it is important to understand that the protection of civilians goes well beyond the conduct of military operations. This is why the Mission is working with the Congolese authorities and local communities, civil society, women's organizations and young people as part of an integrated approach that combines support to community reconciliation, strengthening of the justice system, professionalization of the security forces, and monitoring and reporting on human rights abuses. MONUSCO is also working hand-in-hand with the United Nations country team, the World Bank, the Peacebuilding Fund and other multilateral and bilateral partners to develop and implement a range of programmes designed to meet the immediate humanitarian needs of the population and set the country on the path to sustainable development. In this context, I wish to express deep concern over recent reports of attacks - including killings and kidnappings - on humanitarian actors trying to provide relief to populations affected by conflict. I urge all stakeholders to enable humanitarian access to populations in need and recall that resolution 2417 (2018) condemns unlawful denial of humanitarian access to civilian populations. The stabilization of the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo will depend to a large extent on progress made towards the dismantling of armed groups and the sustainable reintegration of ex-combatants into their communities. It is vital, in this context, that we avoid repeating the experiences of the past, where large numbers of ex-combatants were granted amnesty and integrated into the Congolese security forces, undermining their professionalism, discipline and unity of command. The prospect of obtaining a rank in the Congolese security forces was an incentive to form an armed group, resulting in a deadly cycle of recyclage, the consequences of which are still being felt today. I have continuously emphasized the need to break this cycle and implement a programme of community reintegration that seeks to build the resilience of communities receiving ex-combatants and provide for their legitimate needs, while removing the incentive to form and join armed groups. I believe that this is one of the most urgent priorities facing the country today, and it is one on which I continue to engage with the Congolese authorities at the national and provincial levels, as well as interested donors. I call on the Council to throw its full weight behind efforts to foster this new, community-based approach to reintegration, which represents a clear break with the failed policies of the past. MONUSCO remains committed to exploiting synergies with other United Nations presences in the Great Lakes. In particular, the Mission continues to work closely with the Office of the Special Envoy on a range of issues, including the promotion of non-military measures to tackle the threat posed by armed groups, the importance of which I have already emphasized, and the development of the United Nations regional strategy. The Mission is also committed to working closely with the African Union, the International Conference for the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African Development Community, all of which play an essential role in promoting peace and development in the subregion. To conclude, as I have stated before, the elections of 2018 and resulting peaceful transfer of power were a historic turning point that has made it possible to start envisaging MONUSCO's progressive drawdown and withdrawal from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Serious challenges remain and there is clearly much work to be done to place the country on the path to long-term stability and long-term development. I therefore call on the Security Council to continue supporting MONUSCO in its efforts to help the Congolese Government and people preserve the gains made during the Mission's presence and create the conditions for its responsible exit.
