Ms. Yanez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks the Permanent Mission of France for
convening this open debate. Ecuador believes that it is

important that here, within the Security Council, all
States be able to express their concern regarding the
situation of children in armed conflict, especially given
that, in addition to the vulnerability of their situation
and the countless abuses they endure, they are deprived
of education and, without access to it, further deprived
of the possibility of having a future in which they can
fully enjoy their human rights.

Ecuador thanks the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2017/821) and the briefing he delivered this
morning. We are thank France for the concept note
(S/2017/891,annex) issued as a guide for this meeting.

As the Secretary-General and Special Representative
for Children Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, so
eloquently noted, the situation of children is becoming
increasingly precarious, not just because of the number
and gravity of violations in countries in conflict, both
on the Security Council and outside of it, but also
because all the atrocities covered in the report highlight
the ever-more alarming situation of children who fall
prey to State and non-State actors. To protect children,
we need a collective and comprehensive response that
takes into account their particular circumstances and
needs for protection, and that addresses the many
reported violations of international law, the denial of
access to humanitarian assistance, and the recruitment,
kidnapping and sexual violence to which they
are subject.

The Secretary-General's report also highlights
how schools are used for military purposes and how
educational infrastructure is destroyed. As a signatory
to the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration of 2015, Ecuador
endorses the content of the Declaration presented by
the Permanent Mission of Norway. It expresses its full
support for the need to protect students, teachers and
educational infrastructure in times of armed conflict,
and stresses the importance of continuing education
during armed conflicts and of implementing the
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict.

All of this is linked to Sustainable Development
Goal 4: Ensure inclusive and quality education for all
and promote lifelong learning. That is important for my
country, which our Constitution defines as a territory of
peace. The function of the armed forces and police is to
protect the rights, liberties and guarantees of citizens.
Our Constitution also stipulates that girls, boys and
teenagers will be given priority in cases of disaster,
armed conflict and other types of emergencies.

That is why we believe that the figures included in
the report cannot become the norm; rather, they call for
a comprehensive response on the part of States. That
response must in particular include the commitment
that those responsible will not go unpunished. The
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Virginia Gamba, with whose work we are
all familiar, should receive the necessary financial and
political support.

