Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Ms. Bintou Keita for her briefing on the situation in
Haiti and on the work of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti. We are also grateful for
the very useful and enlightening presentation on the
achievements of the Mission.

We must acknowledge the objectivity of the
alarming assessments in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/795) that the already fragile security
situation has recently been undergoing new trials,
notably the mass protests being staged around the
country. Regrettably, the political life of the country has
been marked by disagreement between the legislative
and executive branches, the resignation of the Prime
Minister and the Government and setbacks in the work of
Parliament, all of which have considerably undermined
the prospects for post-conflict peacebuilding in Haiti.
We have to note that the humanitarian situation remains
dire. More than 1 million people are in urgent need of
food assistance but fewer than half of them are actually
receiving it. And to that can be added the fact that the
humanitarian response plan is only 10 per cent financed.

These events in no way help the Mission in
preparing to withdraw from the country. We have also
seen that the gradual transfer to the Haitian National
Police of responsibility for maintaining law and order
is in difficulties and is going on at a time when criminal
groups are increasingly active. These are all problems
that the Government and people of Haiti will have to
solve on their own in the near future as they assume
their national responsibility.
We welcome the efforts of the country's leadership
to ensure stability and develop a system of State
governance that relies on their own strengths. It will
be crucial to ensure that the work of the legislative,
executive and judicial branches of Government are well
coordinated. And much remains to be done on the part
of United Nations personnel, whose task is to provide
maximum assistance in the process. For our part, we
support Port-au-Prince and affirm that Russia will
continue to ensure that the ultimate outcome of the
Security Council's work will be a genuine normalization
of the situation in Haiti, along with stronger sovereignty
and self-sufficiency.

We would once again like to draw the Council's
attention to a very important point that for reasons that
are unclear has been left out of our discussion. Once
again, in spite of the fact that a significant portion
of the Secretary-General's report is dedicated to the
subject of combating sex crimes and assisting their
victims, it contains no information about similar crimes
committed by representatives of non-governmental
organizations accredited by the United Nations. I would
like to remind the Council that we drew attention to
the issue in our statements on 3 and 9 April (see S/PV.8220 and S/PV.8225). In the context of the stated
United Nations policy of zero tolerance for such terrible
crimes, we have no right to ignore flagrant examples.

