Mr. Daeie (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting of the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999).

I welcome the presence of Special Representative
Farid Zarif and thank him for his statement.

During the current reporting period, the citizens
of Serbia voted in free and fair general elections.
International observers concluded that the vote was in
line with the most rigorous international standards, as
in any stable democracy.

The consolidation of regional peace, security and
stability is a priority for the newly elected authorities of
the Republic of Serbia. I would like to remind this body
that practically right after the Second World War had
come to an end, those who had been the most fervent of
enemies began to lay the foundations for a new, stable
and prosperous Europe. That was the starting point for
today's European Union (EU), in which Serbia too seeks
its place. On the other hand, more than 20 years since
the breakup of the former Yugoslavia and the ensuing
and civil wars, the peoples of the region continue to live
in the past and making mutual accusations, instead of
finding a sustainable solution for the future.

That is why resolving the final status of Kosovo and
Metohija is one of my Government's most important
priorities. Through a process of negotiations and
dialogue, we stand ready to arrive at a sustainable
solution that takes into account the legitimate interests
of Albanians, Serbs and all others who live in Kosovo.
I want to be very clear that Serbia will never, under
any circumstances, implicitly or explicitly, recognize
the unilateral declaration of independence by Kosovo's
ethnic Albanian authorities, because it was not the result
of mutual agreement. Our nation will remain united on
that fundamental issue. We will continue to defend our
constitutional order using all peaceful means at the
disposal of a democratic State Member of the United
Nations. I believe that none of the countries represented
in the Chamber would act differently were its nation to
find itself in a situation similar to ours.

Before proceeding with the rest of my remarks, I
would like to express my country's sincere gratitude
to the majority of the States Members of the United
Nations, which respect Serbia's sovereignty and
territorial integrity. I appeal to them to continue to
refrain from recognizing any solution to Kosovo that is
not the product of a clear and final agreement between
the parties.
Kosovo's final status remains unresolved. No
solution to that status has been approved by the Security
Council, and no comprehensive settlement has been
accepted by the stakeholders. Accordingly, it is the
position of the Republic of Serbia that Kosovo cannot
be allowed to accede to any international organization
in which membership is reserved for sovereign States.

With respect to the interim arrangements reached
at Brussels during the EU-facilitated technical talks, as
referenced in paragraph 14 of the report (S/2012/603)
of the Secretary-General before the Council today, I
underline that there is no doubt that they are status-
neutral and accord with resolution 1244 (1999). As a
point of fact, the participation of the Pristina authorities
as non-State actors is restricted to meetings in regional
forums whose aim is "to promote cooperation or
integration in the Balkan region", to quote from the
terms agreed by the parties. Let me reiterate once
more that that refers exclusively to participation, not
membership.

The Secretary-General's report is explicit in that
regard:

"many difficulties in Kosovo are not simply the
result of the differences among the parties but
also of the ongoing lack ofinternational consensus,
which could assist the parties in reaching the
necessary compromises and thus making faster
progress towards lasting political settlements"
(S/2012/603, para. 47).

We fully share that assessment. For that to
be achieved, a further effort by the international
community is needed. Serbia is ready to participate
constructively in such a process.

Serbia remains fundamentally committed to a
process that would ultimately lead to lasting peace
between Serbs and Albanians. The EU-facilitated
technical dialogue is part of that endeavour. In that
regard, let me underline that the new Serbian authorities,
including the new President and Government, intend to
implement all the agreements reached so far, while also
insisting that Pristina must do so as well.

While the technical dialogue should continue,
it is not a panacea. Serbia is ready for high-level
talks. Negotiations on all outstanding issues cannot
be avoided. Such a process will necessitate not only
strong leadership and vision, as the Secretary-General
indicates; political will to compromise will also be
required by both sides. Belgrade cannot only keep
giving, and Pristina taking. Such an approach could
never produce a legitimate and sustainable agreement,
for its basis would not be consent but imposition. My
Government is ready to engage in good faith at all
levels in order to achieve a mutually acceptable and
comprehensive solution to the final status of Kosovo.

Today's report draws our attention to unilateral
developments that gravely undermine the prerogative
of this body and the authority of resolution 1244 (1999),
which all Member States are bound to respect under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. I
refer in particular to a major change in the functions
of the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX).
According to the report contained in annex I of the
Secretary-General's report, EULEX has successfully
started the process of realigning its structure with
its revised priorities. The Mission has now been
reconfigured. Following the adoption of new planning
documents, the new structure came into effect during
this reporting period. No further details are provided.

The broader context is the announcement by the
so-called International Steering Group that the self-
assigned mandate of the so-called International Civilian
Office to forcibly implement the Ahtisaari proposal,
which Serbia has not accepted, will come to an end in
autumn. The Secretary-General's report tells us that
reforms were enacted by the authorities in Pristina, and
that they are expected to remove the executive authority
of the international organizations in Kosovo.

It is the view of Serbia that the Security Council
is the only institution of indisputable and universal
legitimacy authorized to make the sort of changes
that the report refers to. That is the reason that this
body's presidential statement of 26 November 2008
(S/PRST/2008/44) and the Secretary-General's report
(S/2008/692) of 24 November 2008 were able to affirm
that EULEX would fully respect resolution 1244 (1999)
and operate under the overall authority and within the
status-neutral framework of the United Nations.

As what EULEX calls its reconfiguration has not
been put before the Security Council for approval, nor
authorized by anyone representing the United Nations,
it does not conform to resolution 1244 (1999). Moreover,
unilaterally "remove[ing] the executive authority of
the international organizations [operating] in Kosovo"
(5/2012/603, para. 7) is a further demonstration of
Pristina's complete disregardofthe exclusive jurisdiction
ofthe Security Council on this matter. Let me underline
that, in spite of those disturbing developments, our long-
standing position on the European Union's engagement
in Kosovo remains unchanged. We believe that the EU
should sustain its status-neutral efforts in order to build
the lacking institutional environment and improve the
dismal societal conditions in the province.

I would like clearly to state Serbia's position that
what is required is deeper engagement by EULEX,
not retrenchment. If EULEX does not have enough
capacity, an alternative is for the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to review its own reconfiguration and presence level,
in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999). Should it
become necessary, Serbia will work through the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly to ensure that
additional funds are allocated to UNMIK through the
upcoming budgeting process.

The Secretary-General's report addresses the
security threats faced by the Serbian community in
both north and South Kosovo. It draws attention to
the double murder of the elected Kosovo Serb village
representative and his wife near the town of Urosevac.
Unfortunately, the perpetrators remain at large, as is
almost always the case in attacks against Serbs. The
report also highlights the numerous threatening letters
and pamphlets sent by ultra-nationalist pan-Albanian
organizations to returnees. In addition, it lists various
cases of arson, theft, looting of homes and stoning of
Serb vehicles.

Moreover, it underscores that

"acts of vandalism and religious intolerance have
continued during the reporting period, including
thefts of money, gates and a bell from the premises
of an Orthodox Church and the desecration of
Orthodox cemeteries" (5/2012/603, para. 35).

Furthermore, the report mentions "[f]our incidents
of verbal or physical attacks against Orthodox monks"
(ibid, para. 35). No descriptions are given, with the
document remaining silent about whether arrests were
made in connection with any of those hate crimes.

In our view, those and many other incidents are
part of an orchestrated campaign of intimidation
directed at Kosovo Serbs. It clearly has the ultimate
aim of completing the total ethnic cleansing of Serbs
and the cultural cleansing of our patrimony. The
results are clear. In the current reporting period, only
45 Kosovo Serb internally displaced persons returned
to the province. According to reports by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
that number is less than half who did so during the
same period last year. Let me remind the Council that,
according to the United Nations, more than 200,000
non-Albanians have been expelled from the territory of
Kosovo and Metohija since June 1999.

The Secretary-General's report notes a "decision by
the Kosovo authorities to ban, as from July, the use of
Serbian licence plates issued for Kosovo" (ibid, para. 14). That has led some Kosovo Serbs to adopt the new
automobile number plate system issued by Pristina.
The stated aim of that programme is, apparently,
to eliminate discrimination, as all residents of the
province are supposed to be provided with ethnically
unidentifiable plates. However, a recent European
Union-funded report brings this fundamentally into
question. Authored by the European non-governmental
organization Diadikasia, it is entitled "Freedom of
movement: issuance of RKS license plates to members
of non-Albanian communities in Kosovo, 2012."

I cite its troubling conclusion: "There is a pattern,
according to which only certain couples of letters are
issued to members of the Serbian community".
According to the evidence, Kosovo Albanians are
issued plates with different letter combinations. This
worrisome and highly discriminatory practice was
confirmed to the authors of the report by a Kosovo
police official, who is quoted in the document as saying
that "It is a public secret that Serb cars are marked."

Seven decades after the old continent saw the
end of regimes visually marking members of ethnic
groups in public, the practice has now returned to
European shores. Such a practice, if it is true, must be
condemned in the harshest of terms. This is yet another
piece of evidence that the ethnic Albanian authorities
are engaged in an ongoing campaign to discriminate
against and terrify Serbs.

Furthermore, the Secretary-General's report draws
attention to numerous instances of the disproportionate
use offorce by the Kosovo police service, and underscores
the repeated refusal by the so-called Minister of the
Interior, Bajram Rexhepi, to launch disciplinary action
against those under his command who engage in brutal
and discriminatory conduct or whose inaction threatens
the safety of Serbs. The Secretary-General explicitly
concludes that the incidents outlined in his report
"provide grounds for serious concern with regard to the
institutional capacity of the Kosovo police to manage
tensions and build public confidence" (ibid, para. 18).
Against that backdrop, the announced abrogation of
the executive functions of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission (EULEX) is even more worrisome.
Serbian officials have continued to meticulously follow
the investigation launched by the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force into the allegations made in a
December 2010 report written by the Swiss task force
member, Mr. Dick Marty, and nearly unanimously
approved by the Council of Europe Parliamentary
Assembly.

According to the Council of Europe Parliamentary
Assembly report, entitled "Investigation of allegations
of inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking
in human organs in Kosovo", hundreds of Serbs were
abducted in Kosovo before, during and immediately
after the 1999 conflict and sent to secret detention
camps in the Republic of Albania. Many of them were
subsequently selected for forced surgery before being
murdered. Their internal body organs were extracted
and sold on the international black market.

In the same way as Serbia has done everything
to uncover and prosecute all those who committed
atrocities against the Albanian population in Kosovo,
Serbia expects that the full truth will be sought out and
that all who are responsible for such war crimes against
Serbs in Kosovo will be punished.

The families of the Serbian victims must not be
seen as being any less deserving of justice than the
victims of other war crimes committed in the former
Yugoslavia during the 1990s.

Serbia supports the work of the EULEX Task Force,
which has, as annex I of the Secretary-General's report
states, intensified contacts and working relationships
with a number of State and non-State actors.
Nonetheless, as has been the case since before the
establishment of the Task Force, the critical question of
jurisdiction remains unanswered. That will be necessary
in order for the Task Force to be able to uncover the
full truth about various terrible allegations, including
those made in the Council of Europe Parliamentary
Assembly report, which, in paragraph 68, identifies a
number of senior Kosovo Liberation Army officials as
having "played vital roles as co-conspirators in various
categories of criminal activity". That includes human-
organ trafficking.

As on previous occasions before the Council, Serbia
underscores its belief that the Security Council must
play a significant role in the matter, as it is the organ
able to secure the obligatory and binding cooperation of
Member States. International media stories continue to
bring to our attention the fact that the alleged criminal
trail leads to many parts of the world, including to some
of the members of the Security Council. We appeal
to the Council to ensure that a comprehensive and
independent investigation remains a United Nations
priority. Serbia has made proposals with regard to the
investigation mechanism we envision.

As with the briefings given to the Security Council
twice annually by senior officials of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, we expect
that the investigators dealing with the organ trafficking
case will brief the Council in a similar manner.

We are committed to reaching lasting peace
between Serbs and Albanians in the Balkans. But for
such a peace to be lasting it must also be just. I say
this not only as Serbia's Prime Minister, but foremost
as someone who was born in Kosovo and Metohija, in
Prizren, a city that in the Middle Ages served as the
Serbian capital and in which today there are fewer than
20 Serbs.

That will require both parties to make difficult and
courageous decisions. We are ready to do our part. Serbia
is ready for normalization and regional reconciliation.
That is in the interests of ordinary citizens. Serbia is also
ready to engage in a dialogue whose goal is to arrive at
a comprehensive solution, but we are not, nor will we
be, ready to accept Kosovo's unilateral declaration of
independence. Unilateral moves, on anyone's part, do
not bring us closer to a comprehensive settlement. Quite
the contrary, they can only pull us farther away.

What has so far been lacking is a credible interlocutor
who is willing and able to do what is necessary to reach
a comprehensive settlement. Compromises will need to
be made for an agreement to be reached. It is not only
we who must grasp that point; Pristina must do so also.

As we consider how to move forward, we could
draw inspiration from Nelson Mandela, who has
movingly written that "If you want to make peace with
your enemy, you have to work with your enemy. Then
he becomes your partner".

