Ms. Fatima (Bangladesh): I congratulate you, Mr. President, on Viet Nam's assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I also congratulate the new members of the Council and express our deep appreciation to the outgoing members for their commendable work. Our Constitution mirrors the Charter of the United Nations in its unwavering commitment to international peace and security, based on the principles of respect for national sovereignty and equality, non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries, the peaceful settlement of international disputes and respect for international law. In the words of the father of our nation in his maiden address to the United Nations, "The noble ideals enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations are the very ideals for which millions of our people have made the supreme sacrifice" (A/PV.2243, para. 2). It is on the basis that steadfast commitment that Bangladesh continues to be a leading contributor to United Nations peacekeeping. The humanity and courageous leadership shown by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina in hosting more than a million persecuted Rohingyas, which saved the region from potential destabilization, also emanates from that abiding commitment. Rising from the devastation of the Second World War, the United Nations, guided by its Charter, was at the forefront of multilateral efforts to leverage global socioeconomic development and the promotion of human rights for achieving sustainable peace and addressing conflicts and violence. We have since moved on to a more complex world with new and unprecedented challenges endangering international peace and security. The nature of conflicts and their consequences are far more unpredictable and colossal, compounded by asymmetric security threats coming from non-State actors and a new generation of threats in cyberspace. Other emerging challenges, such as climate change, poverty, inequality, terrorism, violent extremism and human displacement have also added new dimensions to traditional global threats. Yet the Charter has withstood the test of time and shaped the rules-based international order in which we live today. It remains the most powerful and the only universally acceptable instrument before us. There is an urgent need, however, to move from words to an era of action. The ongoing system-wide United Nations reforms can be catalytic in ensuring more effective and results-driven actions. The greater involvement of the wider membership, especially the developing countries, can also provide the much-need impetus. To that end, Bangladesh supports the United Nations renewed focus on prevention for ending and resolving conflicts. A culture of peace and non-violence can be an all-embracing driver. We must also leverage the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in addressing the drivers of conflict. The International Court of Justice and other international legal bodies and tribunals can certainly play a more pivotal role in ensuring justice and ending the culture of impunity. There is also an urgent need to end crimes against humanity, genocide and war crimes. We call on the Security Council to provide a more decisive approach in that regard. As the women and peace and security agenda turns 20 this year, we must ensure justice and gender equality through its implementation. In order to tap into the enormous strength of our young generation, the youth, peace and security agenda has to be pursued in a more effective manner. We also need to build on the regional models of peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We are passing through a critical time when the very notion of multilateralism is in question. It is imperative now - perhaps, more than ever - for the entire United Nations membership to unite and engage to use the Charter in its true spirit and address global realities and the aspirations of current and future generations. We must work towards a more innovative application of the principles of the Charter, and the Security Council has the primary responsibility in that regard, safeguarding the interests of greater humankind for peace and security. Bangladesh stands ready to do its part.
