The Secretary-General: Let me start by
commending you, Sir, for taking the initiative to hold
this open debate on civilian aspects of crisis
management. This debate is extremely timely and the
presence of so many foreign ministers is very
welcome.

Yesterday, in the General Assembly, I stressed the
importance of the rule of law. Nowhere is its absence
more keenly felt than in war-torn societies, and
nowhere is its restoration more Vital to the maintenance
of international peace and security.

But that is far easier said than done. Peace-
building is a complex business. It draws in many
actors: not just the operations mandated by the Security
Council, but also the vital work of United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, of regional
organizations, and of our non-governmental
organization (NGO) partners. And its goal is to build
durable peace in societies shattered by war. That is
ambitious indeed.

We have learned from experience that
international interventions, even those that carry the
unique legitimacy provided by the United Nations,
cannot quickly erase the noxious legacy of conflict. We
therefore need to be realistic about what is achievable,
and we must have a clear political strategy for success,
based on a sophisticated understanding of the context
and tailored to respond to it.

That strategy must include benchmarks for
progress towards the goal, not just of holding elections,
but of building legitimate and effective States. And,
since we have comparatively scarce resources, we must
prioritize. Without clear priorities, particularly in the
areas of security, the rule of law and immediate
economic opportunities, the best-laid plans for long-
term reconstruction and recovery will fail.

I do not wish to sound pessimistic. On the
contrary, peace-building can be truly successful, as we
have seen in El Salvador, in Guatemala, in
Mozambique and in Namibia, and more recently, in
East Timor. I am also heartened that a number of our
ongoing missions are making solid progress in helping
peace to take root.

But I am very conscious that we face enormous
challenges: in Africa, where the demand for United
Nations peace operations is huge, and in other places,
too, including some very dangerous ones. The tangible
support of Council members, in a number of ways, will
make the difference between success and failure for
our current and future peace-building efforts.

First, the Council needs to sustain its interest and
focus on each and every peace operation. The bit-by-
bit building of peace, from the ground up, may not
grab headlines, but it must command the Council's
vigilant attention and long-term commitment. Lack of
interest or division in the Council is a recipe for
unfulfilled mandates and unresolved problems, leaving
the root causes of a conflict to fester and blow up again
some day. We saw the bitter consequences of failed
peace-building in Haiti and Liberia, where we are now
engaged once more. We must not repeat those
mistakes.

Secondly, we need more resources, and we need
to get those resources more quickly than we do. I am
pleased that there have been improvements in the
delivery of resources to post-conflict reconstruction.
But the needs remain very great. United Nations peace
operations are an excellent investment. In the entire
history of the United Nations, just over $30 billion has
been spent on our peacekeeping operations. That is just
one thirtieth of the amount that was spent last year
alone on global military expenditures.

Thirdly, we need to make sure that our efforts are
well integrated, since the various elements of peace-
building are interdependent, and failure in one sector
can mean failure in the rest. To that end, the United
Nations, other international organizations, regional
organizations, bilateral donors and NGOs must
strengthen their institutional links and work together
on the basis of shared goals and shared priorities.

Fourthly, we must make sure that we have the
best people available to carry out the tough
assignments the Council gives them. I am speaking
particularly of civilian staff. We need an international
cadre of highly skilled civilians for peace-building,
both technical experts and people with the ability to
work closely with national actors and bring together
the diverse perspectives of conflict management, State-
building, development and transitional justice. I am
proud of the unique expertise of the dedicated staff
who support me in carrying out the Security Council's
mandates. But, we need to be given the resources to
enhance the quality and quantity of that expertise.

Finally, I cannot conclude this topic without
mentioning the security of United Nations civilian
staff. Risk is an unavoidable part of our work. But
there must be a reasonable balance between the risk to
be undertaken and the substantive contribution that
civilians are called upon to make. I ask for the
Council's full support in ensuring the security of our
staff - both by the provision of troops, where
appropriate, and politically - when I propose new
measures to the General Assembly, as I shall very
soon.

Peace-building requires a clear strategy,
developed and executed by highly skilled
professionals, grounded in local conditions and
reflected in realistic mandates devised by the Council
and, of course, supported by all parts of the United
Nations system and fully backed up by this Council
and the membership of the Organization as a whole.
With that support, our work can succeed, and the
promise of peace-building can be realized.
