Mr. Rodriguez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
endorses the statement made by the representative of
Uruguay on behalf of the group of Friends of Haiti.

My delegation congratulates you, Mr. President,
on your initiative to convene this debate on the
situation in Haiti, giving us an opportunity for an
exchange of views on the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) (S/20lO/200). We welcome the
presence of Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive, Prime Minister of
Haiti.

We thank Mr. Edmond Mulet, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, for
his detailed briefing, and we congratulate him on his
recent appointment. We are convinced that under his
well-known leadership and thanks to his tireless efforts
the work of MINUSTAH will be strengthened in
helping meet the great challenges facing the Haitian
nation.

The Secretary-General's lucid and powerful
account of the situation in Haiti following the
devastating earthquake of 12 January leads us to the
conclusion that there is a unquestionable need for
MINUSTAH to continue playing its important role in

support of all recovery and reconstruction efforts in
Haiti. Let us recall that, last year, the mandate review
incorporated suggestions by the Secretary-General; in
the light of current circumstances, these are even more
timely for strengthening MINUSTAH's presence. They
are being implemented: here, I confirm that Peru will
contribute an additional infantry company of 150
troops, which will help with security tasks related to
humanitarian relief efforts to meet the priority needs of
the Haitian people.

My delegation takes note of the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General in his recent report and
observes that they have been endorsed by the United
Nations Haiti Integrated Strategic Planning Group.
Clearly, one vital goal is to build the institutional
capacity of the Haitian Government, which has been
badly hit. We consider that, in the main, national actors
must be the true protagonists in developing and
implementing the reconstruction and recovery
programme. All activities and cooperation contributing
to the Haitian Government's State-building process
must be aimed at closing the strategic gap involving
weak institutional capacity and a lack of human and
material resources, in order to effectively and speedily
meet the needs of the Haitian people.

In order to attain that goal, we need to address
three areas with a direct impact on the current Haitian
recovery and reconstruction process: governance,
security and development. Here, there must be a just
balance that does not give priority to one area over the
others.

Beyond all of the international community's
initiatives in cooperation with the Government and the
people of Haiti to improve the grave economic and
social situation, my delegation believes that no effort
should be spared in encouraging close cooperation
between Haiti's public and private sectors, in order to
bolster the implementation of needed institutional
reforms in many areas. It is they who should be the
main actors in the work of the Interim Haitian
Reconstruction Commission, which, as indicated in the
report of the Secretary-General, has already been
endorsed by the legislature and is being established. A
strategic alliance between Haiti's public and private
sectors can create a virtuous circle that will help
strengthen State capacity and ultimately ensure the
stability and security of that sister Caribbean nation.
We are convinced that, with joint efforts by all
actors committed to the process of Haitian
reconstruction and State-building, the Government and
the people of Haiti - with their acknowledged ability
to overcome adversity - will decisively and with
optimism meet the challenges in order to guarantee
their country's sustainable development. Here, I wish
once again to reaffirm Peru's firm and steadfast
commitment to contributing to the recovery, stability
and development of Haiti.

