The President (spoke in French): Before we
begin our work, I should like to make the following
statement.

Today marks the fifth anniversary of the attack in
Baghdad against the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq. The Mission was then headed by the
late Sergio Vieira de Mello, who had previously played
a vital role in the transition of Timor-Leste, which is
among the agenda items to be considered by the
Council this morning. A minute of silence and a
commemorative ceremony in the presence of the
Secretary-General have preceded our work. In that
emotion-filled context, I should like to open our
deliberations by once again paying tribute to all United
Nations staff members who have died or have been
wounded in the service of the Organization throughout
the world.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Somalia

Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Somalia (S/2008/466)

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Somalia, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
2
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mohamed
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/556, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations. Members also have before them
document S/2008/466, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Viet Nam


The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1831 (2008).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.
08-46495

