Mr. Lajcak: I would like to thank the Council for
giving me the opportunity today to present my third
report as the High Representative since taking up my
duties in July 2007. I hope that my update will give
Council members a better understanding of the overall
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where we now
stand and what challenges we will be facing in the
period ahead.

When I spoke to the Council in May, Bosnia and
Herzegovina had, after lengthy delays and much
international engagement, adopted the long-awaited
police reform laws that were the key condition for the
country to sign the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the European Union (EU). The signing
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement on
16 June was an important milestone on Bosnia and
Herzegovina's journey towards the European Union. It
is the first ever contractual relationship between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the European Union. It
provides an opportunity for the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to put their tragic recent history behind
them and build a peaceful and prosperous future, inside
the European Union.

However, despite progress on the Euro-Atlantic
agenda, the political situation remains difficult, as the
old and fundamental challenges in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are still in place. There is still not enough
understanding of the need to engage in dialogue, to
compromise and to meet each other half way, so that
the country can move forward. Naturally, it is of some
comfort to note that that has not spilled over onto the
08-63546
security situation, which remains stable. However, the
nationalist and ethnic agendas have continued to
prevail over the one that actually should matter,
namely, the Euro-Atlantic agenda.

As a result, the signing of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement, progress towards visa
liberalization with the European Union and the
decision by NATO to begin an intensified membership
dialogue with Bosnia and Herzegovina have not
delivered the change in approach we need and have not
resulted in the much-needed momentum for reforms.

In the past months, we have seen that negative
and nationalist rhetoric from all quarters continues to
be the norm, rather than the exception. There have
been numerous challenges to the Dayton Peace
Agreement, both against the State and its structures and
against the existence of Republika Srpska as one of the
two entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Such attitudes
directly impact on the political situation by
undermining inter-ethnic trust and making
compromises even more difficult. That needlessly
slows down Bosnia and Herzegovina's path towards
Euro-Atlantic integration. The municipal elections in
October showed further hardening of positions on all
sides.

Let me offer concrete examples. Over the past
months, the Republika Srpska authorities have
challenged the institutions, competencies and laws of
the State on numerous occasions. The details were
listed in the report I presented to the Council
(S/2008/705, annex). In mid-October, the Republika
Srpska National Assembly restated its conclusions of
February 2008, whereby it considers that that entity,
Republika Srpska, has the right to hold a referendum
on secession from the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We have also seen political games being played at
the direct expense of the rule of law, with the
Republika Srpska Government officially denying the
obligation of administrative bodies in that entity to
cooperate with the State's law-enforcement and judicial
bodies, in particular in a case where they were
conducting a pre-investigation related to some
contracts awarded by the Republika Srpska
Government. Although the Republika Srpska, after too
many weeks, eventually delivered in that case, those
challenges are serious and require our full attention,
since the rule of law is one of the pillars of a
08-63546
democratic State. In that respect, all individuals and all
institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina must cooperate
with the State law-enforcement and judicial bodies
without conditions.

The difficulties my Office has encountered with
Republika Srpska a number of times, with regard to
cooperation with the High Representative, as required
by Annex 10 of the Dayton Peace Agreement, are also
of concern. Repeated refusals to hand over requested
documentation again involve a very straightforward
issue, namely, that of respecting and meeting legal
obligations stemming directly from the Dayton Peace
Agreement.

The recent criminal action initiated by the
Republika Srpska Government against a number of
local and international officials, including my Principal
Deputy, alleging a conspiracy to destroy that entity, is
another case in point. That represents a move against
the action of the Office of the High Representative in
particular, and against the international community as a
whole. In that respect, I would like to remind the
Council that my Office has employed citizens of
37 countries over the past 13 years. It is their
commitment, but also that of other countries, that has
made progress possible in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and it is our responsibility not to allow the legacy of
the Office of the High Representative to be
undermined.

But challenges and negative rhetoric have come
from all sides. In particular, Haris Silajdzic, a member
of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency, has been
continuously advocating his private political agenda,
using his office and international forums, such as the
United Nations General Assembly, to question the right
of Republika Srpska to exist. His unwillingness to
respect the constitutional arrangement of Bosnia and
Herzegovina was also reconfirmed in his recent letter
to the heads of State of the European Union and NATO
countries. Such an attitude only contributes to
Republika Srpska's suspicions regarding Bosnia and
Herzegovina and will not help the country.

All those events and the negative political climate
have resulted in a marked decline in addressing reform.
In particular, since the start of the municipal election
campaign in the summer, there has been little progress
in delivering the five objectives and the two conditions
that were set by the Peace Implementation Council
(PIC) to allow for the closure of the Office of the High
3
Representative and transition to a stronger engagement
by the European Union in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
There has also been very little progress in addressing
the European Partnership priorities.

In particular, the State-level institutions have
suffered in that environment. The Parliamentary
Assembly has clearly been underworked and has only
adopted 22 new laws in the first two years of its
mandate. The Council of Ministers and the Presidency
have also suffered from inter-ethnic tension and
mistrust.

Let me underline that Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
order to move forward towards Euro-Atlantic
integration, will need to change the way it conducts
politics. Zero-sum politics will need to be replaced by
a politics based on compromise and a readiness to meet
other parties half way. I cannot overemphasize that
point. That is fundamental for a stable and forward-
looking country.

However, while it is clear, that the political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to be
difficult and fragile, it is also important to underline
that we have seen some encouraging signs in the past
few weeks. On 8 November, the presidents of the
largest Bosniak, Bosnian-Serb and Bosnian-Croat
parties agreed to a joint statement on a number of
issues, many of which are of key importance for the
future of the country. The three political parties agreed
on a way forward on the objectives that were set for the
transition of the Office of the High Representative to
stronger European Union engagement, as well as on
constitutional reform and a population census. Many of
those issues, including the latter two, have been
political stumbling blocks for months, even years.

That is a positive agreement and was rightly
welcomed by the European Union Foreign Ministers on
10 November and by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council on 20 November. Overall, the
joint statement offers the potential to break the current
political deadlock. It is now important that the
proposals of the joint statement are put into concrete
form, discussed and adopted by the relevant
institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that respect,
the decision by the Council of Ministers, shortly after
the agreement, to concretely address those issues is an
encouraging development. The role of the international
community should be to support the political leaders in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in those efforts. Ultimately,
domestic-based compromise and consensus are the
best, if not the only, way forward for Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Another important event during the reporting
period was the arrest of Radovan Karadz'ic' in July. That
arrest and the earlier apprehension of Stojan Zupljanin,
to which the law-enforcement agencies in Bosnia and
Herzegovina contributed, is a sign of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's willingness to move forward in that
regard. The country has made significant efforts to
maintain satisfactory cooperation with the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

Another area I would like to mention is the
economy. Bosnia and Herzegovina will, like most
countries, face significant challenges on the economic
front in 2009. All political leaders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are aware of that and have shown a
readiness to take measures to address the situation. In
November, the Council of Ministers decided to
increase the guarantees for bank deposits to €l0.000.
Secondly, the State and the entities have stepped up
their efforts to better coordinate their fiscal policies.

Despite this good news, we must remain focused
on the big picture. The positive steps that we have seen
in the last few weeks can easily be unravelled with new
negative rhetoric and unilateral actions by any of the
political leaders.

My primary task in the reporting period has been
to facilitate the achievement by the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina of the five objectives and the
two conditions set for the transition of the Office of the
High Representative to a reinforced office of the
European Union Special Representative.

Council members will recall that in February this
year the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board
set five objectives that will need to be met by the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. They are, first,
acceptable and sustainable resolution of the issue of
apportionment of property between State and other
levels of government; secondly, acceptable and
sustainable resolution of defence property; thirdly,
completion of the Brzcko Final Award; fourthly, fiscal
sustainability; and finally, fifthly, entrenchment of the
rule of law.

In addition to these objectives, the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board agreed that
two conditions need to be met: the signing of the
08-63546
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the
European Union and the positive assessment of the
political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina by the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board.

Even though all of these priority reform areas
were established some time ago, and all of them were
previously recognized by the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina as their obligations, achieving these
objectives has not been easy. The Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board has met twice
since I was last here in May, first on 25 and 26 June,
and then, more recently, on 19 and 20 November.
Overall, the Peace Implementation Council has taken
the view that there has been progress in implementing
the conditions for transition from the Office of the
High Representative to a European Union Special
Representative, but a lot still remains to be done by the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to complete the
work.

At the Peace Implementation Council meeting on
19 and 20 November, the members stressed that further
efforts are particularly required for resolving the issues
related to State and defence property and the future
status of the Brcko district before it can take a decision
on the transfer of authority from the Office of the High
Representative to the European Union Special
Representative. It agreed to strongly engage in efforts
to resolve both these issues in the weeks and months to
come by supporting the Office of the High
Representative with a view to reaching solutions by
spring. It will not be easy to reach this goal, but it
remains a prerequisite for transition that all Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board members agree
to. Accordingly, the Office of the High Representative
will continue to carry out its mandate under the Dayton
Peace Agreement into 2009.

The next Peace Implementation Council meeting,
at which the future of the Office of the High
Representative shall be considered, will be held on
25 and 26 March 2009. The recent Peace
Implementation Council meeting also marked the
beginning of the discussion of the overall architecture
of the international community's future engagement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

All the capitals of the members of the Peace
Implementation Council share the assessment that we
must fully focus on our re-engagement in the country
in order to fulfil our mission. In this respect, our
08-63546
priority focus will have to be delivery of the work plan
of the Office of the High Representative. But at the
same time, it is clear that the international community,
and the European Union in particular, will need to start
preparing for the next step.

This approach, together with the European
Union's readiness to assume a greater role in Bosnia
and Herzegovina after the closure of the Office of the
High Representative, has been welcomed by the Peace
Implementation Council. It will now be important for
the European Union to have a detailed and convincing
strategy in place when the time comes for transition.
Such a strategy will greatly facilitate decision-making
on the transition and on the way ahead.

On 10 November, the European Union ministers
for foreign affairs gave a clear signal of their
determination to move forward in this direction and
welcomed a joint report by High Representative Solana
and Commissioner Rehn on a stronger and more robust
European Union engagement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the future. This report will serve as a
basis for elaborating a renewed European Union
strategy for Bosnia and Herzegovina in the coming
weeks and months.

I would stress once again how important it is for
the international community to give Bosnia and
Herzegovina the attention it deserves. Recent focus on
the country has resulted in a series of high-level
discussions on Bosnia and Herzegovina and a number
of high-level visits there, both of which have clearly
made an impact. Undoubtedly, these developments
have contributed to the political agreement reached by
the largest political parties on 8 November. It is
important that the United Nations, the European Union
and the wider international community ensure a proper
follow-up. We have our responsibility in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and we must live up to it.

Finally, I consider the adoption of resolution
1845 (2008) on 20 November for the purposes of
extending the mandate of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUF OR ALTHEA) for an additional year to be another
strong commitment and a Sign of unity from the
international community, for which I would like to
express my appreciation. It is appropriate to say that
the presence of EUFOR ALTHEA is welcomed by all
three constituent peoples in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
5
The new Security Council resolution on
Operation ALTHEA, together with last month's
commitment by the European Union Foreign and
Defence Ministers to maintain EUFOR at its current
strength is an important aspect of the European
Union's overall strategy in Bosnia and Herzegovina. As
soon as the political situation allows it, EUFOR
ALTHEA will be transformed into a smaller,
non-executive military mission.

As to the future, it is important that, in order to
ensure progress, we maintain the momentum that we
have achieved in the past weeks. Let me stress once
again that the wider international community needs to
continue to give the necessary attention to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In this way, we can help the country to
achieve political stability and to progress on the path
towards Euro-Atlantic integration.

It is also important that we recognize the
improvement in the atmosphere in the last few weeks
and build on the emerging readiness to compromise.
The goodwill is fragile. That is why it is all the more
important to safeguard it, in order to deliver the
concrete results that are needed.

A stronger engagement on our part represents our
best chance to complete the work plan of the Office of
the High Representative and to move towards stronger
European Union engagement in the country. However,
we must look beyond our day-to-day activities and plan
ahead for the European Union's future role in the
country. In the weeks and months ahead, the European
Union will be working hard to develop a coherent and
robust strategy in anticipation of the period following
the presence of the Office of the High Representative
and the continuing challenges that will bring. The
question of transition is not about the administrative
issues of the transfer of power from the Office of the
High Representative to the European Union Special
Representative. Rather, it is about ensuring the lasting
stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Two weeks ago we marked the thirteenth
anniversary of the signing of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. In this context, we need to ensure that the
nature and level of our engagement are appropriate for
a country in this stage of its post-war recovery and
European integration. The end State that we all wish to
see is clear: Bosnia and Herzegovina as a peaceful,
viable State irreversibly on course for European
integration. The citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina

deserve a European future. They must have full
confidence that we are here to help now and will
remain with them to see the job through to the end.

