Mr. AlJarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I have
the honour to address the Security Council today on
behalf of the member States of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC). At the outset, allow me
to congratulate New Zealand on assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We also thank
Malaysia for guiding the Council's work during the past
month. I would also like to thank the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing this morning.

With regard to the agreement reached by the
P5+1 with the Islamic Republic of Iran on its nuclear
programme, and the related resolution 2231 (2015), the
OIC hopes that the agreement will serve as a pathway
to security and stability in the Middle East. We hope
that the international community will endeavour to
make the Middle East region one free of weapons of
mass destruction. We also hope it will compel Israel to
adhere the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and subject its nuclear arsenal to United
Nations inspections.

With the rising tide of extremism, terrorism
and violence in the Middle East, the question of
Palestine remains the OIC's central concern. Despite
the negotiation efforts exerted over the past 25 years,
including the recent mediation efforts sponsored by
the United States to resolve the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, all have failed to achieve an agreement.
That is because Israel, the occupying Power, has
failed to honour its commitments. International peace
efforts have not succeeded in getting Israel to release
Palestinianprisoners, halt settlement activities and to
put an end to the blockade of the Gaza Strip and the
siege on East Jerusalem. As a result, the international
community must redouble its efforts to stop Israel's
illegal policies and practices and their impact on the
two-State division.

We face today a difficult situation characterized
by growing frustration given the ongoing illegal
conduct of Israel, the occupying Power, its denial of
the rights of the Palestinian people and its violations
of international law and legally binding resolutions.
We must emphasize that Israel's occupation policy to
create a de facto reality is not legitimate. While it may
serve to establish temporary security, it will never lead
to sustainable peace and security.

The OIC underscores the ongoing responsibility of
the United Nations towards the question of Palestine
until a just and comprehensive resolution to the
conflict is found for all its aspects. In the meantime, we
support the Palestinian decision to internationalize the
Palestinian issue and to bring it before the international
legal system. We support all efforts to adopt a new
Security Council resolution to reiterate the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people, including that of self-
determination, as well as establishing a time frame for
ending the Israeli occupation from all Palestinian Arab
territories, including East Jerusalem, and providing
an international mechanism to guarantee the full
implementation of the resolution.

The OIC wouldalsoliketo emphasizethe importance
of the involvement of all international parties in all
efforts to achieve peace. We call for the expansion of
the Quartet and its mandate to implement the relevant
United Nations resolutions and to achieve the two-
State solution, based on the pre-1967 borders, with an
independent the State of Palestine with East Jerusalem
as its capital. Given the importance of realizing the
political and legal identity of the State of Palestine and
its rightful place in the international community, we
must further promote and mobilize more international
recognition for a State of Palestine by supporting its
accession to international institutions, organizations
and covenants, including the International Criminal
Court, in order to protect the rights of the Palestinian
people.

Almost one year has passed since Israel's military
aggression against the Gaza Strip. However, the
humanitarian crisis continues to worsen at an alarming
rate due to Israel's prolonged illegal blockade of the
Gaza Strip. There has been no progress in compelling
Israel to implement resolution 1860 (2009), which calls
for ensuring the sustained and regular flow of goods
and people through the Gaza crossings. Therefore,
the Organization of the Islamic Conference calls upon
the Security Council to take the necessary measures
towards the immediate lifting of the blockade imposed
upon the entire Palestinian civilian population in
the Gaza Strip, in order to end their suffering and
ensure their protection. We also urge the international
community to fulfil the financial pledges made at the
Cairo Conference in order to advance reconstruction
efforts and deter further deterioration.

We also express our concern over the critical
financial situation of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) at an extremely important time in terms
of assisting the Palestinian people. The international
community must shoulder its responsibility to support
UNRWA.

The Organization of the Islamic Conference
renews its demand that Israel implement resolution 497
(1981), which calls for its withdrawal from the occupied
Syrian Golan to the 4 June 1967 borders. It also renews
its commitment to stand by the Lebanese Republic in
support of all actions and measures taken to promote
its security, sovereignty and territorial integrity. We
demand that Israel halt its violations of Lebanese
sovereignty, withdraw completely from the occupied
Lebanese territories and implement resolution 1701
(2006).

