Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my sincere appreciation for Chile's initiative
in convening today's open debate on this important
topic. I am also grateful to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, and
Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Ms. Leymah Gbowee for
their briefings.

According to the World Development Report 2011,
published by the World Bank, 90 per cent of conflicts
initiated in the 2000s were relapses of previous civil
wars. As many researchers point out, the recurrences
of conflict are attributed in part to failures to promote
peacebuilding in an inclusive manner. In light of the
maintenance of international peace and security,
inclusivity is an extremely important factor in
peacebuilding processes. Therefore today's meeting
is very appropriate and timely. Japan has given
considerable attention to this topic. Since 2013 my
Mission has jointly organized seminars on "inclusivity
in rebuilding States with the Missions of Tanzania and
Slovakia. In building upon these initiatives, I should
like to discuss two points in today's open debate.

First, on political inclusivity, Japan has actively
contributed to the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
since its inception in 2005. The PBC was established
to address the so-called gaping hole in the United
Nations system, where there had been no institution to
effectively help countries with the transition from war
to lasting peace. Last year in the PBC's Working Group
on Lessons Learned, which Ambassador Motohide
Yoshikawa, Permanent Representative of Japan, has the
honour to Chair, we had extensive discussions on the
issue of transitions of United Nations missions.

In his final report, the Chair pointed out that a
major challenge faced by post-conflict countries is
sustaining inclusive political processes. The withdrawal
of United Nations missions invariably results in the
limited capacity of the United Nations to support
inclusive political processes on the ground. The report
emphasized that the PBC should play a role by offering
a political platform to help sustain international
attention and engagement with countries experiencing
transitions. Furthermore, the report notes that as an
advisory body to the Security Council, the PBC has a
crucial role in preventing the relapse of conflicts. At
the time of transition of United Nations missions, the
PBC can support the Council's efforts by advising it
on the holistic peacebuilding progress on the ground. It
can also draw the Council's attention to possible risks
of relapses when any symptom of reversion, including
serious situations of exclusion, is presented after the
withdrawal of United Nations missions. In this regard,
we would like to call on the Council to work with the
PBC to further improve the Council's early warning
and conflict prevention functions.

My second point concerns inclusive development,
which is an essential part of human security and
should also be one of the key principles of the post-
2015 development agenda to be adopted in September.
Japan has provided post-conflict countries with
seamless assistance for the consolidation of peace.
In Africa, for more than 20 years, Japan has actively
supported African countries' own efforts to consolidate
peace and advance development, through the Tokyo
International Conference on African Development
process. Through this process, Japan has not only
implemented its assistance with a deep understanding
of the interrelationship between peacebuilding and
development, but has also promoted an inclusive
society, particularly by assisting women and young
people. For example, Japan's technical cooperation
in Kenya and Tanzania helps to promote the role of
women in agriculture and to realize gender equality
in farm management. Such assistance further leads
to the empowerment of women and enhanced social
inclusivity.

Japan is determined to continue its active role in
promoting peace and an inclusive society through
the activities of the PBC as well as through bilateral
assistance. We hope that the Security Council will
continue discussions on inclusive peacebuilding and
development to further strengthen its role in maintaining
international peace and security as well as to improve
its complementary relationship with the Peacebuilding
Commission.

