Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We, too, are very
honoured and pleased that you, Madam, have come all
this way to chair our meeting today.

I would also like to associate myself with the
statements to be made by the representative of Pakistan
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China; by the
representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement; and by the representative of the Sudan on
behalf of the African Group.

While underscoring the fact that this debate does
not fall within the mandate of the Security Council,
South Africa would like to use this opportunity to
outline the priorities for mitigating and adapting to
climate change that are best addressed elsewhere
within the United Nations system.

In 1992, the historic Earth Summit held in Brazil
adopted the Rio Principles. Among those was the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities,
which was accepted by the heads of State and
Government as being fundamental to any debate on
climate change.

Ten years later in September 2002, the World
Summit on Sustainable Development, held in
Johannesburg, reaffirmed that principle. Furthermore,
the Johannesburg Summit assigned the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the
Commission on Sustainable Development, the United
Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
Kyoto Protocol with the responsibility of following up
on climate and sustainable development.

Recently, the report on impacts, adaptation and
vulnerability issued by the United Nations
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
reconfirmed that Africa is one of the continents most
vulnerable to climate variability and change because of
multiple stresses and low adaptive capacity. Some of
the identified impacts for Africa resulting from climate
change include the facts that, by 2020, between 75
million and 250 million people are projected to suffer
exposure to an increase of water stress due to climate
change; agricultural production, including access to
food, is projected to be severely compromised by
climate; local food supplies are projected to be
negatively affected by decreasing fisheries; resource
shortages in large lakes may be exacerbated by
continued over-fishing; towards the end of the twenty-
first century, projected sea-level rise will affect low-
lying coastal areas with large populations; and the cost
of adapting to those levels of climate change could
amount to at least 5 to 10 per cent of gross domestic
product.

Clearly, an inequitable global response, in which
the largest historical emitters in the developed world
do not shoulder their respective responsibilities to
mitigate climate change or assist vulnerable countries
to adapt, may in future contribute to human insecurity
and could thereby indirectly contribute to instability
and exacerbate conflict potential. The developed
countries should take the lead in providing new and
additional funding for adaptation activities. It is also

critical that all developed countries commit to legally
binding emission reductions and meet their other
obligations under the Kyoto Protocol.

The developing world is relatively unprepared for
disasters and is under-resourced to deal with the
consequences of extreme weather events. The least
developed countries, especially in Africa and Asia, as
well as the small island developing States, cannot bear
the brunt of these costs. The appropriate United
Nations bodies should strengthen their capacity to deal
with disaster and humanitarian crises resulting from
climate change, including new efforts focused on
predicting, preventing, and handling climate-change-
related disasters.

The established multilateral processes in the
climate debate in terms of the Convention and the
Kyoto Protocol are in place and we look forward to the
Conference of the Parties of the Framework
Convention on Climate Change serving as the meeting
of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol to be held in Bali,
Indonesia in December this year. What is of the utmost
importance is that the obligations under the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
and the Kyoto Protocol are honoured by all countries if
we are to avoid a catastrophe brought about by climate
change.

The examples we have raised to describe the
impact of climate change do not as yet directly threaten
international peace and security. Moreover, the issues
discussed here are first and foremost of a
developmental nature. These issues can be best dealt
with regionally in the General Assembly, a more
representative body than the Security Council.
Furthermore, the mandate of the Security Council does
not authorize it to deal with such matters.

We remain convinced that it is vital for all
Member States to promote sustainable development,
adhere to the Rio principles, especially the principle of
"common but differentiated responsibilities", and to
fully implement Agenda 21. We hope that these
commitments will be reiterated at the fifteenth session
of the Commission on Sustainable Development, which
will meet in New York in a couple of weeks.

It is for this reason that South Africa attaches
great importance to the assurance by the delegation of
the United Kingdom that this Security Council meeting
will not result in any outcome or summary. We further
hope that these discussions will not in any way elevate
the issue of climate change or the environment to being
a Security Council agenda item.

