The President (spoke in Arabic): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
December, I should like to take the opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr.
Jorge Voto-Bernales, Permanent Representative of
Peru, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of November 2006. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Voto-Bernales for the
great diplomatic skill with which he conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2006/920)

The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Nepal, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of this item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Acharya
(Nepal) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of the members to
document S/2006/920, containing a letter dated
22 November 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
Following consultations among members of the

Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

the

"The Security Council warmly welcomes
the signing on 21 November by the Government
of Nepal and the Communist Party of Nepal
(Maoist) of a Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
and the commitment both parties have stated to
transforming the existing ceasefire into a
permanent peace.

"The Security Council notes the request of
the parties for United Nations assistance in
implementing key aspects of the Agreement, in
particular monitoring of arrangements relating to
the management of arms and armed personnel of
both sides and election monitoring. The Security
Council agrees that the United Nations should
respond positively and expeditiously to this
request for assistance.

"The Security Council welcomes and
expresses support for the Secretary-General's
intention to send a technical assessment mission
to Nepal with a view to proposing, following
close consultations with the parties, a fully
developed concept of United Nations operations,
including a United Nations political mission to
deliver the assistance requested, and to dispatch
an advance deployment of essential personnel of
up to 35 monitors and 25 electoral personnel.

"The Security Council stands ready to
consider the Secretary-General's formal proposals
as soon as the technical assessment is complete".

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2006/49.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.
06-63742

