The President: Unfortunately, I am being called
to participate in another United Nations forum, so my
able Secretary of State, John Kerry, will take over the
presidency of the meeting.

I would like to say to my friends the leaders of
Kenya, Bulgaria and Moldova, as well as my good
friend Stephen Harper of Canada, and other Heads of
State, that we heartily welcome their commitment and
participation in this meeting. I also thank the entire
Security Council for the seriousness with which we
have tackled this problem. I would like to note that it is
very rare to see the United Nations achieve the kind of
consensus we see represented in today's resolution 2178
(2014). If we look at all the statements that have been
made today, several themes stand out.

First, the brand of violent, extreme terrorism that
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant represents is
something that all of us in the civilized world must
reject. Secondly, in addition to dealing with such
terrorism's challenges militarily, we are going to have
to change hearts and minds, and that will require a wide
range of strategies. Today's resolution commits each of
us to finding tools to counter the radicalization that
can lead to the recruitment of young people who we
obviously want to take a better path in life.

I want to reaffirm that the United States will not
be committed simply to a military approach. We are
also deeply committed to working with every single
country that is prepared to cooperate in making sure
that the scourge of terrorism and the use of foreign
fighters for perverted ambitions are thwarted. We are
going to make sure that we reach out to everyone here
individually to find out how we can be helpful and
cooperate with them.

I will, however, repeat what I said at the outset of
this meeting. Resolutions alone will not be enough.
Lofty rhetoric and good intentions are not enough. We
are going to have to translate words into deeds. But
given the seriousness with which all of us have made
our presentations here today, I am confident that we
can in fact succeed; that we can drain the sources of
the type of extreme radicalization we have been seeing;
that, as a consequence, and with the help of political
solutions to conflicts in the Middle East and North
Africa, we can arrive at a situation in which all of our
young people, rather than resorting to violence and
suicide bombings, can be confident about getting a
good education, seeking opportunity, raising families
and living in peace. I would like to thank everyone here
for their outstanding contributions to this important
and historic effort.

Mr. Kerry took the Chair.

The President: I would like to express my
appreciation to the Heads of State and Government and
Ministers who have waited very patiently to take part
in this meeting. We should emphasize how important
it is that all of these statements become part of the
record. It has been an important record to build, and
we look forward to all the speakers still to come. I will
be here for a portion of that, at which point I have to
go to a meeting of the Friends of Syria Core Group,
and Ambassador Samantha Power will take the Chair.
But, as I say, we are very anxious to receive all the
statements orally; this is a very important record of
the seriousness with which each country takes these
responsibilities.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Rossen
Plevneliev, President of the Republic of Bulgaria.


