Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to start
by thanking Judges Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow for their informative briefings,
and to commend their continuous commitment, and that
of their staff, to the important missions being carried
out by both Tribunals and the Residual Mechanism.

Last month, the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) marked its twentieth anniversary.
The Court stands as a reminder of the massive human
tragedy of the people of Rwanda and of the failure of
the international community to protect. At the same
time, it is also a symbol of our common determination
to uphold and actively pursue accountability for those
responsible for the most serious crimes.

Through its jurisprudence, the ICTR has contributed
significantly, and continues to do so, to international
criminal law, especially through its verdicts in relation
to genocide and on sexual crimes. The ICTR and the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) continue to champion respect for the rule of
law and contribute to the painful but necessary process
of reconciliation leading to sustainable peace. As
creations of the Security Council, they are also part of
the legacy of the Council itself.

The reports that were presented this morning
clearly indicate that both Tribunals are moving steadily
towards the completion of their mandates. We welcome
the steps that they have taken to effectively conclude
the cases still under consideration, while referring the
outstanding tasks to the Residual Mechanism. The
ICTR has made tangible progress over the last reporting
period, as it has completed appellate proceedings with
respect to five more individuals. Today, only one
appeals case remains before the Tribunal concludes
its judicial activities. We acknowledge the challenges
that ICTY has been facing in meeting the deadlines
of the remaining four trial and five appellate cases,
including the recently discovered mass graves. In that
regard, we take note of the updated projections from
both Presidents and encourage them to continue taking
all necessary measures in order to keep the delays at a
minimum.

Accountability for war crimes and crimes against
humanity depends both on the timely completion of the
remaining proceedings by the Tribunals and the Residual
Mechanism and on the success of national prosecutions.
In that regard, we share the concern expressed by
Prosecutor Brammertz regarding the slow processing
of war crimes, in particular cases of sexual violence, by
national institutions in the countries that emerged out of
the former Yugoslavia. While recognizing that it is up
to the national authorities to complete the outstanding
caseload, we welcome the efforts of the Office of
the Prosecutor in that regard, including through the
transfer of expertise and information so as to build the
necessary national capacities.

The support and cooperation of the international
community continues to be essential in achieving some
of the most critical tasks of both the Tribunals and the
Residual Mechanism. In that regard, we note the efforts
described by Prosecutor Jallow regarding the pending
arrest and surrender of the remaining nine fugitives
indicted by the ICTR, and we emphasize the need to
strengthen international cooperation to that effect. We
also note the slow progress reported with regard to
the relocation of individuals who have been acquitted
or who have served their sentences imposed by the
ICTR. We encourage all States in a position to do so to
respond positively to the Tribunals' relocation requests,
the example of Belgium being the most recent example
to follow.

We note that the Residual Mechanism, working
closely with both Tribunals, has gradually assumed
many of its core functions, including with regard to
the enforcement of sentences, the protection of victims
and witnesses, and the management of archives. In
particular, the increase in the judicial proceedings
in the Residual Mechanism and the manner in which
it has been handling that workload provides us
with confidence in its preparedness to continue the
Tribunals' functions.

We stress that the smooth transition of the functions
of Tribunals to the International Residual Mechanism
also lies in the hands of the Security Council, as it has
to decide on further extensions of the mandates of the
judges and prosecutors. In that regard, we should like
to use this opportunity to thank Chile, the Chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
for its leadership in guiding the consultations on that
matter. We recognize that closure dates depend on
the completion of ongoing proceedings, while fully
respecting the standards of due process and fairness.

Finally, while the ICTY and the ICTR have dealt
with some of the most horrendous crimes in modern
history, they are certainly not the only bodies to have
done so. Mass atrocities continue to be committed in
other parts of the world with impunity. The creation of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) as a permanent
body has provided a realistic prospect of ending
impunity for the most serious crimes of international
concern where justice could not or would not be
ensured otherwise. We therefore stress once again
the importance of ensuring that the Council fulfils
its responsibilities in putting an end to impunity and
ensuring justice and accountability. In that regard,
support for the ICC is essential in order to make sure
that it can deliver on the expectations of the numerous
victims of such crimes, for whom this body may be the
only recourse to justice.

