Mr. Eick (Germany): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's meeting and for bringing this
important issue to the Council. I would also like to
thank Under-Secretaries-General Ameerah Haq and
Herve Ladsous for their briefings on the matter.

Since the deployment of the first operation in
1948, both the concept and reality of United Nations
peacekeeping have evolved continuously. One of the
relatively new elements is inter-mission cooperation.
I would like to make three points today on that
topic - first, on the overall concept of inter-mission
cooperation and the major opportunities it provides;
secondly, on the preconditions and limits the concept
is facing; and finally, on inter-mission cooperation
beyond the military aspect of peacekeeping.

On my first point, United Nations peacekeeping
is a joint effort of all Member States, with special
responsibilities for the Security Council, the
Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries
and other major stakeholders. In certain circumstances,
inter-mission cooperation can be a useful and efficient
tool of mutual support for missions that are located in
geographical proximity to each other. Inter-mission
cooperation can save resources and enhance the
efficiency of peacekeeping missions by using and
creating synergistic effects. That can be achieved by the
temporary shift of critical assets between missions. We
welcome recent examples of inter-mission cooperation
in the Sudan and South Sudan, especially among the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei,
and also between the United Nations Mission in Liberia
and the United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire in
West Africa.

But inter-mission cooperation is more than sharing
assets or supporting other missions with troops.
Inter-mission cooperation can also be achieved by
sharing information, coordinating activities and
developing common concepts and strategies within the
scope of missions' respective mandates. For the future,
we should develop creative ideas within that field and
expand the functions and areas in which inter-mission
cooperation takes place. To focus only on the temporary
exchange of helicopters for troops is too narrow.

Secondly, inter-mission cooperation can be a tool
to enhance the efficiency of a mission or to cope with
an unforeseen crisis or shortage. It should not be a
permanent substitute for missing assets and capabilities,
and it must not be an excuse for understaffing or
underfunding a mission. Mutual support with military
assets is a complex undertaking that has to be well
prepared. In addition to the indispensable consent of
the parties, clear command and control arrangements,
sufficient logistical and medical support, and knowledge
of the terrain are key to the implementation process.

Thirdly, we should not limit our understanding of
inter-mission cooperation to the military component of
a peacekeeping operation. Closer cooperation between
the civil components - for instance, in the fields of
early peacebuilding, human rights policy, security
sector reform or other areas - can also be envisaged.
We therefore support an exchange of best practices, not
only at Headquarters but also horizontally at different
missions.

Finally, as suggested by Mr. Ladsous, we would
welcome a comprehensive evaluation of inter-mission
cooperation by the Secretariat that would enable the
Council, troop- and police-contributing countries, and
other major stakeholders to further develop the concept
and implementation of inter-mission cooperation.

