Ms. Power (United States ofAmerica): I thank you,
Sir, for convening today's meeting on the continuing,
ever-more urgent crisis in the Lake Chad Basin, which,
as others have noted, deserves greater attention from
the Security Council and from the broader international
community. I thank Under-Secretaries-General Feltman
and O'Brien for their briefings and efforts, and those
of their teams, to help tackle the significant security
and humanitarian challenges in the region. Mr. O'Brien
knows the region better than most after a lifetime of
dedication to its people, and I think that his personal
commitment is deeply appreciated and very moving.

In April, at the request of President Obama, I led
a United States Government delegation to Cameroon,
Chad and Nigeria to meet directly with those leading
the efforts to counter Boko Haram and respond to the
humanitarian disaster that it had created, as well as of
course to hear from the communities directly affected
by the group's horrific violence. Our delegation included
representatives from a range of United States military,
humanitarian, political and economic agencies,
reflecting our understanding of the comprehensive
approach that is needed to defeat Boko Haram in an
enduring way and prevent another group like it from
emerging in its place.

As part of the trip, we visited camps of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees displaced by
Boko Haram. Virtually everyone whom we met had a
horror story of having seen homes looted and burned,
men and boys murdered, and women and girls raped
and abducted. A 14-year-old girl whom I met in a camp
in Cameroon told me that when Boko Haram came to
her village, one of the fighters told her, "Either you
marry me and become my slave, or I will kill you and
the rest of your family". This girl became a slave so that
her family could live. Imagine a child being forced to
make a decision like that. The girl eventually managed
to escape her captors, but she will carry the trauma
and, perversely, the guilt that she suffered for the rest
of her life.

As we all know, atrocities like these persist. On
3 June, for example, Boko Haram attacked a security
outpost in the Niger's Diffa region, reportedly killing
24 security personnel and wounding 111 more. More
than 50,000 people were displaced as a result, many
of whom were already IDPs or refugees. On 29 June,
a young boy reportedly blew himself up in the town
of Djakana, Cameroon, killing 11 people who had
gathered after breaking the fast during Ramadan.

I would like to discuss briefly the security and
humanitarian efforts that we need to vanquish this
monstrous group. It goes without saying that a robust
military effort is critical. Because Boko Haram has
demonstrated its ability to move back and forth across
international borders, Governments of the region must
be able to seemlessly coordinate their efforts to pursue
the terrorists across those same borders. That does not
always come easily, and it has been very challenging
in that region, but the Multinational Joint Task Force
(MNJTF) is playing a growing role in improving such
coordination, as well as in planning and intelligence
sharing. Those efforts have produced important gains
in recent months, including the freeing of thousands of
hostages, destroying dozens ofterrorist camps and-this
is worth stressing - recovering approximately 75 per
cent of the territory that Boko Haram once controlled.
Those gains must be preserved, and that requires the
international community's supporting and shoring up
any weak link in the security posture of the region.

While members of the Council and United Nations
Member States unanimously agree that Boko Haram
constitutes a threat to international peace and security,
unfortunately few are supporting the countries on the
front lines of this fight. We applaud the European
Union and the United Kingdom for their contributions
to the MNJTF. For its part, the United States is
supporting the MNJTF and its members with advisers,
intelligence-sharing, logistic support, training and
non-lethal equipment totalling more than $71 million
of assistance, as well as providing $40 million through
the Global Security Contingency Fund for training and
equipment to help our partners enhance border security.
We urge more Member States to step up and support
that effort.

To be effective, those military efforts must respect
human rights, as the Council importantly underscored
in its presidential statement S/PRST/2016/7, adopted
in may on efforts to counter Boko Haram. When
Government security forces round up civilians on
nothing more than suspicion, use torture to try to
extract information, apply scorched-earth tactics or
stand by as vigilante groups carry out mob justice or
commit any other abuses with impunity, they alienate
the very civilians whose support and cooperation is
crucial to combating Boko Haram effectively.

As we continue to strengthen the military effort
against Boko Haram, we also have to do much more
to address the region's dire humanitarian situation-
and I stress the word, "dire". As we heard from Under-
Secretary-General O'Brien, an estimated 2.5 million
people have been displaced within their countries by
Boko Haram, while some 150,000 have been pushed
beyond their borders. More than 90 per cent of IDPs
in the region have been taken in by family members or
communities - a testament not only to the tremendous
generosity of the people of the region, but also to the
huge strain that has been placed on them. A security
guard at a university I visited in Yola, Nigeria, had at
one point taken in more than 50 members ofhis extended
family who had been displaced by the violence. He is
a national hero, and there are tens of thousands of such
heros across the region. We therefore have Boko Haram
unleashing this true evil, an evil that has seen them
pioneering the theft of children and the use of young
girls as suicide bombers. But, alongside that evil, we
have seen such unbelievable altruism and goodness.
I think we of greater means should all be inspired by
those heros to do much more.

The situation in the camps is as dire, as we have
heard. Medecins sans Frontieres (MSF) recently was
able to reach the city of Bama in Borno state, Nigeria,
which aid workers have been unable to reach for two
years due to insecurity. It is home to approximately
10,000 people. MSF found that 15 per cent ofthe children
there were suffering from severe acute malnutrition,
and nearly 1,500 people had to be evacuated. Most
chillingly, when the group arrived, they found 1,233
graves near the camp, which had been dug in the last
year; 480 ofthose graves appeared to belong to children.
And camp residents told MSF of 40 deaths in Bama in
the first three weeks of this month due to starvation and
treatable illness. Those are the camps we can reach. In
the parts of Bormo, Nigeria. Lake Chad and Diffa, the
Niger, that are unreachable, one can only imagine how
infernal the conditions likely are.

Yet despite that overwhelming need, the
$535 million in humanitarian appeals for the affected
countries, as we have heard, are grossly underfunded.
In Nigeria, only 28 per cent of the appeal has been met,
in Cameroon the figure is 22 per cent and in Chad only
17 per cent. We have provided more than $253 million
in humanitarian assistance to countries in the Lake
Chad Basin in the past two years. We, like the United
Kingdom, are considering now what more we can
do - because the situation demands it. More countries
need to step up immediately.

In addition to strengthening those military and
humanitarian efforts, we also need to address the
chronic problems that helped to fuel Boko Haram's
rise in the first place, and which, if left unaddressed,
will lead to further instability and insecurity. That
is my final point. We have to play the long-term
game in countering violent extremism. That means
investing more in the education of young people
from marginalized communities, which can open up
opportunities that provide a brighter path than the one
offered by terrorist groups who exploit marginalization.
It means building law-enforcement bodies that are
actually accountable to the communities they serve and
work to earn their trust. It means amplifying the voices
of religious leaders who condemn terrorism and seek to
exercise their faith in moderate and peaceful ways. It
means rooting out the rampant corruption that has long
siphoned away resources from the people who need it
most, and fostering inclusive institutions that serve all
people, rather than one group at the expense of another.
That is a daunting agenda. And one of the challenges
we face now is that we have to simultaneously tackle
those root causes and address this agenda at the same
time that we keep people alive in the here-and-now who
desperately need our humanitarian support.

Let me conclude. It just so happened that the
delegation that I led to the region coincided with the
two-year anniversary of the abduction of 276 Nigerian
schoolgirls from the town of Chibok. As everyone
present here knows, all but one of those girls are still
missing, presumably held by Boko Haram. I had an
opportunity to meet with eight girls who were taken
captive on the awful night in April 2014 when their
school was overrun. Herded into open-roof trucks, a
few of the girls managed to escape by actually clinging
to the branches overhead as the trucks were being
driven away from the school. A few of the other girls I
met escaped because one of the trucks mercifully broke
down and a number of girls jumped out of the backs of
the truck. The girls I met were studying at the American
University of Nigeria in Yola, where they had been
given scholarships. Those were girls who, prior to their
abduction, had not completed secondary school. Now
they are taking accelerated courses to prepare them
for the lives ahead. Eight young women, along with
16 other Chibok girls, were studying for a university
degree, and they were pursuing a range of professions.
All spoke ambitiously and idealistically about studying
medicine, engineering or accounting. All of them
shared something very important in common: they were
determined to go back to Chibok and help rebuild their
community. One of the young women told me, "We
want to make the world proud". Think of the profound
character of a group of young women who, after being
taken from their classrooms in a dangerous area where
they just wanted to complete their exams, taken in the
dead of night by Boko Haram, now are determined as
ever to go back to that community and who just want
to make the rest of us proud. I have no doubt that these
girls will, as will so many other young men and women
in Nigeria, Cameroon, Chad and the Niger. If only, we
help empower them to do so.

