Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and to extend our congratulations to you for having
put the situation in Mali on the Council's agenda
at such short notice, thus demonstrating - as if it
were necessary - that your country is committed to
dealing with all matters related to the maintenance of
international peace and security throughout the world.
My country welcomes this.

The terrorists wanted to catch the international
community unawares, in order to control all of Mali
and turn it into truly reliable staging grounds for their
operations in the subregion and throughout the world.
That is something that could have been foreseen very
early on, at least in Chad's view, as we were among
the countries that first stressed the urgent need for the
international community to take appropriate measures
to eradicate this evil before it spread throughout the
Sahel and beyond.
It was clear that the situation constituted a grave
threat to peace and security, not only in Mali and the
subregion but throughout the world. A failure to act
promptly would have opened the door to an expansion
of terrorism, obscurantism and organized crime. The
international community had to act to guarantee
collective security, which was under daily threat by this
scourge that was centred in Mali.

The President of Chad, His Excellency Mr. Idriss
Deby Itno, therefore did not hesitate to commend
France - and other de facto allies - for so promptly
responding to the Malian President's appeal to halt the
southward progression of the terrorists. Moreover, he
called on African States and the entire international
community to support the truly lifesaving initiative of
the French army.

The new situation emerging in Mali as a result of
the terrorists' intention to extend their occupation into
the south of Mali means that the French intervention
is a case of acting under force majeure, in accordance
with the provisions of resolution 2085 (2012), with a
view, of course, to ensuring the speedy establishment
of the African-led International Support Mission in
Mali (AFISMA) and, ultimately, achieving a peaceful
political solution to the crisis.

It is in that context that my country decided to send
a military contingent of 2,000 troops to Mali, made up
of one infantry regiment and two support battalions.
Chad responded to the request of 14 January by Mali's
Head of State, Mr. Dioncounda Traore, and the calls by
the African Union, confirmed in the letter of 16 January
from the Peace and Security Commissioner of the
African Union, in accordance with resolution 2085
(2012). That decision by the Government of Chad was
unanimously supported by Chad's national assembly,
including the majority and the opposition.

My delegation welcomes the unanimous support
shown by the members of the Council to France and
the African countries that have mobilized in support of
Mali in these difficult circumstances. That diplomatic
support must be continued and be strengthened to
ensure that the terrorists, in their desperation, cannot
exploit any weakness. Furthermore, on the practical
level we urge the international community as a whole,
especially the United Nations, immediately to provide
the logistical means necessary - a logistical support
package - to the troops arriving in Mali. In addition to
the urgent need for the logistical support of the United
Nations, the African-led International Support Mission
in Mali also needs the necessary financial support so
that it can successfully carry out its tasks.

My country has called on the Secretary-General
and the African Union Commission to met that need.
Africa hopes that the international community will
forthwith give concrete expression to its solidarity in
the form oflogistics at the donors conference to be held
in Addis Ababa on 29 January 2013, in accordance with
paragraph 22 of resolution 2085 (2012).

