Mr. Gillerman (Israel): At the outset, I would
like to express my appreciation to the Foreign
Ministers who have honoured us with their presence
here today. I would also like to express my gratitude to
all the members of the Security Council for the long
hours and hard work they have invested in this
endeavour. I would like especially to commend
Ambassadors John Bolton and Jean-Marc de La
Sabliere for their determination and commitment.

Today, but for the grace of God and the alertness
of the British security authorities, we could have been
sitting here in the aftermath of a terrorist atrocity
greater even than 9/11. The world would have
mourned, but in the streets of Tehran, Damascus and
parts of Lebanon, there would have been rejoicing, just
as there was after 9/11. Mercifully, the plan was foiled.
But the threat, and the genocidal ideology that inspired
it, remains.

It is that same genocidal ideology, it is that same
fanatical terrorism, that Israel has been confronting in
Lebanon for the past month and that the Security
Council is asked to address today.

For the past month, Israel has been confronting
this vile phenomenon as it expresses itself in our

region. But the threat we have been facing is not
limited to our region; it has set its sights on the world
at large. The terrorists in our region have a gruesome
record of diabolical invention in perpetrating their
atrocities, but these heinous innovations have been
quick to cross borders and continents. Hostage-taking,
suicide-bombings and hijackings know no boundaries,
as many States represented at this table, among them
Argentina, Britain, Greece, Japan, Qatar, Russia and
the United States, know only too well. Not only are the
countries of the West their targets, but also the
moderate regimes in our region, which offer hope of
progress and prosperity and the basic freedoms to
which the terrorists are so fundamentally opposed.

The stakes could not be higher. Yesterday's foiled
plot is a wake-up call that the campaign of terror,
motivated by fanatical intent and backed by lethal
weapons of destruction, is not limited to any region,
but threatens the whole world. The tragedy we have
seen in our region over the past weeks, it tells us, is but
a preview of the coming attraction, produced by Iran,
directed by Syria, acted by terrorist groups, soon to be
seen in a theatre near you. Whether we will succeed in
defeating this threat depends, in large part, on the
resolve we demonstrate today.

It is often said, "Where there's a will, there's a
way". But recent years have demonstrated that where
there is a way, there is not always a will. The way to
avoid the crisis between Israel and Lebanon has been
clear: implementation of the unconditional obligations
set out in resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006),
which set out issues for resolution between Lebanon
and Syria. The clear path forward required the
disarming and disbanding of Hizbollah and other
militias, and the exercise by Lebanon, like any
sovereign State, of control and authority over all its
territory. But the will to implement this way has been
lacking, and over the past month the peoples of Israel
and Lebanon have paid a heavy price for that inaction.

In the face of the failure to ensure that the
obligations set out in those resolutions were
implemented, Israel has had no choice but to do what
Lebanon has failed to do. As a result, Hizbollah's lethal
capabilities have been dealt a major blow: bases have
been dismantled and stockpiles of Iranian missiles have
been destroyed. Southern Lebanon has been
substantially cleared of the infrastructure of terrorism,
and the terrorists and their sponsors have learned that a

06-4649]

campaign of brutal terrorism will meet with the
forceful response it deserves.

But after six years of inaction which has enabled
Hizbollah to serve foreign interests and to dig itself
deeply into Lebanese soil, there is much yet to be done.
Israel, like any State, has the right and the duty to defend
its citizens from Hizbollah's unprovoked attacks, to bring
its captive soldiers home and to continue its efforts to
complete the task of rooting out the terrorists and
removing the threat they present to the Israeli and
Lebanese peoples. However, Israel is ready to respond
to the calls of the Council and to give another chance
to the Government of Lebanon and the international
community to create a new reality on the ground.

The responsibility which this resolution places on
the international community cannot be overstated. The
tragedy of the past month could, and would, have been
avoided if the previous resolutions of the Security
Council had been heeded and their provisions fully
implemented in all their parts. The resolution adopted
today is an opportunity to correct the mistakes of the
past and to create a genuine new reality in our region.
It establishes a binding arms embargo requiring all
States to prevent the supply of arms and weapons to
militias and terrorists in Lebanon. It provides for a
radically different international force with a mandate
and the capability to use all necessary means in order
to create a new situation in Lebanon in which the
borders will be secure, in which Hizbollah will not be
rearmed and south Lebanon will be free of armed
militias and weapons. It sets out arrangements to
ensure that, finally, Lebanese armed forces will deploy
throughout Lebanese territory, including along the Blue
Line. And it calls for the unconditional release of our
boys, Udi Goldwasser and Eldad Regev. I hope that the
Security Council will do all it can to make this happen,
and I urge the Council to do so.

But a resolution alone will not do anything; it
will do nothing. Unless the tools set out in this
resolution are used with resolve and decisiveness, we
will be back at this table - if not in a week, then in a
month or a year - facing an even greater tragedy. For
then, the terrorists, supplied, no doubt, with even more
lethal weapons by Iran, will be even further
emboldened by yet another demonstration of our lack
of commitment and will.

Today's resolution brings to an end weeks of
intensive negotiations. But it is not the end of the task;

indeed, it is only the beginning. We need to seize this
moment and open a new chapter for the region, a
chapter in which moderation is not seen as weakness,
and a hand stretched out in peace is not perceived as
one raised in surrender.

The stakes could not be higher for Lebanon and
Israel, or for the region as a whole. These last few
weeks have given us a chilling glimpse of what our
region could be like if Iran were to succeed in
achieving its goal of adding weapons of mass
destruction to its lethal arsenal. But in two important
resolutions adopted by the Council today and last
month, Iran has been sent a clear message: it cannot
develop weapons to threaten the region on its own
territory, and it cannot fight proxy wars on the territory
of others.

President Ahmadinejad of Iran, from whom
Hizbollah draws its genocidal ideology, has stated his
dogma clearly: "There is nothing more beautiful, holier
or more eternal than the death of a martyr". Today
more than ever, a united and determined response is
required from those who believe that there is nothing
more beautiful, holier or more eternal than a child able
to grow up living in security and peace.
I turn once again to my Lebanese colleague and,
through him, to the Lebanese people. There is no
quarrel between our peoples. We have no greater wish
than to live next to a peaceful and prosperous State of
Lebanon, exercising its independence and sovereign
responsibilities like any other State.

The choice that faces the people of Lebanon is
clear. It is a choice between those who develop
agriculture and make deserts bloom and those who turn
towns into bases of terror and barren land. It is a
choice between those who work to advance medicine
and bring health to body and limb and those who
manufacture only weapons of destruction to tear limb
from body. It is a choice between those who export
innovation and technology and those whose only
export is terror.

A few hours ago the sun set on Beirut, and in a
few hours' time it will rise over Haifa. This night that
bridges those two bleeding cities is the tale of two
cities, two peoples and two religions. It will end the
Moslem holy day and herald the Jewish sabbath, the
holy day of rest and peace. May the sun rise over a new
day for both our peoples, a day of peace, tolerance and
prosperity for our children and generations to come -
a sabbath of peace. Shabbat shalom.

