The President: I am honoured to be here today
to preside over this meeting of the Security Council.
It is also my privilege to welcome the Heads of State
and Government, Ministers and other leaders and
representatives here with us in the Chamber. I also
wish to warmly welcome Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres and thank him for joining us.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
President of the United States of America.

It is a great honour to be here today at this
Security Council meeting to discuss a matter of urgent
importance concerning countering the proliferation of
deadly chemical, biological and nuclear weapons and
the means to deliver them. The nations of the world have
long recognized that certain weapons are so dangerous
and can inflict so much suffering that all of us have a
vital interest in preventing their further development,
spread and use.

Since my inauguration, the United States has taken
bold action to confront such sinister threats. Many ofus
are rightly focused on the dangers of nuclear weapons,
but we must never forget the risk posed by biological
and chemical weapons. The United States was one of
the first nations to unilaterally renounce the use of
biological weapons and, since the First World War, we
have led international efforts against the scourge of
chemical warfare.

Most recently, in Syria we have twice imposed
severe consequences on the Al-Assad regime for using
chemical weapons against innocent civilians. I want
to thank Prime Minister May and President Macron
for their countries' close partnership in those efforts
in April. The Syrian regime's butchery is enabled by
Russia and Iran. The Iranian regime exports violence,
terror and turmoil. It illicitly procured sensitive
items to advance its ballistic missile programme and
proliferates those missiles all across the Middle East.
The regime is the world's leading sponsor of terror
and fuels conflict across the region and far beyond. A
regime with that track record must never be allowed to
possess a nuclear weapon.

For that reason, I announced earlier this year
that the United States would withdraw from the Iran
nuclear deal. That horrible, one-sided deal allowed
Iran to continue its path towards a bomb and gave the
regime a cash lifeline when they needed it the most.
They were in big trouble. They needed cash, and we
gave it to them. In the years since the deal was signed,
Iran's aggression only increased. The regime used new
funds from the deal to support terrorism, build nuclear-
capable missiles and foment chaos.

Following America's withdrawal, the United States
began reimposing nuclear-related sanctions on Iran. All
United States nuclear-related sanctions will be in full
force by early November. They will be in full force.
After that, the United States will pursue additional
sanctions - tougher than ever before - to counter the
entire range of Iran's malign conduct. Any individual
or entity who fails to comply with those sanctions will
face severe consequences. I ask all members of the
Security Council to work with the United States to
ensure that the Iranian regime changes its behaviour
and never acquires a nuclear bomb.

With all ofthat said, I want to thank Iran, Russia and
Syria, for - at my very strong urging and request - they
have substantially slowed down their attack on the
governorate of Idlib and the 3 million people who live
there, in order to get 35,000 targeted terrorists. Get the
terrorists; but I hope the restraint continues after they
get the terrorists. The world is watching. I would also
like to thank Turkey for helping to negotiate restraint.
Anything the United States of America can do to help
resolve this problem in order to save, perhaps, hundreds
of thousands of lives - maybe more - we are willing
and able. We are available to help.

In my remarks yesterday to the General Assembly,
I laid out my Administration's commitment to building
a more just and peaceful future (see A/73/PV.6).
Regrettably, we found that China has been attempting
to interfere in our upcoming 2018 elections, to be held
in November, against my Administration. They do not
want me, or us, to Win because I am the first President
ever to challenge China on trade, and we are winning
on trade. We are winning at every level. We do not want
them to meddle or interfere in our upcoming elections.
As I also mentioned yesterday, we have seen the
results ofhistoric efforts to open new pathways to peace
on the Korean peninsula, of which we are extremely
proud. I am pleased to say that North Korea has not
conducted a missile test since last November. It has not
conducted a nuclear test since last September. And the
hostages have been returned to us. Very importantly, the
remains of American heroes are now returning home.

In June, I held a historic summit with Chairman
Kim Jong Un in Singapore, where he reaffirmed his
commitment to complete denuclearization. Last week,
Chairman Kim reiterated that commitment to President
Moon Jae-in at their third summit, and to me in the
form ofa very strong letter. I think we will make a deal.
But, unfortunately, to ensure this progress continues,
we must enforce existing Security Council resolutions
until denuclearization occurs.

However, we have detected that some nations are
already violating those United Nations sanctions. That
includes illegal ship-to-ship transfers, which must end
immediately. The safety of the Korean peninsula, the
region and the world depends on full compliance with
Security Council resolutions. That is very important.

Most importantly, however, I believe that Chairman
Kim Jong Un, a man I have gotten to know and like,
wants peace and prosperity for North Korea. Many
things are happening behind the scenes, away from the
media, that nobody knows about, but they are happening
nevertheless and they are happening in a very positive
way. So I think the international community will have
some very good news coming from North Korea in the
coming months and years.

I also very much appreciate what President Moon
of South Korea had to say about me last night in
television interviews. Working with President Moon
has been my great honour. Likewise, working with
President Xi of China and Prime Minister Abe of Japan
has been a pleasure and an honour. Each of us follows
in the footsteps of countless world leaders, diplomats
and public servants who came to the United Nations
with the same noble goal: to build a future worthy of the
patriots - true patriots - who sacrificed their lives
for our nations and for our future. To be successful, we
need a commitment of every nation represented in this
Chamber. Acting together, we can replace the horrors
of war with the blessings of safety and the beautiful
promise of peace.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now invite His Excellency Mr. Emmanuel Macron,
President of France, to take the floor.

