Mr. Winid (Poland): I would like to thank the
United States for convening this debate on the situation
in Afghanistan. I am glad that Poland can contribute to
this important discussion.

Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union and would like to offer a
couple of additional remarks.

The first one is quite sad. Just two days ago, the
forty-fourth Polish soldier to die in Afghanistan since
the beginning of our engagement in the International
Security Assistance Force mission passed away. Platoon
leader Rafal Celebudzki was killed in a suicide attack
on the streets of Kabul, together with two American
soldiers. He left behind a wife and two young children.
We pay tribute to his memory, which serves as a symbol
of the sacrifice of many Polish families who send their
sons and daughters to help rebuild a stable, safe and
prosperous Afghanistan.

The Government of Poland reiterates its
determination to combat all forms of terrorism and
strongly condemns all acts of terror, especially when
directed against those who work towards the country's
stability and security. Recalling resolution 2145 (2014)
and previous resolutions on Afghanistan, we want to
reaffirm our strong commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan.

Our debate today is the best opportunity to underline
the role that the United Nations plays in the process of
the stabilization and reconstruction of Afghanistan.
The coordinating role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the activities
undertaken by the Special Representative, Mr. Jan
Kubis, enjoy our full support and respect. I would like
to join all our colleagues in congratulating and thanking
him the great work he performs in Afghanistan.
Poland welcomes the recent NATO summit's
conclusions on Afghanistan, and we hope that the
decisions made by member States will help that
country to achieve security and prosperity. We also
reaffirm our continued support for the Government
and people of Afghanistan as they rebuild their country
and strengthen the foundations of democracy. For the
first time in the Afghan electoral process, independent
observers could be present for the audit of every
single ballot box utilized in the presidential run-off.
We believe that the compromise solution proposed by
United States Secretary of State John Kerry is a step in
the right direction and hope that both candidates will
honour their pledges. Poland would like to underline
the role of professional international observers from the
European Union Election Assessment Team, various
non-government organizations and 17 diplomatic
missions in Afghanistan who participated in the
process.

We are convinced that the election process
should not be further delayed, especially taking
into account the fact that the audit process has been
concluded. Prolonging the debate on the division of
power is harmful to the stability of Afghanistan. We
encourage all sides to accept the results of the audit
and start cooperating fully with the newly elected
authorities. That is especially important in the light ofa
deteriorating security situation, not only in the southern
and eastern parts of the country, but also, for example,
in Ghor province in the west, Logar province in central
Afghanistan and Kunduz province in the north, not
to mention Kabul, where a tragic terrorist attack took
place just two days ago.

Poland is worried about the budgetary stability of
Afghanistan. There is a growing funding gap, which
would become an immediate challenge for the new
Administration. We hope that the Afghan Government
can resolve the problem as soon as possible and act
decisively to avoid such issues in the future. Poland's
involvement in Afghanistan results from our sense of
responsibility for the situation in that country. Since
2001, we have been an active participant in various
international mechanisms and regional cooperation
initiatives supporting the reconstruction of Afghanistan,
mainly within the framework of the Istanbul Process.
Strengthening regional cooperation is the best way
to tackle problems of a cross-border nature, such as
terrorism, drug trafficking or natural disasters.

The Polish provincial reconstruction team in
Ghazni has executed almost 200 projects, spending
over $26 million to help build roads, water and sanitary
installations, bridges, schools, power plants and other
infrastructure. Let me also add that the Joint Force
Training Centre in Bydgoszcz, Poland, has trained
over 1,000 soldiers and police officers of the Afghan
National Security Forces. Afghanistan is the second
biggest recipient of Polish development aid.

In conclusion, Poland is ready to support Afghan
security forces in 2015 and beyond. We will focus on
helping the Afghan police force through the Law and
Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan. We are ready to
take part in the Resolute Support mission. We therefore
urge the Afghan Government to sign the Security and
Defense Cooperation Agreement and the NATO status
of forces agreement.

