Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French):
Bulgaria is deeply concerned about the very serious
situation in the Middle East and appeals for an
immediate ceasefire. Of greatest concern to us today is
undoubtedly the humanitarian situation.

Yesterday, the Secretary-General spoke to us
about the situation in Jenin. My country fully shares
his concerns. It is urgent that humanitarian
organizations be given access to Jenin so that human
lives may be saved. We reaffirm the absolute necessity
of Israel's withdrawing from the occupied territories
and ending the isolation of President Yasser Arafat. In
that perspective, we note the beginnings of a
withdrawal, which we ascribe to a large extent to the
ongoing commitment of the United States and the other
members of the "quartet" to the mediation efforts, in
particular the mission of United States Secretary of
State Powell to the region.

The destruction of Palestinian infrastructure in no
way contributes to solving existing problems because it
does not allow moderate elements on the Palestinian
side to control terrorist organizations. We expect the
Palestinian Authority to commit itself fully to putting
an end to acts of terrorism against Israel and to
dismantling terrorist networks. Bulgaria appeals to all
countries in the Middle East to work actively to
prevent acts of terrorism, which seriously obstruct
every effort of the international community to resolve
the crisis.

As I have already had occasion to say, my
country welcomes the statement issued in Madrid by
the "quartet". A positive atmosphere has emerged in
the international community, in which a unity of
opinions prevails as to what should be done in the
Middle East. One of the most positive elements is the
ongoing commitment of the Government of the United
States to a search for a solution to the crisis.

My country is ready to support any peace
initiative that can contribute to the establishment of a
just and lasting peace. We played an active part in the
drafting of resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and
1403 (2002). We believe that Security Council
resolutions provide an excellent basis for the efforts of
the international community. From that perspective, we
do not feel it to be the right time to vote on yet another
resolution, because practically everything has already
been said in the resolutions I have mentioned. We do
not feel that a new resolution could add any positive
elements to those already in place. We do not need any
verbal inflation. What we really seek is the actual
implementation of the existing resolutions.

On another occasion, my country will comment in
detail on the very important proposals made by the
Secretary-General in the Council yesterday concerning
the dispatch of a force to the Middle East. I must say,
however, that my country believes that deploying any
force in the region should be an integral part of the
international community's efforts and of a political
process.

