Mr. Araujo Castro (Brazil): I would like to
express our appreciation for the convening of this open
debate on Angola, a country to which Brazil feels very
close. I also congratulate you, Madam President, on the
way Jamaica has been conducting the business of the
Security Council during this important month.

In 1993 and 1994, a period during which we were
also constantly and acutely concerned about the
situation in Angola, I had the honour of being Brazil's
deputy representative to the Security Council. It is with
pleasure that I return to the Chamber today to speak
before an increasingly transparent and inclusive
Security Council.

Brazil welcomes the participation here today of
Angolan Foreign Minister Joao Bernardo de Miranda,
and thanks him for the statement that he made. We also
listened with attention to the briefing by Under-
Secretary-General Ibrahim Gambari and wish him
success in his upcoming trip to the region.

For many years, peace has been an elusive goal in
Angola. With the persistence of instability,
development and prosperity have continued to be
postponed realities for the people of Angola. Many
opportunities for breaking this sad cycle have been lost
because of the behaviour of UNITA, which is, as is
widely recognized, primarily responsible for the
continued fighting. We hope that this meeting, and
Mr. Gambari's contacts, will provide a renewed basis
for the end of hostilities in Angola.

As President Fernando Henrique Cardoso stressed
in the General Assembly last Saturday in the opening
statement of the general debate,

"it is urgent that a lasting solution be found to
the conflict in Angola, which deserves the
opportunity to get back on the road to
development." (A/56/PV44)

Angola cannot afford to see this situation
unchanged for long. The alarming humanitarian
situation in the country must be addressed on a priority
basis. We are all very much aware of the large number
of displaced people, of civilian victims of UNITA's
violence and of Angolans in need of assistance. Much
needs to be done to be able to deal with the
humanitarian situation. The security environment must
be improved for the provision of dramatically needed
humanitarian assistance.

It is clear that a comprehensive and long-lasting
solution to the humanitarian question is directly related
to the end of the conflict. Such a solution depends on a
process that leads to the disarmament and
demobilization of Savimbi's UNITA and its
transformation into a political entity fully committed to
tolerance, democracy and pluralism. How to get there
is the question that the Security Council has been
grappling with for a long time.

UNITA needs to be convinced that there is no
alternative to peace. It has to end its military action and
enter into dialogue with the Government on how to
implement the Lusaka Protocol. Today it is clearer than
ever that the use of force will not bring peace to
Angola. UNITA's fight is even more senseless and
condemnable if it has no serious intention to achieve
peace. UNITA must abide by its own commitments to
peace and national reconciliation. Brazil recognizes
that the Lusaka Protocol and the Acordos de Paz
contain the basis for stability in Angola. They have
been negotiated and agreed. They need to be
implemented. It is to those documents that we should
turn in the search for a peaceful future for Angola.

Sanctions have proved to be a useful means to
deprive UNITA of the tools of war. We strongly
support the firmness of the Security Council in
demanding strict compliance with the sanctions regime
imposed against UNITA. In this regard, Brazil
commends the work done by the Monitoring
Mechanism, under the leadership of Ambassador Juan
Larrain of Chile, and the sanctions Committee, led by
Ambassador Richard Ryan of Ireland. The international
community needs to maintain the pressure in order to
avoid breaches that could be exploited by the rebels. It
should also continue to expose those individuals and
countries that violate the sanctions. Curbing the illicit
traffic in diamonds and arms, closing UNITA's sources
of financing and cutting its representation and its lines
of supply will hopefully lead Mr. Savimbi to comply
with Security Council resolutions.

We acknowledge with satisfaction that genuine
efforts are being made by the Angolan Government to
improve the situation in the country and to promote
political openness and national reconciliation. It is as
clear for the Government as it is for Member States
that it is in the best interest of Angola that peace
prevail as soon as possible.

The perspective of presidential elections opens a
unique opportunity for a demonstration of commitment
to stability. It is not the first time that elections are
expected to bring peace to Angola.

Having rejected democracy and the results of the
past election, Mr. Savimbi may try to influence the
process through violence and intimidation. This has to
be denied by pushing for peace. For the next election
process to be perceived as free and fair, and for the full
recognition of legitimacy in the authorities elected, the
international community expects a stable environment,
where fundamental rights can be guaranteed, where
freedom of movement and expression is assured and
where democracy can indeed be exercised.

Brazil is confident that the Government of
Angola will make the best of the situation, in the
benefit of the people and the future of the country. For
the people of Angola, peace is more than the end of
hostilities. It is having better living conditions, security
and opportunities. It is essential that the Government
assume on a priority basis the responsibility for
providing these improved conditions for the Angolan
people.

The United Nations has a role to play. Some
potential areas of interaction have been identified both
by high-level contacts with the Government and by the
multidisciplinary team that visited Angola in
September. Beyond those immediate areas, there is
more room to cover, and it is not fair to expect the
United Nations to be a bystander, as the future of
Angola is being defined by the actions taken today. We
support Secretary-General Kofi Annan in his decision
to send Ambassador Gambari to Angola shortly to
consult on how the United Nations could further help
in the search for peace in the country.

Today, the main asset of the United Nations in
Angola is having the confidence of Luanda. It took
skilled work on the part of the Secretary-General, his
Special Adviser and United Nations Office in Angola
(UNOA) to bring the United Nations relationship with
Angola to its current level. Brazil trusts the diplomatic
ability of Mr. Gambari and hopes that his visit will
enhance the mutual confidence that the United Nations
and Angola have been building lately. In the same vein,
we hope that the Special Adviser will be received in
Angola, once again, with an open spirit.

Although it is true that the conflict in Angola has
seen some positive movement, thanks to sanctions and
the international isolation of UNITA, we are still far
from stability. Nevertheless, the experience of the
Security Council in Angola must not be a sequence of
frustrated expectations.

It has been said that only time resolves conflict,
but time needs help. We have serious doubts that
UNITA wants to resolve the conflict, let alone help
time. But the Government and the United Nations can
certainly push in this direction. The United Nations and
the Security Council know that bringing peace to
Angola is a great challenge - a hard but achievable
goal. To accomplish this task, we must not overlook the
sensitivities and difficulties involved. For the Angolan
Government, the main interlocutor able to discuss
peace is clearly seen as justifiably unacceptable.

UNOA has been instrumental in helping Angola,
step by step, in its path to peace. Brazil believes that
the setting of measurable objectives can foster
improvement the situation in the country. The
upcoming visit of Ambassador Gambari can be another
element in helping time. The United Nations should
listen to the Government, political parties and
representatives of civil society, as well as to interested
States, so that possible alternatives to resolve the
Angolan conflict are shared by all. We look forward to
hearing from Mr. Gambari on the results of his tour, if
possible in an open meeting like this one.

Brazil stands ready, as it always has, to assist the
Secretary-General and the Security Council in their
efforts to promote peace in Angola.

