Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Icongratulate
Ms. Zerrougui on having garnered the confidence of
the Secretary-General through her appointment as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. I wish her every success
in accomplishing her tasks. We are convinced that she
will carry out her mandated duties in an appropriate
manner, although her predecessor deviated somewhat
from those tasks. We note that Ms. Zerrougui is taking
up her duties today.

My delegation takes note of the Secretary-General's
report on children and armed conflict (S/2012/26l)
before us today, which covers the period from January
to December 2011. We listened carefully to the briefing
by Ms. Zerrougui. In that regard, we are pleased to
reiterate that the situation of children in armed conflict
in the Sudan has clearly improved with respect to the
past. That progress, which can be attributed to the
efforts of the Government in Blue Nile and Southern
Kordofan states, is highlighted in the first paragraphs
of the report. It is also the result of the signing of the
Doha Agreement and the establishment of the Darfur
Transitional Authority, following the deployment of the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei.
The establishment of normal relations with the
brotherly country of Chad, and the signing of a border
monitoring agreement with that country and of an
agreement with the brotherly Central African Republic,
have had a positive impact on the protection of civilians,
including children.

On the topic of Darfur, I would stress that the
rebel movements that did not sign the Darfur Peace
Agreement, including in particular the Justice and
Equality Movement, continue to abduct and recruit
children to carry out military operations, armed looting
and abductions ofpeacekeeping officials. The reality is
that we did want to put an end to that type of operation
targeting children by sending a letter indicating the
Council's strong condemnation of such actions. While
some continue to ignore the situation, not giving it due
consideration and turning a blind eye to the facts, such
a reaction will be simply ineffective in dealing with the
issue of the recruitment of children.

The end of the mandate of the Independent
Expert on human rights in the Sudan under paragraph
4 and its resumption under paragraph 10 point to an
improvement in the human rights situation in the
Sudan, particularly as concerns the rights of children.
The Secretary-General's report mentions limitations
and obstacles that are hampering the mechanisms to
monitor violations against children. In that respect, my
delegation reiterates that movement within Darfur on
the part of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur requires a simple notification, not
authorization, so as to coordinate protection.

With respect to the signing of the action plan to put
an end to the recruitment of children, we are pleased
to note that, in addition to the fact that the law on the
armed forces and police in the Sudan prohibits the
practice, the armed forces of the Sudan have agreed
to sign the action plan. In the near future, the mission
will be providing details on the agreement to the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict. My delegation hopes
that that will contribute to the delisting of the Sudan
from the list of countries that recruit children.

In the two states of Blue Nile and Southern
Kordofan, as well as in the Abyei region, the Sudan
People's Liberation Army and the the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement-North were the direct cause of
the events that unfolded, in blatant violation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. Along those lines,
we underscore, as was mentioned in the report, that
the popular movements that have not signed the Darfur
Peace Agreement continue to use recruit children and to
use them as human shields. With respect to information
sources, my delegation reiterates its request that the
Secretary-General's reports contain accurate, verified
information and that the relevant organizations be
notified in that connection so as to enable them to
provide comments before the publication of such
reports.

Given that we attach importance to the rights of
children and their protection, my country has adopted
many laws in recent years. The Sudan ratified the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two
Optional Protocols some years ago. The text of the
Convention and Protocols was translated in 2010 into
a law that entered into force a year ago. Moreover,
mechanisms for the protection of children at the federal
and state levels have also progressed as councils on
children have been established in each state. Police
units directly responsible for children's affairs and for
their protection have been created, as have units for
children's protection within the army and the police.
Those units, among other things, ensure the application
of the law on the armed forces, the police and security
forces, which prohibits the recruitment of children
under 18 years of age.

Other developments include the creation of a unit
for combating violence against children and women
within the Ministry of Welfare and Social Security.
At the social level, my country has for some years
conducted campaigns to protect children as well as to
educate families and social players and to raise their
awareness about matters relating to children and their
education and health. That has all taken place under
the auspices of the State, working together with United
Nations agencies and programmes active in the Sudan,
such as UNICEF. Statistics on the subject demonstrate
a drop in the number of deaths of children and acts of
violence against them.

Above and beyond the efforts of the Government to
protect children in my country, additional progress has
been made to strengthen children's rights, including
the creation of a high independent commission for
children's rights and a special tribunal in Darfur, as
well as the appointment of a prosecutor for the tribunal.

A verification committee has also been established
in Southern Kordofan. An inventory was conducted
there in a tripartite initiative, in cooperation with United
Nations agencies, including UNICEF and the World
Food Programme, that will have a positive impact on
children in Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan states.

To conclude, the Government of the Sudan reiterates
its commitment to the children of the Sudan, who are our
future leaders. We reiterate our assurance to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and all of the specialized agencies
of our full cooperation with their efforts. We hold the
highest hope that those efforts will foster strengthened
governmental capacities, which we consider of critical
importance.

