Mr. Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by thanking
the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States,
Mr. Ahmed Aboul-Gheit; the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov;
and Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi for their briefings and for
their tireless efforts striving for peace. I also thank
Mr. Michael Doran for sharing his perspective with the
Council today.

This month marks 50 years since the 1967 Six-
Day War, which resulted in the occupation of the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, Gaza and the Syrian
Golan. Since then, the Palestinian question has rarely
been far from the top of the Council's agenda, with
the Council, in successive resolutions, calling for the
establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East that includes the withdrawal of Israel from the
occupied territories.

The hardships faced by generations of Palestinians
during the Israeli occupation are numerous, not least
for those forced to leave their homes to seek refuge
elsewhere. The United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which
has supported Palestinian refugees since 1950, now
faces a chronically difficult financial situation. As a
major donor to the Agency, Sweden fully supports the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
recent report on sustainable funding. To mobilize the
much-needed political and financial support, we look
forward to hosting a high-level meeting, together with
Jordan and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
on 21 September during this year's session of the
General Assembly.

Today I would like to make three points on what we

believe is needed now to move forward.

First, the international community remains clear in
its stance on the occupation and the need for a two-State
solution. But we must act before it is too late; otherwise,
the solution that the Council is striving for - two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security - will move beyond our reach, resulting
in a one-State reality and perpetual occupation.

A renewed peace effort between Israelis and
Palestinians is needed. After decades of violence and
suffering that has affected both sides, this anniversary
reminds us that the parties alone are not able to resolve
the conflict. Together with the Israelis and Palestinians,
the international community and the Council have a
responsibility to remain engaged to end the occupation
and achieve peace.

The United States has always played a leading role in
efforts to resolve the conflict. United States leadership
to revive the peace process is key, and we welcome the
efforts made by the United States Administration in
this regard.

Regional partners also have a key role to play. The
Arab Peace Initiative, as Secretary-General Aboul-
Gheit has outlined today, is essential. Any regional
effort should build on this initiative, as it could
contribute to a new dynamic benefiting all actors.

The support and active engagement of the people
directly affected, particularly the youth of Israel and
Palestine, is also much needed. Generations have
grown up shaped by recurring cycles of violence and
retribution. People-to-people contacts are now at a
record low. Sweden, actively engaged with civil society
in both Israel and Palestine, calls for a re-engagement
with young people, in line with resolution 2250 (2015),
and the revival of a public debate on the prospects for
peace and a two-State solution. We must show the post-
Oslo generation that there is an alternative to violence
and occupation; after all, it is their future that is at stake.
The purpose of Sweden's recognition of Palestine was
to contribute to making the parties less unequal and to
give hope and belief in the future to young Palestinians
and Israelis alike.

Secondly, the humanitarian situation in Gaza
is deteriorating by the day. The civilian population,
particularly women and children, is bearing the brunt of
the suffering. The decision of the Israeli Government,
with the consent of the Palestinian Authority, to further
reduce electricity supplies to Gaza is adding to the
suffering and risks, leading to a dangerous escalation.
A new conflict in Gaza would be in no one's interest,
and we must prevent it from happening. We continue
to call on all Palestinian factions to engage, in good
faith, in a reconciliation process leading to a unified
Palestinian leadership and a reunification of Gaza with
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.

Thirdly, we welcome the Secretary-General's
quarterly report on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). The resolution contains clear messages to
both parties, and both parties have a duty to implement
its provisions, including by ensuring accountability
for acts of violence against civilians. The continued
construction and expansion of settlements as well as
violence and acts of provocation will, if not reversed,
render the two-State solution impossible.

It is therefore vital that the issue of settlements
be addressed without delay. As clearly stated by the
Council, settlements in occupied territory constitute
a flagrant violation of international law and a major
obstacle to the achievement of the two-State solution.
Furthermore, in resolution 2334 (2016), the Security
Council reiterated its demand that Israel immediately
and completely cease all settlement activities.

The recent Israeli announcement of the
construction of 3,000 new settlement units is worrying
and contradicts Israel's commitment to the two-State
solution. In line with resolution 2334 (2016), we also
call on all States to distinguish between the territory of
the State of Israel and the territories occupied in 1967
in their dealings.

Ending the occupation will improve the lives of
both Israelis and Palestinians as well as contribute to
wider peace and security in the region. This must be
our common goal. The Council must stand ready to
assist, and we must spare no effort.

