Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to join previous speakers in thanking the Secretary-
General for submitting a very informative and substantive
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict and
for making a statement on this extremely important
subject.

We also appreciate your role, Mr. President, and the
role of the delegation of Canada, in convening the current
open debate. The growing number of open debates in the
Security Council apparently demonstrates a positive
tendency towards an increase in transparency in the work
of the Council, which my country has always advocated.

Ukraine's position and views on the agenda item
now before the Security Council again have been stated
several times on recent occasions and have not undergone
any changes of principle. Therefore, welcoming this new
opportunity to address the multifaceted problem of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, I would rather
limit myself to making a few remarks on the basis of the
Secretary-General' s report.

The importance of the problem under consideration
is well-known. We fully share the concern of the Council,
referred to in paragraph 1 of the Secretary-General's
report in document S/ 1999/957, that

"civilians continued to be targeted in instances of
armed conflict, in flagrant violation of international
humanitarian and human rights law".

It is truly regrettable that, despite quite a number of
basic instruments in international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law which provide for the essential
legal protection of civilians in armed conflict, the gross

 

violations of their rights around the world have not yet
ceased. The tragic facts alluded to in the Secretary-
General's report on the situation of civilians in ongoing
conflicts vividly demonstrate this.

In this regard, the Secretary-General's report has, in
our view, rightly placed the accent on the growing
perception within the international community of the urgent
need to turn to the effective implementation of international
humanitarian law. At the same time, I believe that
promotion of the rule of law in all aspects related to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is the tenet which
helps us to deliberate on today's subject in a more holistic
manner. Moreover, this understanding becomes more
topical in view of the fact that this year marks the
centenary of the Hague Convention and the fiftieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions. More than a year
has passed since the Statute of the International Criminal
Court was adopted at the Rome Conference.

In this context, Ukraine generally supports the
measures recommended by the Secretary-General to
strengthen legal protection for civilians in armed conflict,
and stands ready to consider their implementation.

It is also worth mentioning that this year has been
marked by yet one more truly important and remarkable
event: the entry into force on 15 January of the Convention
on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
We believe that this document started a new phase of
conducting United Nations peacekeeping operations under
conditions of increased protection for the personnel
involved, both military and civilian. Furthermore, the
Convention provides the Security Council and the General
Assembly with an additional mechanism to encourage all
Member States and the parties to a conflict, including non-
State actors, to fully respect the status of United Nations
and associated personnel, as well as the personnel of
international humanitarian organizations.

Ukraine is proud to be among those 25 Member States
which, last June at the second Summit on the Security and
Independence of the International Civil Service, were
presented with a memorable award in appreciation of their
ratification of that Convention - a ratification that enabled
its early entry into force.

The delegation of Ukraine considers that the
recommendation of the Secretary-General, paragraph 43 of
his report, to extend the scope of legal protection to all
United Nations and associated personnel, including locally
recruited staff, through the development of a protocol to the
1994 Convention, deserves further discussion. As the
initiator of the very idea and a sponsor of the initial draft
of the 1994 Convention, Ukraine looks forward to the
possible deliberations on this idea at the current session
of the General Assembly.

The delegation of Ukraine also took careful note of
the Secretary-General's conclusion on the humanitarian
impact of sanctions in general and on the targeted
sanctions issue in particular. It seems to us that the
Security Council should examine practical ways of how
to avoid, or at least greatly minimize, a negative impact
on the civilian population. In addition, we feel that further
thinking must be done in the area of the impact of
sanctions on third States.

For this purpose, the Security Council should, in our
opinion, give careful consideration to the potential social,
economic and humanitarian impact of sanctions on the
population of the target State and those of third countries
prior to the imposition of sanctions. Following the
imposition of sanctions, the possible options should be
envisaged so that appropriate adjustments can be promptly
introduced to sanctions regimes in order to mitigate their
adverse collateral effects.

Undoubtedly, there is no single remedy to resolve
the problem of civilians in armed conflict. On the one
hand, the roots of conflicts are deep and complex. On the
other hand, there is a lack of effective mechanisms for the
implementation of existing major instruments of
international law.

At the same time, as has been stated by many
speakers during this open debate as well as during
previous ones on this topic, it is undeniable that the best
way to prevent the suffering of the civilian population in
armed conflict is to eliminate conflicts themselves or,
rather, to prevent their emergence. In that sense, the role
of the Security Council in this matter remains primary.

Recognizing the critical role played by many other
United Nations and non-United Nations bodies and
humanitarian agencies in protecting civilians in armed
conflict and in providing them with humanitarian
assistance and all necessary relief, we stand by our
position that the Security Council should be the guiding
and coordinating organ in these international efforts.

Therefore, we believe that the great number of
concrete ideas emanating from the detailed analysis of the
situations of ongoing conflict presented in the Secretary-

 

General's report, as well as in many of the statements made
yesterday and this morning, should receive an appropriate
response by the Security Council.

My delegation is very satisfied that most of those
ideas are duly reflected in the draft resolution that is before
the Council today. In the same vein, we hope that the
provisions of the draft to be adopted will not remain only
on paper but will be fully respected and implemented, thus
effectively contributing to resolving the problem of civilians
in armed conflict.
In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council that
Ukraine is committed to seeking ways to further enhance
the protection of civilians in armed conflict and to fully
support the Security Council's decisions to that end.

