Ms. Bishop (Australia): After decades of conflict,
the Afghan National Security Forces continue to
make daily sacrifices in their efforts to protect their
communities, while the Afghan people continue to
suffer the ravages of terrorism and conflict. It remains
vital that the international community continue to
stand with the Afghan people in their efforts to defeat
terrorism and pursue peaceful development.

The struggle against extremist ideology of groups
like the Taliban is existential for many communities.
There is no place in our world for a doctrine that defines
women and girls as second-class citizens, and where
young girls have their hopes and dreams crushed by an
ideology that deprives them of education, respect and
free will. There are many reasons for our support for
the Afghan Government; however, few are as important
as the future welfare of the women and girls of that
beautiful country.

On this International Women's Day, we commit
anew to the courageous women and girls ofAfghanistan.
Australia will maintain our 300-strong commitment to
the NATO-led Resolute Support mission to train, advise
and assist the Afghan Security Forces, and our annual
$100-million commitment to its support. The Australian
Government reiterates our condemnation of the actions
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) and
ISIS-inspired groups, Al-Qaida, its affiliates and other
terrorist groups, including in Afghanistan. In February,
Australia listed the Islamic State-Khorasan Province
for counter-terrorism-targeted financial sanctions.

Since 2001, Australia has also been committed to
Afghanistan's development, including by providing
$1.34 billion in development assistance. Sustainable
economic growth is the key to lifting more Afghan
people out of poverty. We are seeing advances, with
women and girls now having opportunities for education
and economic participation while their rights are being
codified in Afghanistan's laws. Women, at least as
much as men, must win the peace in Afghanistan,
and we support their participation in the upcoming
elections, both as candidates and as citizens exercising
their democratic rights. More work is needed to ensure
that Afghans can fulfil their potential, including those
displaced due to the ongoing humanitarian crisis.

Australia continues to support Afghanistan's
efforts to reintegrate displaced people and returnees
and to meet the humanitarian and development
needs of its citizens. Today I announce a $60-million
humanitarian support package to assist Afghanistan's
refugees, displaced people and their host communities
in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Australia will continue
to support Afghanistan's efforts in responding to the
ongoing challenges of food security, safety and health
needs, particularly of vulnerable women and children.

Afghanistan needs enduring peace to fulfil its
undoubted potential that can only come through
negotiation and dialogue. The November 2018
ministerial conference in Geneva will provide the
opportunity for Afghanistan to demonstrate progress
towards a political settlement, give priority its
development needs and build international confidence.
The Australian Government acknowledges the
commitment of the Afghan Government and people,
and the bravery of the Afghan security forces in their
determination to end conflict. We also appreciate the
valuable contribution of all United Nations agencies,
diplomatic partners and their staff in Afghanistan.

Like all people, Afghans want to live their lives
in peace and security and strive for higher standards
of living. We are reliable and enduring partners in the
struggle to reach that goal. The men and women, girls
and boys, and families of Afghanistan are counting on
us all.

