Ms. Machel: Thank you, Mr. President, for
having invited me to attend this meeting of the Security
Council. It is a measure of the progress that we have
made in moving children to the centre of the
international peace and security agenda that the
meeting today is the second Security Council meeting
in the past few months to focus on children and armed
conflict. In a historic moment last November, the
Council invited a young person to address a meeting.

Today, as the General Assembly prepares for its
first-ever special session specifically on children, the
Security Council is enabling children themselves to
interact directly with one of the most important organs
of the international community. In addition, in the past
few months and years the Council has held discussions
and adopted significant resolutions aimed at promoting
the protection of children and women in situations of
armed conflict.

Placing children at the centre of political agendas
at the highest levels of the international community is
an important shift in our attempt to promote the well-
being of the world's children. Other encouraging
developments since the 1996 United Nations report on
the impact of armed conflict on children was presented
to the General Assembly include the introduction of the
Ottawa Convention against landmines and the
subsequent destruction of millions of stockpiled
landmines; the strengthening of international
legislative frameworks, including the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict; the
introduction and strengthening of child protection
mandates in peacekeeping missions; and the
appointment of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.

Yet there is so much more to do. In too many
countries throughout the world, war continues to tear
apart children's lives. The prevention of conflict is the
primary mandate of the Security Council - indeed, of
the United Nations. We know that the best way to
protect children in armed conflict is to prevent such
conflict from beginning. It is essential that the Security
Council increase its efforts to develop and implement
mechanisms that enforce its decisions and guidelines
on the prevention of conflict. Otherwise, the cycle of
conflict will never end and millions of children will
continue to die from preventable diseases, continue to
be forced from their homes and continue to be maimed,
tortured and killed.

The implementation of the measures promoted in
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions is
slow at best, and the improvements we have been
pushing for are still only intermittently and dimly
reflected in the everyday lives of children. Six years
after the original United Nations report highlighted the
dangers of sexual abuse and sexual exploitation for
children caught up in armed conflict, we are still only
just beginning to implement effective protection
measures, as highlighted by the recent distressing
reports coming out of Sierra Leone.

We can point with pride to the demobilization of
3,500 child soldiers in southern Sudan last year -
the result of the tireless work of the United Nations
Children's Fund, several non-governmental
organizations and concerned Governments. Yet
children in as many as 85 countries continue to live
with the reality of abduction and forced recruitment
into military groups. Even as we meet today, the might
of the international community seems unable to stop
the criminal situation in which tens of thousands of
children from northern Uganda are being abducted and
forced into military and sexual slavery - a situation
that has continued for a period of more than a decade.
In refugee camps throughout the world, education
remains out of the reach of large numbers of children,
instead of being the protective, guiding and
empowering force that it has the potential to be.

Every day that a child lives in fear or pain or is in
danger from the violence of war is another day on
which we have not done enough. As the Security
Council of the United Nations, you are in a stronger
position than most to ensure the protection of children.
Monitoring of the implementation of Security Council
resolutions on children and armed conflict must be
strengthened.

When you see - and you will - that
implementation is too slow or ineffective, please use
your power to promote new measures to admonish
those who break international law or fail to carry out
your initiatives and, when necessary, to instigate
disciplinary measures to force Governments, United
Nations agencies and international organizations into
better and more urgent action to prevent conflicts in
order to protect children.

The Security Council is to be commended for its
vision of and commitment to social justice, which has
moved it to invite children to address this meeting. I
hope that hearing from the people most directly
affected by conflict will be a regular occurrence in this
important forum. Listening to their stories, their
questions and their concerns will surely motivate us to
act more urgently to prevent conflicts and to protect
children. There can be few catalysts that will more
effectively shatter the political inertia that has allowed
armed conflict to ruin the lives of millions.

