Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to thank the Permanent
Mission of Equatorial Guinea for having convened this
important open debate and putting before the Security
Council the African Union initiative Silencing the
Guns in Africa. We also commend the good offices
involved in the drafting of the resolution adopted
today (resolution 2457 (2019)). We are also grateful to
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Mr. Ramtane Lamamra and
Mr. Vasu Gounden for their briefings.

At the outset, we wish to underscore the importance
of the Silencing the Guns in Africa initiative. It is a
somewhat ambitious initiative, but at the same time
one that is necessary owing to the high number of
conflicts and wars that have enveloped large parts of
the African continent. In the same vein, we commend
the progress made by African Union member States in
the implementation of the road map of practical steps
to achieve that overarching objective. There are various
reasons for which States find themselves embroiled
in continuous conflicts, but among the most common
we would mention economic crisis, bad governance,
scant institutionality, fighting for access to and
control of natural resources, human rights violations,
ethnic and religious differences and the effects of
climate change, among others. That diverse range
of factors makes it necessary to address the issue of
security and development in Africa from a broad and
comprehensive perspective.

Mali, the Sudan, Libya, Nigeria, Kenya and
Somalia have demonstrated that the threats faced by
the African continent must be tackled globally, while
maintaining the view that the future of the region is
the fundamental responsibility of African countries,
with the cooperation of the international community.
While it is true that the reasons for conflicts are distinct
for each country, it is equally true that in each and
every one of the conflicts on the African continent and
throughout the rest of the world there is an inevitable
presence of the illicit proliferation of small arms and
light weapons. Such weapons are cheap and easy to
use, transport and hide, thereby representing the main
element used in conflicts. It is those weapons that are
favoured for use in civil wars and for carrying out
criminal activity, organized crime and terrorism. The
illicit trafficking in those weapons represents a scourge
that exacerbates conflicts and undermines the stability
of those States that at one point or another managed to
emerge from conflict but have ended up immersed once
again in crisis.

We therefore encourage African Union States
to fulfil their domestic and international legal
commitments, including the effective implementation
and monitoring of arms embargoes put in place by the
Security Council, as well as the various international
instruments that advocate for peace, disarmament
and the realization of lasting international security, in
particular through the full implementation of the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects.

We also call on non-signatory States to the Arms
Trade Treaty to sign and ratify it with a View to its full
universalization. In that regard, with the support and
assistance of the United Nations Regional Centre for
Peace and Disarmament in Africa, we call for measures
to be established in order to strengthen citizen security
and combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons by implementing security sector reforms and
draft laws for the control and regulation of firearms,
munitions, explosives and their related materials.

The primary objectives of those projects and
reforms should be to prevent and control the use
of weapons by the civilian population and the
weapons used by the military and police outside
the scope of regulation, as well as promoting the
gradual disarmament of the population through the
implementation of a legal system that establishes
crimes that do not exist in current criminal legislation,
in addition to promoting institutional strengthening,
capacity-building, reinforcing control measures for
arms acquisition, developing adequate procedures for
the management of stockpiling, physical security and
the marking, registration and tracking of such weapons.
In that regard, we also recognize that the effectiveness
of weapons-collection programmes and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes depend,
inter alia, on providing sustainable opportunities for
ex-combatants and on the ability of State institutions to
foster an inclusive environment in which people feel safe
and protected, as expressed in resolution 2220 (2015).

Another aspect that we would like to highlight
is that the African continent has achieved positive
developments with regard to the various protocols and
resolutions that have been adopted on women and peace
and security. However, Governments must remain
committed to gender equity, particularly by ensuring
women leadership in peace and security processes and
mechanisms and by making efforts to guarantee their
implementation, as they are catalysts for successfully
achieving the objectives of Agenda 2063 of the African
Union and a continent free of conflict by 2020.

We believe that investment and multilateral
cooperation in Africa and among the countries that
comprise it, as well as investment in education, the
greater participation of women and young people
in various sectors of society and the participation of
civil society and a focus on human rights, among other
aspects, would allow countries across the continent
to capitalize on their vast human capital and natural
resources and thereby achieve the socioeconomic
development that they yearn for.

The Dominican Republic, as a country that firmly
believes in young people as transformers of societies
that are more just, inclusive and peaceful, supports
the recommendations of the fourth report of the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union in the
implementation of the road map for the participation of
young people and women throughout the full cycle of
peace processes across the continent. We also welcome
the designation by the African Union ofa special envoy
for youth, peace and security.

Other issues that we must analyse include the
challenges generated by the effects of climate change
on the African continent, particularly for agriculture,
which represents the economic linchpin of a large
part of the population. All estimates suggest that a
significant part of the continent will become more arid
and experience greater climate variability. Several
African countries are already experiencing those
effects as a result of reduced rainfall, soil degradation
and the depletion of natural resources.

In particular, it is worth mentioning the increased
desertification of the Sahel, which could lead to greater
regional instability and an increase in northward
migration to the Maghreb region and Europe, while
an increase in adverse weather events in East Africa
and a decrease in rainfall in North Africa could affect
the Sudan and cause food shortages in Ethiopia and
Somalia, which would increase tensions in the Horn of
Africa. It is also predicted that climate change will have
a considerable effect on the spread of diseases, which
will contribute to aggravating existing tensions.

As we can see, the main threats to the African
continent are not isolated but rather interrelated,
meaning that a joint effort is necessary in order to
effectively confront them through strategies for
conflict resolution, development and economic and
environmental sustainability. Governments and armed
groups should also renew their commitments and
focus on overcoming the great challenges they face in
implementing existing peace agreements in countries
such as Mali and the Central African Republic, among
others, and should adopt measures for the effective
implementation of those agreements.

It is also important that the international community,
the Economic Commission for Africa and regional
and subregional organizations support and assist the
regional defence cooperation frameworks with a view
to achieving their overall objectives.

Finally, the Dominican Republic reiterates its
commitment to achieving and maintaining international
peace and security. We therefore extend our support
to the African Union member States in their efforts
to achieve a continent free of conflicts. It is the
responsibility of the entire international community
to ensure the well-being of its citizens and guarantee
collective security in a sustainable manner.

