Mr. Kulla (Albania): The Albanian delegation joins
other delegations in expressing its gratitude to you, Mr.
President, for initiating this open debate on a very
important subject. We also felt honoured by the presence
of His Excellency the Foreign Minister of the Republic of
Korea, which demonstrates the great attention that the

 

Korean delegation attaches to matters during its presidency,
under your competent guidance.

Due to the current well-known situation, my country
has been on the agenda of the Security Council for the last
two months. Security Council resolution 1101 (1997),
which authorized the deployment of the multinational force
to protect the delivery of humanitarian assistance in
Albania, constitutes one excellent example of the efficacy
of the work of the Security Council, and of the quick
reaction of the international community when it comes to
helping one of the Members of the Organization. The
Albanian people welcomed this intervention at this difficult
moment, and on behalf of my Government, I express my
deepest gratitude on this occasion. I also express my
deepest thanks to the coalition of willing countries
participating in this force and providing humanitarian
assistance, and to the international organizations and non-
governmental organizations involved in humanitarian
assistance, providing food and medicaments in these
difficult days for Albania.

Thanks to this relief action and to good cooperation
with the legitimate authorities in the areas where the
international actors are working, the people of my country
can see a greater possibility of overcoming this situation,
expecting better political solutions from the elections that
will be held at the end of June.

Albania is a country with plenty of resources and a
hard-working people whose aim is to achieve prosperity
within its own borders, rather than to produce waves of
refugees and thus create problems for host countries all
over the world and sometimes exposing those refugees to
mistreatment. With this in mind, we strongly believe that
these waves of refugees to neighbouring countries, and
other countries as well, are a temporary phenomenon
resulting from the historical condition of a long isolation
under the cruellest communist dictatorship, as well as from
the difficult period of transition to a democratic society and
a free-market economy.

I am convinced that the Council, as it has over the
past two months, through periodic reports of the Secretary-
General and daily contacts with its members, will follow
closely the situation in my country to arrive at a definitive
and safe solution.

