Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): First, on the Bank of England, we
are going to circulate to all Members of the United
Nations and to the general public the truth about this
situation. The Bank of England is not independent, as
confirmed in letters to our representatives stating that it
is following the sanctions imposed by the Government
of the United States. The Bank of England is not
independent when it communicates with representatives
of the dictatorship imposed by the Government of the
United States - rather, that it wants to impose - on
Venezuela. The Bank of England does not enjoy great
prestige, given that what it is doing to us now it did to
Libya previously. The Bank of England simply takes
advantage: when it sees an opportunity to confiscate
the wealth of a country it thinks has weaknesses, it
changes its mind.

The latest example is this: the British Government
says that its traditional policy is to recognize States, not
Governments, and that they are not going to change it.
But they did change it in the case of Venezuela. Now
they are saying that they are not recognizing a State, but
a new puppet Government that does not even control a
single street in Venezuela. The Bank of England adjusts
itself to that new policy, and now the President of the
Central Bank of Venezuela, with whom the Bank of
England has dealt with for years, says that he is not
recognized because the British Government changed its
mind. That is not an independent bank. And those who
keep their gold there have to be very careful, for it is
in danger.

With regard to what the Ambassador of Peru said,
he has to be reminded that the United Nations is not a
club of the friends of Peru, or the United States, and
that Peru's bilateral relations - for whoever recognizes
Peru, or not - has no bearing on my participation as the
representative of the State of Venezuela at the United
Nations. My rights here are conferred by the legitimacy
of my Government within Venezuela, and not by what
the Ambassador of Peru or the Vice-President of the
United States might say. Whoever thinks that their
enemies have to be pushed out of the United Nations
and the Organization of American States has not
understood the principles set out in the Charter of the
United Nations or those of multilateralism. I therefore
raise the warning about the campaign that is starting
today to try call into question our rights and those of all
Members of the Organization.

With regard to the issue of migratory flows, I must
say that there is in fact migration in Venezuela - and
there is an economic cause behind it. But it is ridiculous
to talk about refugees here, for a refugee is technically
someone fleeing a political situation whose life is in
danger and has no possibility of going back. Anybody
who wants to can come back to Venezuela. In fact,
thousands are going back from many countries. They
come and go, yes. There are countries where thousands
ofpeople come and go every day. They cannot be called
refugees; they are economic migrants.

However, the Ambassador of Peru wants the issue
of economic refugees to be made a criminal or security
matter here at the Security Council. If that is the case,
then he should also be concerned about the refugees
travelling in caravans to the United States border
and the fact that President Trump is responding with
a wall and an army and is declaring an emergency
humanitarian situation. But the Ambassador of Peru
does not seem to think that such a serious matter should
be addressed in the Security Council, only the issue of
Venezuela. That double standard is what we came here
to denounce. The economic situation is in a bad state
and is difficult, but what cannot happen to bring in the
Security Council to try to criminalize the Venezuelan
Government and create the conditions for an invasion.
That is what we came here to denounce. We also came
here for the Council to investigate and determine
whether there really is a legal basis for the aggression
against our people.

