Mr. Muburi-Muita (Kenya): My delegation
welcomes the decision of the Security Council to hold
an open debate to consider how to enhance its
effectiveness in conflict prevention and resolution,
particularly in Africa. We wish to hail this Congolese
initiative and to applaud the support of the Secretary-
General.

This year has turned out to be a turning point on
matters of international peace and security, not only for
the United Nations but also for the African Union.
Recently, the Security Council finally adopted a
resolution authorizing its peacekeeping mission
destined for Darfur and also extended the mandate of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We
look forward to seeing full implementation of these
two resolutions. My country will work to support both
missions.

Foremost among the challenges of the Darfur
mission is the urgency to improve the safety and
security of the civilian populations.

Kenya recognizes the good work being done by
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in the Horn of Africa,
particularly in Somalia. The great effort to coordinate
the humanitarian work by United Nations relief
agencies and that of other international bodies has
saved the lives of a great number of the internally
displaced persons and has ameliorated the condition of
the sick and other vulnerable groups. These
humanitarian agencies are operating in extremely
difficult circumstances, and my delegation calls upon
the international community to support them.

The ongoing restructuring of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations might be construed to mean
that the United Nations is gearing itself up to building
sufficient capacity to deal with numerous complex
peacekeeping missions. It is instinctive to observe that
peacekeeping is more expensive than conflict
prevention. The energies and resources of the United
Nations should therefore be channelled more to
conflict prevention through use of its good offices to
address potential root causes of conflicts at the earliest
stages, before full escalation. These include Increasing
economic opportunities and promoting the culture of
inclusive politics to avoid marginalization and
alienation of large sections of populations, which often
leads to conflict.

Peace, security and development are mutually
interdependent. This is based on the realization that
there can never be development in the absence of peace
and security, while, on the other hand, peace and
security are prerequisites for development. Lack of
development, poverty, deprivation and suffering are all
breeding grounds for insecurity. In this respect, my
delegation would add that the ongoing United Nations
reform should ensure that proper working mechanisms
are put into place between the peace and security
organs, namely, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Security Council on the one hand, and the development
arms of the United Nations, especially the Economic
and Social Council, on the other.

Kenya welcomes the support that the United
Nations is giving to the African Union in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. We
call upon both bodies to deepen the cooperation in
order to enhance the capacity of the AU to handle
regional security issues, especially through the African
Union Peace and Security Council.

While commending the Security Council for its
good work, let me mention that, unfortunately, all too
often it has been stuck in its traditional approach of

peacekeeping. In most conflict situations, there will be
no peace to keep, and yet the international community
will be looking to the United Nations to deal with the
situation, as eloquently articulated by the Permanent
Representative of fellow East African Community
partner State, Uganda.

It is a commonly held View that the United
Nations preconditions that a country at conflict must
have a peace to keep in order for the United Nations to
deploy is untenable. To put it in context, the reason for
which a country allows foreign troops on its soil is to
create - not to keep - peace. The high-sounding
argument that there has to be political agreements
between warring factions is itself misplaced. Intra-
State conflicts require a neutral party to mediate
between the warring parties and a credible neutral
force to protect civilians and facilitate humanitarian
effort.

My country continues to shoulder great
responsibilities in our region of Africa on the subject
under discussion. As the current Chair of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Great Lakes Forum, Kenya has spearheaded aggressive
regional political initiatives to change the situation. We
will continue to pursue these goals as we call upon the

international community - and especially the United
Nations Security Council - to remain seized of the
matter.

