Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
would to congratulate and thank you, Mr. President,
for presiding over this open debate. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

Two decades after the signing of the Oslo Accords
between the State of Israel and the then Palestine
Liberation Organization, the transitional provisions
have given way to a status quo that unfortunately
continues to this day. Thus, after 20 years of progress
and setbacks in the negotiations, there is still no sign of
the desired two-State solution reflecting the principles
established in the pertinent United Nations resolutions
to allow the creation of an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State, living side by side in peace and
security with the State of Israel, within secure and
internally recognized borders. The peoples of Israel
and Palestine and their future generations deserve no
less.

Chile recognized the State of Palestine in 2011.
In that same year, it supported Palestine's full
membership in UNESCO. Subsequently, in 2012, we
were a sponsor of General Assembly resolution 67/ 19,
which accorded Palestine the status of a non-member
Observer State at the United Nations. We View that
policy as a contribution to the peace, as it strengthens
the capacities of the Palestinian State.

Owing to the foregoing, Chile welcomes the fact
that the parties resumed direct negotiations under
United States auspices last August. In particular, we
welcome the personal commitment shown by Secretary
of State John Kerry, who has visited the region on
numerous occasions. In order for the negotiations to
move forward, the parties must strengthen dialogue
and build trust. That requires ongoing actions and the
avoidance of unilateral acts that undermine or destroy
confidence. The release of hundreds of Palestinian
prisoners is pointless if, at the same time, Israel
announces the construction of thousands of homes
in the settlements located in Palestinian territory, in
contravention of international law.

It is also necessary to more strongly condemn
the attacks affecting the civilian population of Israel,
and measures must be taken to avoid provocative acts
and incitement. I take this opportunity to reiterate my
country's condemnation of all terrorist acts, in whatever
form and whatever their motivation. Terrorism has no
place in the world.

Chile supports the Palestinian reconciliation
process between Fatah and Hamas, agreed in Doha and
Cairo in 2012. We believe that the Islamic Resistance
Movement must renounce the use of arms and recognize
Israel's right to exist. Chile will continue to encourage
the constructive, consistent commitment of Palestine
and Israel to the current peace negotiations aimed at
achieving a just and lasting peace in accordance with
international law. It is our hope that that will be possible.

The conflict in Syria is of particular concern, as it
has caused over 100,000 deaths. Regrettably, in nearly
three years, the Council has been unable to adopt a
resolution that, it was hoped, would end the tragedy.
Nevertheless, the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013)
marked a turning point. Thanks to the joint work of
the Council and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, progress has been made towards
destroying the Syrian chemical arsenal through an
unprecedented effort of the international community.
However, it should be recalled that that is only one
aspect of the conflict, in which conventional weapons
have caused the most Victims. Our country therefore
reiterates that the provision of military supplies to any
of the parties must halt in order to avoid exacerbating
the conflict and the suffering of the civilian population.

The humanitarian crisis requires the Security
Council to make every possible effort to call on the
parties to the conflict to fulfil their obligations in
relation to international humanitarian and human rights
law, while guaranteeing the protection of civilians
and the rapid and unimpeded access of humanitarian
personnel. We call for the urgent implementation
of the Security Council's presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/15 of 2 October 2013. The International
Humanitarian Pledging Conference, held in Kuwait,
which dealt with humanitarian and refugee assistance,
represents a step in the right direction.

Chile supports the efforts made by Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and Joint Special Representative
Lakhdar Brahimi towards the convening of the second
Geneva Conference on Syria and hopes that that meeting
will generate momentum for a political agreement. The
participation of all international actors in a position to
influence the parties is necessary in order to ensure
a political agreement. For their part, the parties must
agree not to undermine the principles of the Geneva
communique of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex),
whether or not they participated in that meeting. It is
our hope that the parties will implement humanitarian
measures to address the critical situation and efforts
towards the building of mutual confidence in order to
achieve the necessary political agreement. We reiterate
the importance of women being represented at every
level in the debates on the Syrian Arab Republic in order
to ensure that their concerns are be duly considered and
acted upon.

The deterioration of the security situation in
Lebanon is reflected - inter alia - in the clashes
between pro-Al-Assad and anti-Al-Assad demonstrators
in Tripoli, the attack on the Iranian embassy, the
assassination of former Minister Mohamad Chatah
and the recent bombing in the southern Beirut suburb
of Haret Hreik and the town of Hermel. Chile appeals
to the Lebanese political leaders to promote the
agreements needed to ensure the country's institutional
functionality. In addition, it is important to encourage
Lebanese society to implement the dissociation policy
established in the Baabda Declaration.

We believe that it is the will of the international
community to support Lebanon by promoting stability,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, especially now
that the Special Tribunal created to try the suspects in
the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri
has started its hearings, which form a crucial element
of the task of combating impunity.

Chile maintains far-reaching ties with communities
in the Middle East and stands ready to join with the
international community in mapping out the road to
peace and progress for the inhabitants of the region.

I conclude by thanking all of those that have
welcomed my country upon its election as a
non-permanent member of the Council.

