Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful
to you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate on such an important topic. We welcome the
participation of the President of the General Assembly,
Mr. Mogens Lykketoft; the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Eliasson, and Ambassador Jiirgenson, who is
representing the President of the Economic and Social
Council.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela also supports
the statement to be made by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Faced with complex challenges in the area of
international peace and security, which call for effective
and timely responses by the Security Council to promote
the peaceful settlement of disputes, our country values
the holding of this debate on its working methods.
This exchange makes it possible to reaffirm the need
to strengthen the Council's working relationship with
the rest of the membership and the principal organs of
this multilateral Organization, within the framework of
their respective mandates. That process must involve
the entire Organization and its subsidiary organs. A
comprehensive reform of the Organization is necessary
and cannot be put off.

While some decisions and working methods have
been agreed and some documents approved with the
aim of improving the working methods of the Security
Council, including presidential note S/2010/507, we
believe that they are still far from what is required to face
up to the the existing challenges. Moreover, we need to
find effective formulas to promote greater transparency
and inclusivity, if we are to meet the expectations and
reflect the collective interests of the Members of this
Organization. We must also do something about the
status of the rules of the Security Council, which have
been in provisional form for 70 years. We need to adopt
a definitive text to regulate the work of that body and
put an end to the excessively discretional nature of its
actions.

Despite those calls, there are still some major
obstacles, such as lack of transparency, that adversely
affect the working dynamics of the Security Council,
and ultimately undermine the results of their execution.
At times, the process ofnegotiating a draft resolution has
lacked the necessary inclusivity, the discussions having
been confined to a group of actors without taking into
account the opinions of the non-permanent members of
the Security Council. Since the unity of the Council
is an important element for maintaining international
peace and security, achieving that objective requires
the full participation of all the Council members. In that
regard, we stress the need to put an end to those types
of exclusionary practices that undermine transparency
and inclusivity.

We must focus attention on the sanctions
Committees. The primary purpose of those subsidiary
bodies of the Council, given the exceptional situations
in which they are established, should be to assist in the
political resolution of disputes. Ten of the 16 sanctions
Committees now in existence affect African countries.
The sanctions Committees should operate alongside
an ongoing political process. In other words, their
objectives should be clearly circumscribed and they
should have a clear end date.

However, that is not what happens under the
current practice of the Council. Once established,
sanctions Committees, for whatever reason, will exist
for decades if some of the permanent members so
desire. The remaining members, the elected members,
can do little to prevent it. Although they may chair the
Committees, they have little, if any, power to change
things. The non-permanent members of the Council can
do little to change such imbalances, given the opposing
factions that impede the possibility of carrying out
needed improvements.

Sanctions should not be used as a political tool
against countries and peoples. They should not be seen
as an end unto themselves, but rather as an instrument
bound to the solution of a given conflict. The sanctions
committees must not be seen as merely punitive.

Another issue that we must review is the power
wielded by penholders, the few permanent members
that decide what, how and when mandates are created
and considered, sometimes with little regard for the
opinions of other members. The Council's practice is
based on a consensus reached through negotiations;
that is why we believe that a thorough democratization
of the Council's working methods is urgently needed,
especially regarding sanctions.

Bearing in mind that international peace and
security affect all Members of the Organization,
according to the principle of the sovereign equality
of States, it is important for the Security Council to
convene open or public meetings more frequently, in
order that countries, particularly those whose cases
are under consideration, may contribute to discussing
the issue with a view to reaching a peaceful resolution
of the conflict. That is even more important in cases
involving regional organizations. It is therefore
paradoxical, given that the African Union is a strategic
partner of the United Nations, that its representative,
former President Joaquim Chissano, was unable to
participate in the briefing on Western Sahara held in
April (S/PV.7435). We hope that Mr. Chissano will be
able to participate in the next meeting on that issue and
that such a situation will not be repeated.

Moreover, Venezuela believes that troop-contributing
countries should, in accordance with Article 44 of
the Charter of the United Nations, participate in the
decisions of the Council on the employment of their
contingents in peacekeeping operations. In that vein,
we support the calls of those countries for a genuine
implementation of the provisions of Article 44, which
would result in better functioning of the Security
Council and its instruments for promoting peace.

The relationship among the Security Council,
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council must be based on respect for their respective
competencies. That is why the Council should deal
strictly with issues relating to threats to international
peace and security, in accordance with Article 39 of
the Charter of the United Nations. We are concerned
about the tendency of this organ to address issues
outside its jurisdiction, issues that are properly handled
by the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, which can consider them from a security
perspective as well. Such was the case of resolution
2240 (2015) on migrants, adopted recently by the
Council, with Venezuela abstaining. Our country sees
the interaction between the Security Council and the
other main bodies in terms of balance and respect for
their respective functions under the Charter.

In the context of a close and harmonious relationship
between the Council and the General Assembly, we
would like to highlight the important role that the
latter should play in the election of the next Secretary-
General. Consultations on that topic should be guided
by the principles of transparency and inclusiveness
and should start as quickly as possible, by sending a
joint communication by the Presidents of both bodies,
including a description of the process as a whole and
inviting candidates to be presented in a timely manner.

We are therefore convinced that the General
Assembly should play a more active role in that matter
so that it will not find itself simply endorsing the
recommendation made by the Security Council. The
General Assembly should be able to choose among
several candidates, taking into account geographical
balance. We also strongly support the nomination of
female candidates to fill the position mentioned and the
mainstreaming women's equality in the Organization.

Venezuela also believes that the review of the
Council's decision-making mechanism, in particular
the veto power, could have a positive influence on
the interaction between the Council and the General
Assembly in terms of its working methods, primarily
the competency of the General Assembly's jurisdiction.
In that regard, we wish to again highlight that the threat
of using the veto has thwarted the legitimate aspiration
of the Palestinian State to be admitted as a full Member
of the United Nations, despite the overwhelming
support on the part of Organization's membership.

To conclude, Venezuela calls for a body with a
more balanced focus that will avoid applying double
standards in the examination of the issues under
its consideration. In that regard, as non-permanent
members, we look forward to working together towards
a Security Council that takes into account the views of
all of its members, and the diverse geographic, political
and cultural realities of the world.

