Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I would like
to thank Special Representative Salame and his team
at the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. I
also thank Ms. Al Tubuly for her comprehensive and
enlightening presentation. I particularly welcome the
Foreign Minister of Libya to the Council.

Let me first fully agree with what the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has said. It
is somewhat of a cliche when we say that he said that
the next days and weeks will be crucial for Libya.
Unfortunately, that is very true given the situation today.
He kindly referred to the Berlin process. I do not have
a great deal to add. He spoke very comprehensively in
that regard. But let me reiterate that in two days, another
meeting of the so-called senior officials meetings of the
Berlin process will take place. From our point of view,
that will be an important meeting.

Let me just reiterate that the sole objective of the
Berlin process is to provide support to the efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Salame and the United Nations to facilitate a political
solution for Libya. That requires a more coherent
approach by the international community to issues such
as the arms embargo, the ceasefire, the return to the
political process, respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights and several reforms that are
urgently needed.

We think that, despite all open issues, we can
move forward in our negotiations and support for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
help the return to an intra-Libyan political dialogue.
That is exactly what Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Salame' suggested on 29 July, when
he presented his three-point plan to the Council (see S/PV.8588).

I do not want to go into all the issues that are on the
agenda but wish to focus on two matters today: first, the
arms embargo and, secondly, respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights.

Let me start with the implementation of the arms
embargo. We all know that the decisive and swift
action of the international community and the Security
Council is becoming increasingly pressing in the light
of the increasing number of civilian casualties. We
therefore call on all United Nations Member States to
immediately halt any arms deliveries. The illicit flow of
arms needs to stop now. We all know that there cannot
be any military solution to the conflict in Libya.

In that context, I will say a few words in my
national capacity about the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
I think that it is fair to say that the work of the Libya
Sanctions Committee is unfortunately probably now
more important than ever. In that context, I would
mention the case of Mr. Moncef Kartas, a member
and arms expert of the Committee's Panel of Experts.
Council members are aware of the case. Let me say that
we understand and respect that this is a judicial matter
in Tunisia but, at the same time, it is a matter of the
Libya Sanctions Committee and ofthe Council. For that
reason, I would like to reiterate that Tunisia must abide
by its obligations under the 1946 Convention on the
Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations and
close all legal proceedings or request authorization to
continue them in line with the Convention.

Regrettably, the problem has been even further
perpetuated. The Chair of the Committee will not be
able to provide the periodic report of its activities to
the Security Council because a purely factual rendition
of the Committee's activities in the Kartas case was
blocked. We expect Council members and Members
of the Organization to honour their commitments
under the Charter of the United Nations and all the
conventions that they have signed. The signal that
we send as the Council by not being able to agree on
merely factual statements runs counter to what all
our leaders reaffirmed in September, namely, that the
United Nations and the Security Council are crucial.

Secondly, I would like to refer to the issue ofrespect
for international humanitarian law, human rights and
women's rights. Unfortunately, as the presentation
by Ms. Al Tubuly once again made abundantly clear,
women, children, migrants and refugees are exposed
to indiscriminate shelling, exploitation and sexual and
gender-based violence. I would like to thank Ms. Al
Tubuly for giving the Council first-hand insights into
the situation within Libya. We commend her courage
and dedication and that of Libyan civil society for their
challenging work in a dangerous environment. We
know that women activists and human rights defenders
in particular are frequently targeted, often to silence
them and to create a climate of fear. We cannot allow
that to happen. Women must be represented in political
and social life and their voices must be heard. We will
certainly continue to support Ms. Al Tubuly's work
wherever we can.

Before concluding, let me also take this opportunity
to again encourage the Libyan authorities to continue
their search for the House of Representatives lawmaker
Siham Sergewa, whose whereabouts remain unknown.

