Judge Meron: It is a great honour for me to
address the Council today. The honour is magnified
because I come before the Council in the company of
Lord Ashdown. For many years now, Lord Ashdown
has been a tireless and resourceful servant of the
international community. I pay tribute to his wisdom,
dedication, commitment and skill.

The Council has heard from Lord Ashdown about
several aspects of his work in Bosnia and Herzegovina
during the past year. I am here to add a few words of
support and elaboration on one aspect of that work -
the establishment of a special War Crimes Chamber
within the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The creation of the War Crimes Chamber in
Sarajevo, as members know, has been a joint initiative
of the Office of the High Representative (OHR) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). This past February, my
predecessor, as President of the ICTY, Claude Jorda of
France, and Lord Ashdown's Principal Deputy, Bernard
Fassier, initialled a joint proposal outlining the
structure and the financing of the War Crimes
Chamber. I twice had the honour to address the steering
board of the Peace Implementation Council (PIC)
about the proposal, and I am grateful that the PIC
steering board endorsed the project in June. I am
grateful as well that the Security Council added its
imprimatur to the War Crimes Chamber in resolution
1503 of the 28 August 2003, called for its "expeditious
establishment" and urged the donor community to
support the project financially.

We are now moving from plans to action. Later
this month, the ICTY will host an OHR donors
conference in the Tribunal at The Hague. That
conference, which builds on earlier meetings in
Sarajevo, should put in place the War Crimes
Chamber's financial foundation - the foundation
which, as Lord Ashdown has explained, is absolutely
essential for the success of this project. Once that
foundation is laid, a series of working groups will be
created to address many of the detailed policies needed
to get the War Crimes Chamber running. Those groups,
staffed by representatives from the OHR, the ICTY,
relevant departments of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Government and interested groups such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the Council of Europe and the European
Union Police Mission, will address such issues as rules
of procedure and evidence, witness protection,
investigations, detention and transfer of cases and
evidence from the ICTY.

The Sarajevo War Crimes Chamber will serve
several important functions and will make a crucial
contribution to the achievement of important goals of
the international community.

First, from the perspective of the ICTY, the
creation of the War Crimes Chamber will serve, as the
Security Council recognized in resolution 1503, as "an
essential prerequisite" for the success of the ICTY's
completion strategy, its plan to complete its mission
within the time-frame indicated by the Security
Council. That completion strategy has a number of
components, including focusing the work of the
Tribunal more tightly on the prosecution of the most
senior leaders suspected or accused of being most
responsible for crimes within the ICTY jurisdiction and
enacting a series of internal procedural reforms
designed to improve the efficiency of the Tribunal's
proceedings. Some of those reforms have already been
adopted. Others will soon be.

Within this overall completion strategy, the
establishment of an orderly process for transferring
certain cases from the ICTY to a judicial institution of
an emerging Bosnian Government will play a vital role.
Winding up the work of the ICTY in a reasoned and
timely fashion will itself contribute to the process of
reconstruction and reconciliation in the region. That
orderly completion strategy will form an essential
element in the legacy the Tribunal will leave to the
international community's historic effort to bring
accountability for those who commit terrible atrocities.

Secondly, as Lord Ashdown has indicated, the
establishment of the War Crimes Chamber will
contribute directly to the realization of the OHR
Mission Implementation Plan. The War Crimes
Chamber will make a powerful contribution to the
overall efforts of the OHR to establish a firm
foundation for the rule of law in the national
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The experience
local prosecutors and judges gain in the War Crimes
Chamber will carry over to their work in other areas of
law enforcement.

Thirdly, the War Crimes Chamber will ensure that
the prosecution of war criminals takes place in Bosnia
and Herzegovina in an efficient and fair manner, and in
accordance with internationally recognized standards
of due process.

At present, unfortunately, we cannot rely
exclusively on the existing institutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Despite the gradual re-establishment of
democratic institutions and the return of peace to the
country, the local courts still suffer from significant
structural difficulties, as well as from lack of
cooperation between the entities; political pressures
brought to bear on judges and prosecutors; the often
mono-ethnic composition of the local courts; ethic
bias; difficulties protecting victims and witnesses
effectively; and lack of adequate training of court
personnel.

While the OHR has initiated far-reaching and
extremely important reforms of the judicial system, the
process of reform will not be completed for several
years. The establishment of a specialized War Crimes
Chamber that will include international judges in its
early years offers the best chance for rendering justice
expeditiously and thus advancing the process of
reconciliation in a timely way. The possibility of
internationally credible war crimes prosecutions in
entity or cantonal courts, unfortunately, cannot be
contemplated as yet.

The establishment and the success of the War
Crimes Chamber can play a crucial role in
demonstrating the international community's
commitment to ensuring justice in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It can contribute powerfully to the solid
growth of the rule of law. Transferring to the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina themselves the responsibility
for prosecuting war crimes committed in their territory
can play an absolutely essential role in advancing that
country's reconstruction and integration into the
international community and Europe.

A tremendous amount of work remains to be done
before the Chamber is up and running. The work runs
the gamut from the construction and renovation of
buildings to house the Chamber, to the enactment of
laws, rules and regulations, to the hiring of local and
international judges and prosecutors, to the
establishment of mechanisms for the transfer of
evidence and defendants. The international community
must fully engage in this task if an imaginative
blueprint is to be turned into a vital reality. I appeal to
Council members to support the project warmly.

