Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the delegation of the Russian Federation for convening
today's debate. I would also like to thank Mr. Nigel
Fisher, Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Haiti, for his presence here today and for
his assessment of the situation on the ground.

It was with great interest that Mexico heard the
detailed assessment of political, socioeconomic and
security situation in Haiti. We believe it necessary for
the international community and the United Nations
to redouble their efforts to lay the foundation for
sustainable development in the country. The report
of the Secretary-General (S/2013/139) describes a
complex panorama and proposes a consolidation
plan to concentrate the efforts of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in specific
areas to promote political stability.

We agree with the identification of the four priority
areas of the plan: development of police capacity,
building of electoral capacity, the rule of law and human
rights, and governance. However, we are concerned
that actions that have been successful in the past have
been left out, such as the quick impact projects that put
into place strategies to promote economic recovery and
the long- and medium-term projects that have made it
possible to meet persistent needs in humanitarian aid,
health care, food security and basic infrastructure.

We agree that while the Mission can be supported
by other actors working on the ground, including those
in the private sector, MINUSTAH should not disengage
itself from specific key areas such as education, food
and agriculture, which can be a source of long-term
instability. It is necessary to have an ongoing firm
commitment from the international community. In
that regard, Mexico calls on the Security Council,
United Nations agencies and international agencies
and partners to continue cooperating with the Haitian
people and authorities to meet the economic and social
challenges that remain prevalent in Haiti.

Mexico applauds the appointment of the members
of the transitional college of the permanent electoral
council, and hopes that their prompt entry into that
body will be a departure point for holding local and
municipal elections. It is necessary for Haiti to embrace
a culture geared to building consensus to address the
priority issues of development of the island. Also
worthy of attention is the development of the capacity
of the Haitian National Police so that it may extend its
reach to the whole territory, enabling it to effectively
address crime rates.

Mexico would like to highlight the decision to
renew, with the Haitian Government's approval, the
mandate of the Independent Expert on the situation of
human rights in Haiti, which occurred just a few days
ago. The Human Rights Council has assessed the human
rights situation in the country and taken stock of the
Government's commitment to improving the quality of
life of its citizens. No doubt that work will complement
MINUSTAH's work in favouring governance in the
country.

Mexico reiterates its full support for MINUSTAH
and recognizes the value of the men and women who
are deployed in the Mission to improve the situation
in Haiti. The Government of Mexico will continue to
support institution-building in the country, as well as
long- and medium-term projects. We call for a possible
reconfiguration of the Mission's mandate, taking into
account considerations put forth today by troop- and
police-contributing countries, as well as by members of
the international community who are committed to the
long-term stability and development of Haiti.

