President Yanukovich:

"As the legitimately elected President of
Ukraine, I wish to inform you that events in my
country and capital have placed Ukraine on
the brink of civil war. Chaos and anarchy reign
throughout the country. The lives, security and
rights of the people, particularly in the south-
east and in Crimea, are under threat. Open acts
of terror and violence are being committed under
the influence of Western countries. People are
being persecuted on the basis of their language
and political beliefs. I therefore call on President
Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin of Russia to use the
armed forces of the Russian Federation to establish
legitimacy, peace, law and order and stability in
defence of the people of Ukraine."

The letter is signed by President Yanukovich and dated
1 March. For all who may wish to see it, I have with me
a photocopy of the original letter from the President of
Ukraine to the President of Russia.

Those who seek to interpret this situation as a
form of aggression and are threatening sanctions and
boycotts of all kinds are the very partners who have
consistently encouraged political forces close to them
to engage in ultimatums, to reject dialogue, to ignore
the concerns of southern and eastern Ukraine, and
ultimately to polarize Ukrainian society. We call on
them to adopt a responsible approach, to set aside
geopolitical calculations and to place the interests of
the Ukrainian people above all else. The obligations
undertaken in the 21 February agreement, including
the launch of a constitutional reform process with the
participation and full consideration of the opinions
of all regions of Ukraine, must be honoured, and
their outcome submitted for approval in a national
referendum, as well as the establishment of a legitimate
Government of national unity that takes the interests of
all political forces and regions of Ukraine into account.

The Russian position has been and remains
consistent and open. While the Ukraine is merely a
geopolitical playground for some Western politicians,
for us it is a brotherly country to which we are bound by
many centuries of common history. Russia is interested
in a stable and strong Ukraine where the legitimate
rights and interests of the Ukrainians, our compatriots
and all citizens are protected. In this extraordinary
situation, which is not of our making and in which the
lives and security of the inhabitants of Crimea and
south-eastern Ukraine are under genuine threat from
the irresponsible and provocative acts of gangs and
ultranationalist elements, we emphasize once again that
Russia's actions are entirely appropriate and legitimate.

