Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Holmes for the
updated information he has provided on the status of
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Not a day
goes by that we are not made aware of new instances
of killing, torture, cruelty and other forms of violence
against civilians in armed conflict.

In recent years, we have focused particular
attention on the humanitarian situation in Darfur.
However, at present, and due to a large extent to the
ongoing and painstaking efforts of the United Nations
and the African Union, we have noted genuine
prospects for an intensification of the political process,
a consolidation of the Darfur peace agreement, and a
strengthening of the peacekeeping presence in Darfur.
That gives hope that the threat of violence will cease to
loom over that region of the Sudan.

Unfortunately, such positive momentum is not yet
in evidence in Iraq. Reports of mass casualties have
become commonplace. The international community
would not yet seem to have grasped the scope of the
humanitarian tragedy unfolding in Iraq in the course of
the conflict, which has already become among the
bloodiest of the past 50 years.

Today, we cannot ignore the many years of
suffering endured by civilians in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The wounds inflicted on Lebanon in the
summer of 2006 have yet to heal, and civilian
casualties number in the many hundreds.

The number of civilian casualties in Afghanistan
is growing. We understand the alarm of the Afghan
Government in reaction to each death among its
peaceful citizens.

While responsibility for the protection of
civilians falls first and foremost on the Governments of
States where conflict is occurring, we believe that such
responsibility should also be kept in mind by other
parties that might be drawn into various conflict
situations.

We are especially aggrieved by the deaths of and
injury to children. Just the other day, seven children
were killed in the Zargun Shah district of Afghanistan.
The Secretary-General, his Special Representative
Ms. Coomaraswamy, and the United Nations
Children's Fund reacted in a timely fashion. Such
events should fall within the purview of the Council's
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

Attention must be paid to gender-based violence.
The United Nations must react expeditiously to
instances of violence against peaceful civilians and the
destruction of civilian sites in armed conflict. This is a
most topical issue given that, in many current conflicts,
civilian deaths and the destruction of civilian
infrastructure are often the result of premeditated
actions or of insufficient attention to preventing
civilian casualties. We therefore need to strive for strict
compliance by all parties with the norms of
international humanitarian law and the relevant
decisions of the Council.

Conflicts often lead to massive displacements of
people within or outside a country. According to data
from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, for the first time in the
past five years the number of refugees in the world has
increased, rising to almost 10 million. The main cause
of that rise is the violence in Iraq, from which
approximately 1.5 million people have had to flee,
while some sources put that figure at 2.2 million. The
need for emergency measures in that context was
expressed at the conclusion of the International
Conference on Addressing the Humanitarian Needs of
Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons inside Iraq
and in Neighbouring Countries, held in April in
Geneva. Afghanistan remains the point of origin of the
largest number of refugees, now numbering some
2.1 million.

In recent years, along with the status of refugees,
growing attention has been paid to the internally
displaced person (IDP), whose status is not regulated

by international law. Unlike refugees, IDPs legally
continue to be protected by their States. Upon the
request of the State, they may be provided assistance
by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other
international organizations.

The issue of IDPs is often linked to the concept
of the responsibility to protect, which, we believe,
must be interpreted in strict compliance with the 2005
Summit Outcome. We would recall that heads of State
throughout the world agreed to help to protect people
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity, with the understanding that
this concept and its implications would be considered
by the General Assembly on the basis of the principles
of the Charter and international law.

Humanitarian work is a component of a crisis-
settlement strategy and post-conflict reconstruction and
requires systemic measures at the international,
regional and national levels. The Security Council is
fully justified in paying greater attention to the
protection of civilians as part of its responsibility to
maintain international peace and security.

