Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to express my delegation's pleasure
at seeing you, Madame, personally presiding over our
meeting today, on the occasion of the anniversary of
the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. We sincerely welcome your presence as
irrefutable proof of your dedication and that of your
country to the development of humankind.

I also wish to thank Secretary-General Kofi
Annan for his opening message earlier.

Allow me also to congratulate Mr. Kenzo
Oshima, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, and Mr. Angelo Gnaedinger, Director-General
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, on the
excellent quality of their briefings.

One lesson we can draw from their respective
statements is that civilians are the most vulnerable
sector in conflict situations. In certain cases, they are
systematically tortured and killed, which explains why
there are generally more deaths among civilians than in
the ranks of combatants. In the absence of adequate
protection, civilians are forced to flee and relocate,
completely impoverished, leaving their property and,
sometimes, family members behind. They are also the
principal victims of landmines and other arms.

As the Secretary-General clearly stresses in his
report:

"As is now well known, civilians, rather
than combatants, are the main casualties of
conflicts today, with women and children
constituting an unprecedented number of the
victims. More than 2.5 million people have died
directly as the result of conflict in the last decade,
and over 10 times this number (31 million people) have been displaced and uprooted by
conflict. This represents human suffering on an
immense scale." (S/2002/1300, para. 12)

This observation precisely and succinctly illustrates the
extent of the tragedy of civilians caught in armed
conflict.

The international community has established a
body of consistent international humanitarian law and
human rights norms. We welcome the commendable
efforts that have been made to implement those
instruments, as well as the valuable work done by the
International Committee of the Red Cross and other
humanitarian organizations.

Mr. Gnaedinger rightly raised two questions
earlier. He wondered whether it is the law that has not
been adapted or whether it is the humanitarian
organizations that are not up to the task. I can assure
him that we have adapted the law, which is why it is in
constant evolution. The humanitarian organizations are
carrying out their work admirably and to our great
satisfaction. The problem, as he pointed out, lies
elsewhere. Today, armed conflict is quite different from
conventional warfare and involves State and non-State
actors who violate or deliberately ignore all of the
relevant conventions, creating even more tragic,
complex and unbearable situations. This is the
challenge facing the international community today. It
cannot be met without the utmost respect for existing
law. Our task is to ensure that respect.

It is therefore with genuine satisfaction that the
delegation of Cameroon welcomes the Secretary-
General's report. All of the recommendations it
contains refer to strategies to be implemented in order
to guarantee effective protection of civilians in armed
conflict, which is a major prerequisite for any peace
process. It refers first to the roadmap, a preliminary
presentation of which is annexed to the report. As the
report suggests, this document, which is rich in
recommendations, warrants further study by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, in
cooperation with the competent United Nations bodies,
in order to organize a coherent plan of action to be
undertaken with, in Mr. Oshima's words, "specific
responsibilities assigned and time frames". There are
also measures on developing awareness on the part of
Member States with regard to their obligations to
protect civilians in armed conflict; the commitment to
carry out coordinated negotiations on humanitarian
operations; taking into account the ties between
humanitarian aid, peace and development; the fight
against the exploitation of conflicts for commercial
purposes and the global threat of terrorism.

The Cameroon delegation supports these
measures. It is convinced that, if the measures in
question were respected and implemented by the
parties in a conflict, they would make it possible to
provide solutions to certain concerns, such as the
problem of access to vulnerable populations, the
question of the security of members of humanitarian
organizations, the involvement of humanitarian agents
and members of peacekeeping forces in the fortunately
rare but unacceptable cases of sexual exploitation and
violence.

Cameroon is part of a region confronted by many
armed conflicts, and as a result has adopted several
measures to protect civilians in armed conflict. My
country, indeed, has joined the four Geneva
Conventions of 1949, as well as other instruments
related to human rights. We have signed the Statute
leading to the establishment of the International
Criminal Court, which we are getting ready to ratify.

In keeping with our tradition of hospitality,
Cameroon welcomes thousands of refugees who come
from several Central African countries and elsewhere,
in close cooperation with the various competent United
Nations bodies set up in Yaounde. With the assistance
of certain friendly countries we provide all of the
necessary aid to create the conditions for a normal life.
Furthermore, Cameroon has taken and continues to
take measures, particularly in the area of the protection
of civilians through conflict prevention within the
framework of preventive diplomacy of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa. Thus, my country and
several other countries from the Central African region
have adopted a non-aggression pact and established the
following structures: the early-warning mechanism of
the countries of Central Africa, the Central African
multinational force, the Defense and Security
Commission and the Council for Peace and Security in
Central Africa.

We are attempting as much as possible to ensure
that the various activities organized by the Standing
Advisory Committee to promote a culture of peace are
not overshadowed by the conflicts that are currently
affecting some countries in the subregion.

In conclusion, Cameroon would like to launch an
appeal to all the parties engaged in the various armed
conflicts to guarantee the security of civilians. They
must also take adequate measures to guarantee access
for humanitarian services to vulnerable populations.
Finally I would like to pay a special tribute to the
delegation of Norway for the central role it has played
in the Council in the discussion of the question of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We would like
to thank them.

