Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I wish to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths
and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their
comprehensive briefings. Their efforts to restore peace
and stability in Yemen and improve the humanitarian
situation in the country are highly appreciated.

China welcomes the important progress achieved in
the intra-Yemeni talks in Sweden. The United Nations
and Special Envoy Griffiths overcame all manner
of difficulties and worked with the Yemeni parties
with great perseverance. Secretary-General Guterres
went to Sweden in person to lend his support to the
consultations and push for breakthroughs in the Yemeni
issue, which China applauds. The Kingdom of Sweden
hosted the consultations and members of the group of
19 attended the event, making important contributions
to the overall success of the consultations. The Yemeni
parties made important decisions in the interest of
their country's future and the well-being of the Yemeni
people, thereby ending the impasse, which we welcome.

We are pleased to note the important outcomes of
the consultations in Sweden, namely, the agreement on
a ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah, a mutual understanding on
Taiz and an executive mechanism on activating aprisoner
exchange agreement. More significantly, the Yemeni
parties agreed to host the next round of consultations,
scheduled for the end of January, to discuss a framework
document to facilitate further political negotiations in
Yemen. The Swedish consultations therefore mark a
good start and their significance is threefold.

First, the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah governorate
was achieved ahead of schedule, which will help
to prevent any further deterioration of the Yemeni
economy or humanitarian situation. Secondly, the
event has the potential to become a key turning point
in the situation in Yemen, as well as the starting point
for a new political process that will help the parties in
Yemen to build mutual trust. Thirdly, it brings hope to
the people of Yemen and the international community
as a whole. It is inspiring and boosts morale.

Having said all of that, the challenges now
confronting the political efforts to resolve the Yemeni
issue are also threefold, to say the least.

First, Yemen's national security and economic woes
have been snowballing for many years. The problems
are chronic and deep-rooted and defy an easy fix,
while the broader context remains fragile. Secondly,
a ceasefire has yet to be achieved across the whole of
Yemen. We cannot afford to underestimate the risk of
further military friction or conflict escalation. Thirdly,
major differences remain between the intra-Yemeni
parties and the foundations of confidence are still shaky.
It is particularly important to avoid misunderstandings
and accidents.

As the situation currently stands, we believe that
the international community should rise to action on
three fronts.

First, we must ensure the implementation in good
faith of the consultations in Sweden. Efforts should
be made to push the Yemeni parties to implement an
immediate ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah governorate within
the agreed time frame, complete the redeployment
of the respective forces as scheduled, implement the
prisoner exchange agreement and seek solutions to
the Taiz issue. By fully exercising the United Nations
oversight function in the port of Al-Hudaydah and
taking advantage of the favourable external conditions,
including the ceasefire agreement and redeployment of
troops, the United Nations should work to ensure safe,
swift and unhindered access to Yemen for commercial
and humanitarian supplies to be delivered as soon as
possible to the Yemeni population, effectively reduce
the risk of famine and provide the injured and sick with
much-needed treatment.

Secondly, we must build on the Sweden
consultations and facilitate a sustainable and effective
dialogue in the negotiations process. The Yemeni
parties should continue their consultations on the
opening of Sana'a airport to commercial flights and the
payment of salaries to Yemen's public-sector staff. The
parties should agree at a practicable agreement as soon
as possible and build greater mutual trust. We look
forward to the parties in Yemen reaching an agreement
on a framework document for political negotiations
at the end of January to implement a ceasefire across
the whole of Yemen and establish a comprehensive
package, including political and security arrangements.

Thirdly, the United Nations must continue to play
a leading role in mediation and good offices. The
Council should continue to lend political support to the
intra-Yemeni peace talks and urge regional countries
to continue to provide constructive assistance to that
end. The international community should increase its
humanitarian assistance and provide targeted support,
including food, medical and financial assistance. Yemen
should receive support in improving its economic
situation, stabilizing prices and ensuring the safe,
timely and unhindered humanitarian access to meet the
basic needs of the Yemeni population.

There is no alternative to the political track in
striving to resolve the Yemeni issue. There is no military
solution that can secure lasting peace. The international
community should maintain Yemen's sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity, while
supporting efforts to achieve an inclusive solution,
through dialogue and negotiation, based on resolution
2216 (2015), including the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its implementation mechanism and the
outcomes of Yemen's National Dialogue Conference.

China has been consistently committed to advancing
the political settlement process in Yemen. The Chinese
Ambassador to Yemen was present throughout the entire
process of the consultations held in Sweden. China,
along with the rest of the international community, will
continue to support the United Nations in advancing
the Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned political settlement
process, with a view to reaching an early solution
leading to a comprehensive, lasting and effective
settlement of the Yemeni issue.

