Mr. Sautter (Germany): I very much thank Under- Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Special Envoy Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for their briefings. I, too, would like to extend a warm welcome to Richard Mills here back in New York. We see light and we see shadow for Abyei. Let me start with the light. With regard to the political process, we see some major positive regional developments. The signing of the Juba peace agreement between the transitional Government of the Sudan and the armed groups is a historic achievement. There is a huge potential to move the Sudan towards comprehensive peace. We urge those that continue to stand outside that process to become part of the solution. In that context, we commend the role of South Sudan in helping to bring about the peace deal. We believe that the Sudan and South Sudan should now take advantage of the high level of confidence in bilateral relations to seriously engage in joint talks that would lead to improving the situation in Abyei, especially at the intercommunal level. In the meantime, the presence of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) remains key to ensuring peace and security. That brings me to the shadow to which I referred. The security situation in Abyei remains tense. We have heard that in the briefings. The deadly intercommunal clashes in recent months and attacks against peacekeepers underscored that. Like other speakers before me, I strongly condemn any violence. That includes all attacks against peacekeepers. In that context, let me make it very clear that the host nation must investigate any attacks against UNISFA, and it has an obligation to hold those responsible to account. We thank Ethiopia for its long-standing commitment as a troop contributor to UNISFA in that context. Let me make some remarks on the UNISFA mandate and its implementation. First of all, we agree with the recommendation of the Secretary-General that the mandate should be extended by six months. However, it is important for us that there be no business as usual. The Security Council has sent a clear message that UNISFA needs to adapt. It is therefore with disappointment that we note that the adjustments to the mandate made by the Council have not yet been implemented on the ground. The recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1019) shows that the mission is not fit for purpose. That is mainly due to obstruction by the host nation. The mission must be able to fulfil its mandate and respond to emerging challenges. A stronger police component within UNISFA is essential for that. We therefore again strongly urge the Sudan to issue visas without further delay, particularly to allow the mandated increase in the UNISFA police personnel. Mr. Lacroix strongly underlined that point in his briefing, and we fully share that reading. Without an effective police capacity, we simply run the risk of a deteriorating security situation. Furthermore, we support the call of the Secretary- General and urge the Sudan and South Sudan to work together with UNISFA on a road map to establish an Abyei police service. Tangible progress in the establishment of joint interim institutions, such as the Abyei Area administration and the Abyei police service, is crucial to building enhanced national capacities. We also see a continued need to strengthen the civilian component of the mission in order to support the efforts of the communities in Abyei to reconcile and create enduring peaceful relations. On the positive side, we note the efforts of the South Sudan co-Chair of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee and the Juba-appointed Chief Administrator in promoting women's participation in the peace process. We encourage further steps by both sides towards the full, effective and meaningful participation of women at all stages of the peace process. Above and beyond, we highly recognize the crucial and visible role of Abyei's women in the prevention of the coronavirus disease at the local level. Let me conclude by drawing the Council's attention to human rights monitoring. The mandate needs to ensure continued and effective human rights monitoring, including of any sexual and gender-based violence and violations and abuses of human rights, including those committed against women and children. We therefore welcome the Secretary-General's recommendation to deploy human rights expertise to UNISFA, as mandated by the Council.
