Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): As
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), I am pleased to brief the
Security Council on the main activities of the
Committee during the six months since the last joint
briefing held on 12 November 2008. Among the main
aspects, I would like to refer to the adoption of the
Committee's annual programme of work and on
outreach activities, assistance and cooperation with
relevant organizations.

In accordance with paragraph 9 of resolution
1810 (2008), the Committee completed preparation of
its programme of work covering the period from
1 February 2009 to 31 January 2010. The programme,
which was circulated as a Security Council document,
calls for intensification of ongoing activities and for
developing new activities. The programme seeks first
to increase the Committee's knowledge of the status of
implementation by encouraging non-reporting States to
submit a first report and other States to provide
additional information reflecting progress towards a
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004);
secondly, to pursue the Committee's dialogue with
States on such progress and to organize and participate
in outreach events at the national, regional and
subregional levels; thirdly, as Ambassador Mayr-
Harting mentioned, to enhance the Committee's
cooperation with other international bodies, including
the Security Council's Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001);
and, fourthly, to engage actively with States and
relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations for the purpose of sharing experiences
and lessons learned.

Moreover, the programme seeks to strengthen the
Committee's role of facilitating technical assistance in

the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by
developing further its clearing-house function in
matching offers and requests for assistance and by
encouraging and taking advantage of voluntary
financial contributions to assist States in addressing
their needs.

A major focus of the Committee's work in 2009
will be to organize a comprehensive review of the
status of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
The review will assess the evolution of risks and
threats in the areas covered by the resolution, address
specific critical issues that have not yet been
addressed, and identify new approaches for the
implementation of the resolution. The modalities of the
review, to be completed no later than 31 January 2010,
were circulated in document S/2009/170 of 1 April
2009.

In order to implement its 2009 programme more
efficiently, the Committee has established four working
groups open to all its members. They focus on the
following topics: first, national implementation and
monitoring, including the comprehensive review;
secondly, assistance; thirdly, transparency and
outreach; and fourthly, cooperation with international
organizations and subsidiary bodies, including the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the 1267
Committee.

(spoke in English)

Outreach activities have been intensified to
encourage and promote the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Since the last joint briefing in
November 2008, 25 conferences and workshops have
been attended by the Chairman or members of the
Committee and by the experts assisting the Committee.
The Committee's outreach has been worldwide,
covering meetings in Africa, Asia and the Pacific
region, Europe, North America, Latin America and the
Caribbean. The purpose of such participation has
ranged from raising awareness to the encouragement of
submitting national reports on the status of
implementation, and from sharing the experiences and
lessons learned in seeking solutions to explaining
technical issues in the resolution and encouraging the
use of methods and tools to facilitate the preparation of
implementation plans or assistance requests.
Since November 2008, the Committee has
continued to engage in several types of outreach
activities, summarized as follows.

First, the United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs (UNODA) has organized regional workshops
specific to the 1540 Committee. There were three such
regional workshops on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), focusing on building the
capacity of Member States with respect to border and
export controls. The first was organized for the
Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR) countries
in see Paulo, Brazil, in late November 2008. The
second workshop, held in Doha, Qatar in March 2009,
was organized for the countries of the Gulf
Cooperation Council and the neighbouring area. The
third, held in Port Vila, Vanuatu in late April and early
May, was organized for United Nations Member States
in the Pacific Islands region. The Committee expresses
its appreciation to the host countries and to the
sponsors of those events: the European Union and the
Government of Norway, who were joined by the United
States in the case of the Brazil and Qatar workshops
and the United Kingdom in the case of the Qatar
workshop, and by New Zealand for the workshop in
Vanuatu.

Secondly, regional workshops were organized in
collaboration with other United Nations bodies. In
addition to the common strategy workshops for non-
reporting and late reporting African States, organized
by the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC/TPB),
the UNODC/TPB co-organized workshops on the
implementation of the international instruments dealing
with counter-terrorism with other regional bodies, such
as with the League of Arab States in Cairo in
November 2008, the Organization of American States
(OAS) in the Dominican Republic in February 2009
and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe (OSCE) in Bucharest in March 2009. The 1540
Committee expresses appreciation to UNODC and the
regional bodies and host Governments for their
valuable role in organizing these workshops.

Thirdly, other organizations organized meetings.
Those conferences and workshops covered subjects
ranging from the broad issue of implementation of the
international instruments on non-proliferation and
counter-terrorism to a direct focus on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), and from
the various non-proliferation measures in the nuclear,
chemical or biological area to a sharper focus on
specific issues such as proliferation, financing, illicit
trafficking and maritime security. Such events included

international and regional workshops on the
implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC) organized by the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW); a
European Union-sponsored meeting on the CWC and
non-proliferation; an OSCE meeting on security
cooperation, including non-proliferation initiatives; an
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
symposium on nuclear security; a conference of the
Combined Joint Operations from the Sea Centre of
Excellence; OAS meetings on non-proliferation,
resolution 1540 (2004) and counter-terrorism; and
meetings of the Financial Action Task Force.

Fourthly, there were country-specific events. The
1540 Committee has participated in country-specific
workshops of particular relevance to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In February
2009, a 1540 Committee expert participated in a
workshop in Tashkent devoted to the implementation
of the resolution in Uzbekistan. We appreciate the
initiative taken by the Government of Uzbekistan and
the Center for Nonproliferation Studies of the
Monterey Institute of International Studies in
organizing this event, which facilitated intensive
dialogue with officials from different ministries. It
should be noted that a similar dialogue with officials
from the Dominican Republic was made possible in
tandem with a UNODC-sponsored meeting of the
Caribbean countries held there in February 2009.

(spoke in French)

With regard to assistance, as encouraged in
resolution 1810 (2008), the Committee is intensifying
efforts to further develop its clearing-house function
for channelling assistance to Member States by
matching, as appropriate, assistance requests with
offers of assistance. The number of specific assistance
requests submitted under the Committee's recently
distributed assistance template has now reached six,
comprising five from Member States and one from a
subregional organization, the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), on behalf of its region. Those requests
concern assistance in drafting legislation, organizing
workshops on border and export controls and
appointing a regional 1540 implementation
coordinator. They have been referred to Member States
and organizations that may be in a position to provide
the requested assistance, and some offers have already
been made.

On cooperation with other bodies and
organizations, our joint statement as Chairmen of the
CTC, the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee
and the 1540 Committee provides more information on
the progress that our Committees have made in
strengthening our cooperation during the past six
months. We expect to continue these joint efforts in
inviting intergovernmental organizations to contribute
to promoting the objectives of the three Committees.

Towards that end, during my visits to Washington
and Vienna last December and again this month as the
1540 Committee Chairman, I was able to meet senior
staff of the OAS, OSCE and the IAEA to discuss new
steps to improve the Committee's relations with those
organizations. I intend to carry out similar
consultations with other organizations, for example,
the World Customs Organization, in the near future, in
order to strengthen their cooperation with the
Committee to support their roles in facilitating States'
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Improving
the cooperation between international organizations,
States and the Committee is also among the major
objectives of the comprehensive review taking place
during the rest of this year.

