Ms. Sison (United States of America): The United
States thanks the Governments of France and Italy
for taking the initiative to rally the international
community to protect our world's common heritage
from being used to further armed conflicts.

Over the past two decades, we have seen damage
to and destruction of our shared cultural heritage on
an unprecedented scale. Those engaged in conflict and
terror deliberately destroy cultural property to create
fear, undermine Governments and cause animosity
among different groups within a society. The wanton
devastation by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS), Al-Qaida and others in Iraq and Syria, by the
Taliban in Afghanistan, and by other groups elsewhere
has taken a devastating toll not only on human lives, but
also on our common cultural heritage. This destruction
tears at the very fabric of our societies.

The policy of the United States Government
is clear. The unlawful destruction or trafficking of
cultural heritage is deplorable. We unequivocally
oppose it and we will take all feasible steps to halt,
limit and discourage it. The United States seeks to
hold accountable those who engage in the illegal trade
of cultural property and the perpetrators of deliberate
cultural heritage destruction.

Enhanced international law enforcement cooperation
to counter these destructive and destabilizing activities
is already showing results. For example, the United
States shared information with our international
partners about the activities of the deceased Abu
Sayyaf, a former high-ranking ISIS official who was
responsible for financing the group's terrorist activities,
including through the illicit sale of antiquities. Growing
international coordination and cooperation among law
enforcement and other agencies enabled the United
States to take direct action in order to seek the recovery
of these items.

We believe that there are no one-size-fits-all
strategies for cultural heritage preservation in armed
conflict. Complex situations around the world warrant
a variety of responses. Many States have demonstrated
the ability to safeguard their cultural treasures in
conflict zones during times of crisis. It is a long-
standing United States policy to preserve cultural
heritage in situ whenever possible, thereby avoiding
the need to remove cultural property from its country
of origin.

The United States looks forward to strengthened
international cooperation and to finding new channels
of cooperation for the protection and preservation of
cultural heritage in armed conflicts in order to preserve
this priceless inheritance for future generations.

