Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April and to express
my appreciation to your Government and to the
Security Council for their unremitting support and
close review of events in Lebanon. I would like to
express our deep gratitude to the South African
delegation for their leadership last month. Lebanon
greatly values the efforts of this distinguished body and
appreciates its significant accomplishments. I also wish
to express our gratitude to Mr. Pascoe for his briefing.

What can we say about the situation in the
Middle East? It is a conflict almost 60 years old, one
which resulted in an uprooted nation, with a majority
of its population transformed into refugees. It is a
history of a blocked peace, an obstructed horizon,
repetitive wars, immense pain and suffering and an
emerging radicalism. We all need to draw lessons from
these injustices in order to save the world from future
violence and extremism.
Five years ago, Arab leaders held a summit in
Beirut and adopted the principles of an Arab peace
initiative, whereby two States would be established,
lands would be restored, the refugee problem would be
addressed on the basis of General Assembly resolution
194 (III) and normal relations with Israel would be
established with a full peace. Five years ago, Israel
rejected that initiative.

Because of that, today the Middle East is sadly
not so different than before. Israel's colonialist policies
are pursued with the same level of determination and
short-sightedness, to the detriment of all - the
construction of the imprisonment wall, the continued
growth of settlements and the collective punishment of
an entire population.

On 28 and 29 March of this year, Arab leaders
held another summit in Riyadh and reactivated their
Peace Initiative of 2002 with a follow-up mechanism.
On 18 April, the Arab ministerial committee in charge
of the Peace Initiative held a meeting and decided to
establish a ministerial delegation to promote their
principles of peace. This delegation is to hold meetings
with the United Nations Secretary-General, the
members of the Security Council, the European Union
and the Middle East Quartet.

That meeting reaffirmed the Arab commitment
for a comprehensive, just and peaceful resolution of the
Arab-Israeli conflict. However, the same level of
commitment is required from Israel in order to achieve
this peace and to create confidence-building measures.
The Arab summit also called for an international
conference - with the participation of all regional and
international parties, including Israel, under the
auspices of the United Nations and of the Quartet - in
order to relaunch direct negotiations on all tracks. This
initiative is an historic opportunity that must be seized
to ensure peace, security and stability in the region.

Turning to Lebanon, I wish to emphasize that
Lebanon is committed to the full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), abides by its
obligations under that resolution and looks forward to a
permanent ceasefire that will guarantee Lebanon's
stability and security. However, Israel's repeated
overflights into Lebanese airspace, its continued
occupation of the northern part of the Lebanese town
of Ghajar in breach of the Blue Line and its continued
detention of Lebanese civilians in Israeli prisons are all
violations of international law and exacerbate an
already tense situation.

While those violations should not be linked to the
enforcement of the embargo on illegal arms, Lebanon
has taken a series of necessary measures to curb illegal
arms activities. To that end, it has deployed over 8,000
troops on its eastern and northern frontiers with Syria,
and it is cooperating with the German Government in a
pilot project to improve its border security.

The situation south of the Litani River remains
generally calm, where cooperation and coordination
between the Lebanese army and the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) have been
especially good. Any other and different allegations
would not be accepted. In addition, UNIFIL's maritime
force has been successful in securing our coastal
waters. Furthermore, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
has offered to send an evaluation mission to assess the
security situation along our eastern and northern
borders, with which we will cooperate fully. We
consider border control and the prevention of the
illegal entry of arms to be vital issues of national
security.

Cluster bombs remain a continuing threat to the
civilian population in south Lebanon. We urge the
international community to press Israel to submit all
relevant information as to where these bombs were
dropped and to submit maps for the landmines they
planted during their aggression. Any other allegation
by Israel aimed at diverting attention away from this
humanitarian crime is a subterfuge that must be
rejected.

In the meantime, the Lebanese Government
welcomes the progress made by United Nations
cartographers on the Sheba'a Farms region and looks
forward to United Nations recommendations in this
regard that would echo the proposal contained in
Lebanon's seven-point plan calling for the withdrawal
of Israel from the Lebanese Sheba'a Farms and placing
the latter under United Nations jurisdiction.

Lebanon is also pursuing the vital matter of the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon to safeguard liberties and
to put an end to impunity in our country. The Tribunal
is crucial for peace and stability in Lebanon, which has
had a long and tragic history of political assassinations
with impunity.

The world cannot afford another five years of
rejection and unilateral initiatives. The world cannot
afford another five years of conditionality and mistrust.
The world cannot afford another five years of
destruction and death.

Peace is not a luxury; it is a necessity for a better
future and the prevalence of moderation. Peace will
ensure life, liberty, dignity, prosperity and justice for
all citizens of the area.

