Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Let
me begin by thanking the Russian presidency of the
Council for convening this important meeting. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo,
our colleague of the Netherlands and the observer of the
European Union for their very informative briefings.

I would also like to commend the factual and
balanced nature of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/602), which has been submitted to us and whose
scope fully corresponds to his mandate.

The Security Council's responsibilities are
measured by the variety and complexity of international
peace and security issues it has to deal with, including
non-proliferation. We spoke briefly about this issue
two days ago during the debate on North Africa and
the Middle East (see S/PV.8293), where the challenges
are immense. In this context, the Iranian nuclear issue
is a textbook case; it confirms the role of impetus and
monitoring that the Security Council can and must play.
This was demonstrated by the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2231 (2015), on 20 July 2015, which
sealed the agreement reached in Vienna, the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), of which the
Council is the guarantor.

The JCPOA is the result of the perseverance of the
international community and a common will to provide
a robust response to our shared security interests. The
JPCOA also embodies the pragmatic and demanding
multilateralism to which my country is deeply
committed. The collapse of this major achievement
would mark a serious step backwards for the region, for
the non-proliferation regime, and for all of our security,
which would potentially have serious consequences.
This is why I want now to renew with force the
commitment reaffirmed by President Macron alongside
his British and German partners, and supported by the
other Europeans, on 8 May. France, which has worked
tirelessly throughout the negotiations to ensure the
robust nature of this agreement, remains determined to
ensure its implementation and preserve it.

In this regard, we have noted with regret and concern
the decision of the United States to withdraw from the
JCPOA. However, the agreement remains in place, and
this decision should not affect the implementation by
the parties to this agreement of their commitments.
France will continue to work with the parties involved
in this collective framework. Let us be clear - as
long as Iran fulfils its nuclear commitments under the
JCPOA, France will meet its own. We are therefore
determined to ensure as far as possible the maintenance
of the economic relations with Iran permitted by the
agreement. The agreement was designed specifically to
ensure that Iran's nuclear programme is not diverted for
military purposes. That founding goal continues to be
met, as the Secretary-General recalls in his report. In
accordance with its mandate, the International Atomic
Energy Agency reconfirmed in its report of 24 May
that Iran is in compliance with its commitments under
the JCPOA.

I now come to my third point, which concerns
resolution 2231 (2015) and the report before us. Our
collective commitments do not end with the JCPOA
framework. For its part, Iran must respect all its
commitments under the resolution, including those
under annex B. However, the Secretary-General's
report identifies various elements of Iran's continued
non-compliance with several of its provisions, which
are sources of significant concern. I would refer to
Iran's ballistic activities and the transfer of ballistic
capabilities and technologies, in particular to the
Houthis, as documented in the report of the Secretary-
General. The Security Council has on several occasions
condemned the firing of ballistic missiles against Saudi
Arabia. This aspect is in addition to the information
reported on seizures of weapons of probable Iranian
origin and elements relating to violations of asset
freezes and travel bans. However, I recall that all
States, first and foremost Iran, must comply with those
provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). In particular, any
activity involving the transfer of assistance, missiles,
technologies and ballistic capabilities to State or
non-State actors is contrary to Security Council
resolutions and must cease immediately.

In conclusion, I recall the importance ofthe JCPOA,
which is both an essential instrument of the international
non-proliferation regime and one of the cornerstones
of stability in the region as a whole. Anything that
weakens it therefore poses a direct risk to our collective
security. The assurances given to us by the JCPOA in
the nuclear field should enable us to address other issues
of concern for regional security. This is the thrust of
President Macron's proposal to engage in discussions
towards a broader four-pillar agreement that preserves
the JCPOA, provides a long-term framework for Iran's
nuclear programme, constrains the most destabilizing
developments in Iran's ballistic activities, and ensures
that Iran ceases to play a destabilizing role in the
region. I would assure Council members of France's
full and clear commitment, alongside our partners, on
these points, as well as on the implementation of all
our commitments.

