We deeply appreciate the briefing delivered today by Special Representative Swan and his efforts on the ground in Somalia. The United States supports the efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and will continue to stand with the Mission to support Somalia and its people. The next months in Somalia are particularly important for the future trajectory of the country. The constructive dialogue among Somali leaders over the past several months has led to the development of an electoral model. While we recognize that the structure agreed upon does not achieve the one-person, one-vote model that most Somali people desire, we are encouraged by the peaceful process that led to the agreement and the manner in which the Federal Government and the federal member states used dialogue to reach that agreement. We urge the Somali Federal Government and the federal member states to continue that dialogue and achieve consensus on all electoral process matters, from the composition of the electoral management bodies to Somaliland seats in Parliament. The United States strongly urges all parties to hold firm on the 30 per cent quota for women to which Somalia has committed. Lastly, we encourage the further consideration and timely implementation of the draft national election security plan, noting that the scheduled start of parliamentary elections on 1 December is just days away. Conflict and terrorism remain serious impediments to Somalia's march towards long-term stability and development. The United States is committed to supporting the African-led efforts to address the threats that impact not just Somalia but the region as a whole. We condemn in the strongest terms Al-Shabaab's continued attacks against innocent Somali civilians, humanitarian workers, Government officials and institutions. We offer our sincere condolences to the families of those who lost their lives in the attack in Mogadishu on 17 November. With regard to the Government of Somalia's update to the Somalia transition plan, it is important that we fully support and cooperate with the work of the Security Council-mandated independent assessment. We need to prepare for the February 2021 discussion on the mandate of the African Union Mission in Somalia in order to ensure that it is positioned to effectively meet the mandate objectives and to enable Somalia to take greater security responsibilities. The United States continues to be concerned about Al-Shabaab's ability to accrue large amounts of financing for its activities through illicit means. Al-Shabaab continues to expand its revenue base through informal taxation and the manipulation of formal and informal institutions. Some reports indicate that Al-Shabaab earns over $50 million per year through illegal means. We laud Somalia's recent progress in curbing terrorism financing and encourage that the country continue to work with the Panel of Experts on Somalia and international partners. Unfortunately, the triple shock of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, extreme flooding and severe locust infestations has compounded Somalia's already complex humanitarian emergency. The United States is Somalia's largest humanitarian and development donor, providing more than $505 million in humanitarian assistance funding this fiscal year. That includes supplemental funding both for the COVID-19 health crisis and the locust response. We remain steadfast in our support for the people of Somalia and call on others to do more. We are encouraged by the efforts of the Somali leadership to make progress on the country's re-entry into the international financial system. Somalia has implemented significant economic reforms in recent years, and in March reached the first stage of debt relief through the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative. As a Paris Club member and Somalia's largest bilateral donor, the United States has worked with the Somali Government to reduce and reschedule its decades-old United States loans. The United States is confident that Somalia is on a path towards stability and prosperity. Lastly, the United States would like to highlight the ongoing and important work of the United Nations in preventing sexual and gender-based violence. We commend the efforts to ensure accountability and train the Somali authorities on best practices. Those efforts are making a real difference, and we applaud the shared commitment to tackling that terrible challenge.
