Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): It gives me great pleasure to begin by
extending to you, Mr. President, our sincere
congratulations.

We would also like to take this opportunity to express
our condolences on the death of Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye,
who lost his life as a martyr in the performance of his
mission as the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Angola, while carrying out his noble
humanitarian effort.

I would also like to express our sincere appreciation
for your response, Mr. President, and for the response of
the other members of the Security Council, to the request
made by the Arab Group to hold this emergency meeting to
consider the serious decision, taken by the extremist Israeli
Government on 21 June, to adopt the programme declared
by the Israeli Prime Minister on 18 June aimed at
strengthening Israel's illegitimate grip on Jerusalem. That
provocative decision was intended to expand the municipal
boundaries of the city of Jerusalem to include Israeli
settlements on the West Bank, to establish greater
municipal authority and to annex more occupied Palestinian
territories into the municipality of Jerusalem, thereby

 
erasing the Arab character of the city and altering its
status from a Holy City characterized by love and
tolerance into a city that is totally within the Israeli grip.
This would result in erasing its Arab identity and altering
its demographic composition while Judaizing it totally.

While my country believes that this Israeli decision
represents one aggression in a series of Israeli aggressions
against Arab and Palestinian occupied territories, we
strongly and categorically condemn and reject it. The
Syrian Arab Republic regards that decision as not only a
provocation of the Palestinian and Arab peoples, in
particular, and of the peoples of the world,
including Muslims and Christians, in general but also as
a flagrant violation of international law and the
resolutions of the Security Council, especially the 16
resolutions the Security Council has already adopted on
Jerusalem. Security Council resolution 478 (1980) stresses
in paragraph 3 that,

"all legislative and administrative measures and
actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power, which
have altered or purport to alter the character and
status of the Holy City of Jerusalem, and in
particular the recent 'basic law' on Jerusalem, are
null and void".

This new Israeli decision is yet another flagrant
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and
of the Hague Convention of 1907. The Syrian Arab
Republic considers this new Israeli decision as null and
void and of no legal consequence.

The new plan of the Israeli Prime Minister is within
the framework of systematic procedures and steps aimed
at destroying the peace process in its entirety. The
decisions taken by the Israeli Government with regard to
Jerusalem and its policies of annexing occupied Arab
territories are the practical embodiment of the policies of
"ethnic cleansing" that were strongly denounced and
condemned by the international community with regard to
Bosnia, for example. These measures taken by Israel
remind us of the cantonization policy adopted by the
racist regime of South Africa before the victory over
apartheid.

The process of "ethnic cleansing" conducted by
Israel against the Palestinian people has led millions of
Palestinians to leave their homeland and, if this continues,
will force scores of thousands more to go into exile.
Palestinians, who have always lived on the land of their
forefathers, now hold only 0.5 per cent of their land;
 

while the Israelis, who have brutally and through repression
and mass massacres confiscated the land, control 99 per
cent of all Palestinian land.

It is noteworthy that international warnings have been
addressed to certain countries. Navies are being moved on
the high seas and planes are being redeployed, While those
who commit those actions do not bother to denounce in
their statements or in a few words Israel's actions as being
contradictory to human rights and to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations and the Geneva
Conventions.

Scores of resolutions have been adopted by the
Security Council and the General Assembly to demand that
Israel withdraw from the occupied Arab territories, cease
the confiscation of land and refrain from taking any action
that would alter the geographic, demographic and legal
status of the occupied territories. However, Israel has
treated those resolutions with total disregard. We believe
that this raises the following questions.

Why are laws, resolutions and international sanctions
made applicable to certain States but not to Israel? Why
does Israel remain an outlaw? Why does it challenge and
defy these laws and the Council?

In this context, since the Israeli Prime Minister took
power he has taken the following actions in contradiction
of Security Council and General Assembly resolutions:
digging a tunnel next to the Al-Aqsa Mosque; establishing
a new settlement in Jebel Abu Ghneim and planning for the
construction of 6,500 housing units; undertaking
archaeological excavations at Burj al-Laqlaq, within
occupied East Jerusalem, as part of Israeli plans to build a
settlement in the heart of occupied Jerusalem; providing
protection to extremist settlers and support for their
attempts to confiscate housing units such as those in
Silwan, in East Jerusalem; confiscating additional occupied
Arab lands in order to build settlements; making plans to
build new settlements and encircling roads; demolishing
Palestinian houses and withdrawing Palestinian identity
cards; and persisting in not adhering to agreements,
commitments and the destruction of the peace process. The
list is very long.

This pattern of behaviour by the Israeli Government
would lead us to say that the accumulation of oppression,
injustice and tragedy to which the Palestinian people and
the other Arab citizens in occupied Arab territories are
subjected can only lead to an explosion endangering the
security and stability of the Whole region. It is
 

unimaginable for those who live under occupation to
accept it or to adapt and adjust themselves to the practices
of the Israeli occupation.

The Israeli Prime Minister recently declared that his
Government Will continue to build settlements in every
place in the Holy City, and reiterated his commitment to
build the settlement in Jebel Abu Ghneim in defiance of
international resolutions and calls of condemnation. The
President of the Israeli Knesset associated himself with
his Prime Minister by saying:

"The appropriate Israeli response to the
statement by the United States Secretary of
State with regard to Jerusalem lies in the
intensification of settler activities in the city
and the implementation of Israeli designs
Without heed for any declarations or positions
against it."

The policies of the extremist Israeli Government
have led to a total paralysis of the peace process on all of
its tracks. If it were not for the deceptive appearance of
movement once in a while that does not deal with the
matters of substance on the Palestinian track, during the
last two years, the world would have seen the true picture
in a tangible manner and would have realized that the
Israeli Prime Minister has completely stopped the peace
process from his first day in office, especially by having
followed the policies of his ancestors in the expulsion of
Arabs from their lands and bringing in new Jewish
settlers from all over the world to replace them.

Nevertheless, the international community is about
to discover the glaring truth, since the conflict between
the extremists in the Israeli Government which was about
only 2 per cent of the lands of the West Bank, has
become a very explosive issue which may affect the
American sponsor as well.

Syria will never give up one iota of its land, and will
not permit regression from what has been achieved
through previous negotiations. We will always insist on
resuming the negotiations from the point where they
stopped. In this regard, we would like to reiterate that
strategic option of the Arabs for the establishment of a
just and lasting peace is based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978), which
all demand the complete Israeli withdrawal from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967, and
from southern Lebanon and the Bekaa to the recognized
international boundaries. Moveover, Syria will always do
 

its best to guarantee the legitimate national rights of the
Palestinian people, including the right to self-determination
and to the establishment of its independent State on its own
soil.

The Israeli Government, by turning its back on its
agreements, pledges and commitments reached during the
peace process that started in Madrid in 1991, is solely
responsible for destroying the peace process. While we
appreciate the increasing international awareness of the
reality of Israeli policies and their objectives, which are
inimical to peace, we would like to urge the sponsors of the
peace process, the countries of the European Union and
friendly and peace-loving States, to continue their serious
work in order to compel Israel to commit itself to the
implementation of the resolutions of international legitimacy
and to fulfil the agreements, pledges and commitments
which have been agreed upon as well as to resume the
negotiations on both the Syrian and Lebanese tracks from
the points at which they stopped.

In view of this bitter reality at which we have arrived
through what is called the "Israeli political kitchen", and
the misleading attempts of the head of the Israeli
Government to justify its measures, the Security Council is
now called upon to bear its responsibilities in the
maintenance of international peace and security by
defending its credibility and its resolutions, by having Israel
respect these resolutions, by condemning the Israeli
decision to expand the geographic boundaries of Jerusalem
and by compelling Israel to rescind this serious and
provocative decision which, among other measures,
represents another time bomb that would lead to an
explosion of the whole region. The Security Council should
also reiterate Israel's commitment to apply its relevant
resolutions and those of the General Assembly, particularly
resolution 446 (1979) to the effect of establishing an
international commission of the Security Council to monitor
and follow up the situation in order to prevent settler
activities in Jerusalem and the Arab and Palestinian
occupied territories.

At a time when we support the Palestinian people in
order to guarantee their legitimate rights, we would like to
urge the international community to provide all types of
assistance and support to them.

In the light of the above, we look forward to the
Security Council's taking a position on the side of the right
and the just, a position of determination to protect
international peace and security. The Security Council
should adopt the necessary and mandatory measures and

 
procedures that would prevent Israel from implementing
its plan to expand the boundaries of Jerusalem,
particularly since the Council is duty-bound to apply the
provisions of the Charter with regard to giving effect to
its resolutions without any double standard. Here we
would like to recall these Security Council resolutions:
252 (1968), 267 (1969), 271 (1969), 298 (1971), 446
(1979), 452 (1979), 465 (1980) and 476 (1980). We
believe that a mere expression of concern or denunciation
by this Council is no longer enough to have Israel change
its aggressive decisions and settler and expansionist plans,
either in the Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, or
in other Arab occupied territories, including the occupied
Syrian Golan and southern Lebanon.

The issue requires that the Security Council move
effectively and decisively and take the necessary practical
measures to rescind the decision and plan of the Israeli
Government to expand the boundaries of Jerusalem and
to bring pressure to bear on Israel in order for it to
resume the talks on all tracks from the point where they
stopped. In this regard, it is necessary to reaffirm the
necessity of avoiding any double standard, especially with
regard to the maintenance of peace and security, and most
particularly when it comes to an issue such as Jerusalem.
This is so especially because Israel's continuation of this
extremist policy would lead to the destruction of the
peace process and would endanger security and stability
in the region.

