Ms. Malcorra: Mr. President, allow me to start
by thanking you and this Council for providing this
forum for discussion of matters of significance for our
work to better serve the peacekeeping and political
field presences serviced by the Department of Field
Support (DFS). Allow me also to welcome our force
commanders to this forum, because I think their
presence really adds value to our discussion.

Alain has already referred to the work done in the
New Horizon document. DFS has worked closely with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) in
the creation of this non-paper. As the Council knows,
one of the key enablers of the New Horizon non-paper
will be the Support Strategy. We started to discuss this
Strategy with the Council at the Council retreat earlier
this year, and we intend to maintain close consultations
with Member States throughout the process. Our
overarching goal is to provide improved support
services with quality, speed and efficiency, and we
believe that there are clear opportunities to achieve
these goals.

I am absolutely convinced that DFS must
improve its response to the evolving and increasing
needs for support, and to do so in a holistic manner.
The need to develop an agenda ambitious enough to
tackle these demands and to give all parties involved
the opportunity to engage in a good conversation
underpins our efforts. Throughout the process, DFS
will develop options, outline opportunities to improve
and present sound business plans to support the
decision process.

With this in mind, on Monday 3 August, we
issued to all Member States a mid-point non-paper on
the Support Strategy, which should be in your hands by
now. This non-paper follows the release of the New
Horizon document and is aimed at taking stock of our
strategic thinking, while we start work on detailed
proposals and business cases, including cost-benefit
analyses. We anticipate that this process will culminate
in a report of the Secretary-General to the General
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session, next spring.

Some matters for discussion will have, in one
way or the other, implications for rules, regulations and
resource management, which will require review and
endorsement for change by the Member States. The
approval of the intergovernmental bodies will be
sought in due course to achieve the support
transformation envisioned.

The DFS Support Strategy non-paper reflects a
high-level view and a fresh approach to supporting
field missions. It also builds on the tools approved by
the General Assembly to improve our operations. The
development of this work takes into account the
following key drivers.

The first is the need to update the regulatory
framework to strike the right balance between the
demands for effective delivery and the demands to
comply with rules and regulations. As it is
unacceptable to excuse ourselves using the imperatives
of the operational demands to justify shortcuts, it is
also unacceptable to hide behind the existing
framework without questioning its continued
applicability and, where relevant, without seeking the
appropriate empowerment to do our job better. Quite
often, support operations are hindered by processes
that have not been revisited for a long time or have not
been adjusted to the current realities on the ground and
to a fast-paced operational tempo.

Secondly, it is imperative to strike a balance
between the risk to mandate delivery associated with
delays in mission deployment and the risks stemming
from increased operational empowerment. It is easier
to measure the financial exposures than to measure the
risk of not meeting the needs of the individuals we
serve. We must do more to find the right balance.
These proposals will have to go through an appropriate
risk management analysis and will involve putting in
place the necessary mitigating measures.

Thirdly, there is a need to protect our personnel
and to ensure appropriate living and working
conditions in the mission, while maximizing safety and
security. Concepts such as modular delivery and the
delivery of support from regional service centres will
achieve clear benefits in terms of effectiveness and
efficiency. We expect that they will also lead to a
reduction in the quantity of support staff required in
difficult and unsafe locations.

Fourth is the need to recognize that missions go
through a life cycle and that key investments at critical
stages can have a sizeable effect on the ability of
missions to show real results in shorter time spans.
Again, we anticipate that this approach should result in
increased efficiency and a more strategic investment of
scarce resources.

Fifth and last, there is the requirement to ensure a
more productive impact on the environment in which
we operate by contributing to the local or regional
development of industry and individuals and by
ensuring that the footprint is ecologically mindful and
environmentally sensitive.
The elaboration following these drivers will be
framed by the Views expressed by Member States a few
weeks ago during the adoption of the peacekeeping
budgets regarding the balance between ambitions and

the availability of resources to achieve them. We are
conscious that all of this work requires that solid
business cases be constructed to inform the decision-
making and strategic direction.

We will seek guidance from Member States in the
following key areas.

The first area is the establishment of a new
support framework for service delivery in field
operations, a framework based on a clear distinction
between functions of a strategic and policymaking
nature to be performed at Headquarters and repetitive
transactional tasks that can be more effectively and
efficiently delivered closer to the field operations they
are designed to serve.

Second is the adoption of standardized mission
support models to improve deployment timelines,
achieve economies of scale and facilitate oversight and
the responsible stewardship of the resources of
Member States.

Third, we will seek guidance on the
implementation of responsive resource management.
We are striving for a model that allows improved
flexibility to allow greater asset-sharing and allocation.
This will also include a more effective approach to
managing staff, ensuring their development and
facilitating mobility across locations.

It is indeed too early for us to provide a detailed
report at this juncture. We are working closely with all
our implementing partners and stakeholders within the
Secretariat to further develop this mission.

In conclusion, let me stress that support is not an
end in itself. My Department has service delivery at its
core. We must not lose sight of our ultimate purpose,
which is to better serve those dedicated men and
women charged with the daunting challenge of
securing a fragile peace in war-torn countries. All our
efforts will be dedicated to realizing this mission, and
we count on the Council's support and guidance to get
there.

