Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I wish to congratulate to you,
Mr. President, on presiding over the proceedings of the
Security Council this month. I hope that the Council
will be able to benefit from the Chinese wisdom during
your presidency.
I should like to begin by providing information
to raise awareness among members of the Security
Council. There is a Syrian terrorist named Jihad Diab.
He is also known by the name of Abu Wa'el Diab.
That terrorist travelled to Afghanistan in 2000 to fight
alongside Al-Qaida. Pakistani security forces arrested
him in 2001, along with other international terrorists.
Pakistani security forces handed them over to United
States intelligence services, which transferred them to
the Guantanamo Bay detention camp.

It turns out that the American authorities have
released a number of Guantanamo prisoners during
the terrorist crisis that has been plaguing my country.
Miraculously, those prisoners were able to leave
Guantanamo and travel to my country. They obtained
passports, visas and money. They travelled tens of
thousands of kilometres without being stopped by
anyone, managing to go from Guantanamo all the way
to Syria. Among those individuals was Jihad Diab,
who is currently residing in Turkey. He is visiting his
mother, who is sick, in one of the hospitals there. He
can move freely between Syria and Turkey to fight
alongside the Al-Nusra Front, a terrorist entity that has
been inscribed on the Council's lists. That is the first
part of what I wanted to share with the Council today.

The second part deals with the details, and I trust
that it will be of interest to the Council. The American
Government reached an agreement with the Uruguayan
Government in 2014. Pursuant to that agreement, a
large number of terrorists from Guantanamo prison
were transferred to Uruguay for so-called humanitarian
reasons. That number included three Syrians, one
Palestinian and one Tunisian. Jihad Diab was one of
them. For humanitarian reasons, therefore, he was able
to go from Guantanamo to Syria through Uruguay. The
United States has stated that it reached an agreement
with the Government of Uruguay, pursuant to which
the Government of Uruguay committed to keeping that
terrorist on its soil. However, that terrorist left Uruguay
and went to Syria. Now residing in Turkey, he is
recruiting terrorists and sending them to Syria - either
to Idlib or elsewhere in the country. We will relay
that information to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015). We expect that the Committee
will deliver a practical response this time by inscribing
the name of that terrorist on the sanctions list - of
course, if there is anyone who genuinely wants to tackle
the heinous scourge of terrorism that has been plaguing
my country.
I will tell the Council of another incident, which
happened in 2014. We informed the Council about
it in an official letter that was issued as document
S/2014/l95. I concerns another Syrian terrorist, named
Haytham Qassab. That man transferred chemical
material from Turkey to the so-called Ahrar al-Sham,
which is the Al-Nusra Front, now located in Idlib.
On 31 May, Turkish authorities released that terrorist
after having caught him in the act and in possession of
chemical material on Turkish soil. He was released to
be able to play his terrorist role in Syria. That terrorist,
Haytham Qassab, went to a Turkish supplier named
Khalid Osman Malika, head of the Thurwa Import
and Export Company in Turkey, which operates in
the Polhajili area of Turkey. We can even describe the
colour of the building's facade and give the building's
address. Haytham Qassab requested material from
that Turkish supplier, including white phosphorus,
red phosphorus, potassium fluoride, methanol and
resorcinol. He said that he needed those materials to
produce white smoke in certain areas and then claim
that it was the Syrian authorities that had bombarded
those areas. The objective therefore was to use those
materials as chemical weapons. That is the information
I wished to provide concerning the terrorism from
which my country has been suffering - terrorism
supported by certain States.

Day after day, the practices of certain Western
States on the Council demonstrate that they have come
to enjoy exploiting the principles of international law,
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
the rules governing the proceedings ofthe Organization.
Those States have also manipulated United Nations
platforms to advance their political agendas, with the
aim of interfering in the affairs of other Member States,
as well as to cover up for the crimes that they themselves
perpetrated against the Syrian people, and also to cover
up the crimes perpetrated by the armed terrorist groups
to which they have provided myriad forms of support
over the past seven years. That includes facilitating the
acquisition by those terrorist groups of toxic chemical

materials that they then used against the Syrian army
and Syrian civilians alike.

Day after day, light is shed on unprecedented
atrocities perpetrated against the Syrian people due to
the heinous policies carried out by the Governments of
those States. The most recent example is the discovery
of mass graves in Raqqa several days ago. That was a
consequence of the air strikes by the so-called global
coalition against that city. The tragic discovery ofthose
mass graves in Raqqa revealed 4,000 bodies, most of
whom were women, children and the elderly. We had
removed only 2 per cent of the rubble in Raqqa and
already discovered 4,000 bodies to date in mass graves.
That tragic discovery corroborates the veracity of the
information we provided repeatedly with respect to the
brutality of the crimes perpetrated by the coalition.
The coalition completely destroyed the Syrian city of
Raqqa - after having transferred Da'esh terrorists
to the governorate of Deir ez-Zour - to prevent the
national army from controlling the shared borders with
Iraq, and to ensure that they could deliver on their plans
to undermine the sovereignty and unity of the Syrian
Arab Republic in conjunction with the militias under
their wing.

Once again, my country calls upon the Security
Council to shoulder its responsibilities to safeguard
international peace and security, to act immediately
to put an end to the crimes perpetrated by the global
coalition against the Syrian people, to prevent the
reoccurrence of those crimes and to hold the perpetrators
of those crimes against my people accountable. My
country calls upon the Security Council to conduct an
international investigation into the crimes and mass
killings that were uncovered in the city of Raqqa. We
call upon the Council once again to put an end to the
aggressive and illegal presence of American forces and
other foreign forces on Syrian soil.

I would like to tell those who have a short memory
that Syria's commitment to eradicating weapons of
mass destruction does not date back to 2013 alone,
rather 2013 was the year we joined the Chemical
Weapons Convention. On the contrary, our commitment
to eradicating weapons of mass destruction is a long-
standing one. I would like to remind all present in the
Council that my country presented, on 27 December
2003 to be exact, when we were a member of the
Security Council, an initiative to make the Middle East
a zone free of all kinds of weapons of mass destruction.
Nonetheless, at that time the United States delegation
threatened to veto it if we put that proposal to the vote
in Security Council. Therefore, our commitment is
long-standing and dates back to 2003. In that regard,
my country reiterates the call for Member States to
make the Middle East a zone free of nuclear weapons
and all weapons of mass destruction. We also calls
upon the Council to urge Israel to join the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as a non-nuclear-
weapon State and to submit all of its nuclear activities
and facilities to the monitoring of the International
Atomic Energy Agency.
My country has honoured its commitments
pursuant to the Chemical Weapons Convention and
resolution 2118 (2013). Syria has always endeavoured
to cooperate in a positive, transparent and flexible way
to uphold its commitments, even as we face tremendous
challenges and difficult, complicated and provocative
security conditions resulting from the hostile actions of
some regional and international stakeholders.

The Syrian Government made an unprecedented
achievement in the Organization's history by irreversibly
eliminating its chemical-weapons programme in record
time and on United States vessels. Yet instead of
commending what the Syrian Government has done,
we observe that those States that are manipulating
international law, those that are masters of the art of
deception, are calling on the Security Council to hold
theatrical meetings on an almost daily basis, with the
sole aim of advancing provocative and unfounded
allegations against the Syrian Government. I would
underscore for those States once again that there is a
huge, rampaging elephant in the Chamber. The elephant
is the States that called for today's meeting are the same
States that facilitated terrorist groups' acquisition of
toxic chemical materials. The elephant is that those
armed terrorist groups used that material against Syria.
The elephant is the statements of senior officials of
those States, accompanied by the statements we have
all heard today, that the only way to save the armed
terrorist groups is through the use of chemical weapons.
Hence there are States in this Chamber that want to see
chemical weapons used, and States that are prompting
terrorist groups to use those weapons to once again
hold such theatrical meetings and make unfounded
accusations against the Syrian Government and say that
the Syrian Government used those heinous weapons.

I now take this opportunity to note that these
heinous weapons are European and American weapons.
American weapons in Viet Nam and European weapons
in the hands of France and Germany, as was mentioned
by my colleague the representative of France, who
mentioned that at the beginning of his statement this
morning. Therefore, the use of chemical weapons is
indeed a Western use.

One day I visited Hanoi on a Vietnamese aircraft.
I travelled from Saigon to Hanoi. From the window of
my aeroplane I saw thousands of giant craters in the
ground between Saigon and Hanoi. When I asked,
"What are those craters there?" I was told that they
were craters left by the dropping of American chemical
bombs, which incinerated all signs of life over a
1,000 kilometres between Saigon and Hanoi. I repeat,
thousands of craters.

The elephant is that those statements are direct
incitement for armed terrorist groups to use toxic
chemical weapons against civilians in Idlib and for
them to fabricate evidence and seek false witnesses to
manipulate the crime scene. These States, with their
media and political influence, stand ready to accuse
the Syrian Government and intervene to save terrorist
groups, and that is exactly what happened in Khan
Al-Assal and Khan Shaykhoun.

The elephant is the scenes orchestrated by the White
Helmets, which are the deceptive British branch of the
Al-Nusra Front, about the alleged use of toxic chemical
weapons in a number of Syrian areas. The elephant is
that the fact-finding mission has continuously violated
its mandate and failed to uphold professional standards.
It has adopted a selective approach in its investigations.
It has not been transparent or maintained the chain of
custody of its samples. It did not comply with the fair
geographical composition of its teams. That, I would
say to Ms. Nakamitsu, is the truth.

The elephant is the use by the global coalition
of white phosphorus, an internationally banned
chemical agent that has bee unsed repeatedly against
Syrian civilians.

The elephant is that these States are turning a
blind eye to more than 160 letters that my Government
addressed to the Secretary-General, the Security
Council and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), as
well as the Counter-Terrorism Committee, concerning
the possession and use by armed terrorist groups of
chemical and toxic materials.

The elephant is that the Security Council has not
taken any measure to address those States that sponsor
and finance the armed terrorist groups, those States that
have facilitated the possession of toxic and chemical
weapons for those groups.

In our most recent letter, we informed the Security
Council about a tremendous explosion on Thursday,
18 October, in a part of a factory with a large amount
of fertilizer, explosive material and barrels of liquid
chlorine, a factory that belongs to an armed terrorist
group in Idlib, specifically in the city of Termanin,
which is 15 kilometres from the Turkish border. That
factory is supervised by foreign Turks, British and
Chechen experts. The explosion took the lives of nine
of the so-called experts and two of the so-called White
Helmets. We remind the Council that some Al-Nusra
Front agents have previously transferred cargo from
that factory to an unknown destination, in conjunction
with the terrorist White Helmets.

With regard to the settlement of the so-called
unresolved issues that have to do with Syria's first
declaration, my country is of the view that a great
deal of effort and time was spent on certain aspects
of the declaration, which continues to be described as
unresolved issues and yet they were widely considered
and studied. My country believes that it is important to
reconsider the composition of the current Declaration
Assessment Team. It is important to introduce changes
to the Team and incorporate scientific and technical
expertise, rather than intelligence elements. It is
important to let go of one-sided interpretations and
to stop turning a blind eye to the interpretations of
Syrian experts.

My Government calls the Council's attention to
the fact that the nature of the work of the Declaration
Assessment Team has changed. It was an assistance
team and it has become an investigation team. That runs
counter to the provisions of the agreement. Therefore,
all the issues that were discussed remain unjustifiably
pending, even though Syria has collaborated with
the Declaration Assessment Team in general and has
provided the it with all the information at its disposal.
Syria has also responded effectively and without delay
to the questions and inquiries submitted to it.

In conclusion, my country's Government has
underscored time and time again before the Council
and the OCPW Executive Council that it condemns any
use of any type of chemical weapon or other weapon
of mass destruction, as that constitutes a crime against
humanity and a wrongful, immoral and unjustifiable
act, no matter the circumstances, whereabouts or cause.

From this Chamber, we reaffirm that the Syrian
army has never used any chemical weapons. We no
longer possess those weapons, as Ms. Sigrid Kaag
reported few years ago. We remind the Council that
the Syrian chemical-weapon arsenal was completely
destroyed in the Mediterranean aboard the American
vessel MV Cape Ray. That was attested to by Ms. Kaag
as well in her report submitted to the Council in
June 2014.

This case, therefore, was closed four years ago,
but there are some who do not want it closed. They
want to continue to defame the Syrian Government
every month during these theatrical meetings; indeed,
these meetings are purely theatrical. A lot of effort and
money here and at The Hague are spent while this file
is essentially empty.

The Syrian Government confirms that it will
continue to uphold all the commitments it undertook
upon acceding to the Chemical Weapons Convention,
as well as its commitment to fight terrorism, which
will not be stopped by any form of political or media
blackmailing, or even by the despicable exploitation of
the blood of our innocent people in Syria.

The meeting rose at 12.05 pm.
