Mr. Hill (Australia): I would like to thank the
United Kingdom for holding this important debate.

How best to address post-conflict and post-crisis
stabilization has been something Australia has been
working on for some years now, be it in our role in the
International Stabilization Force in Timor-Leste, in the
regional assistance mission to the Solomon Islands, or
in Bougainville, which was referred to in some detail
by my friend the Ambassador of Papua New Guinea.
We do not pretend to have all the answers, but we have
learnt a number of lessons similar to those that the
United Kingdom has drawn together. In many ways
those lessons are obvious ones, but even simple truths
bear repeating.

The speed and strength of an initial response are
of the essence. Following any conflict or crisis, there
may be a limited window of opportunity to consolidate
peace and commence rebuilding on a sound foundation,
in cooperation with national authorities. Similarly,
quick military intervention is at times the best way to
save lives. The quick deployments by ourselves,
Malaysia, New Zealand and Portugal in May 2006 to
Timor-Leste at the request of its Government
demonstrated that. The same principle applies to police
deployments.

We need the same flexibility and preparedness for
other civilian elements, although in our case we would
not look to maintain a large, multidisciplinary team on
a just-in-case basis; for us, we take a just-in-time
approach using teams drawn on a case-by-case basis
from both our national and State levels of Government
and subject matter experts from the wider Australian
community. But we look forward to hearing more from
the United Kingdom as it develops its deployable
civilian capability.

Demonstrating to a population that security has
been restored is the first step. That demonstration is
made tangible by a full re-establishment of the rule of
law, transitional justice and quick development
outcomes. To achieve those, we need to ensure that we
are drawing on the full range of our own expertise.

In that regard, Australia is establishing the Asia-
Pacific Centre for Civil-Military Cooperation as an
essential part of our commitment to regional stability
and development. The Centre will focus on supporting
a coherent national capability to assess, plan for and
implement integrated peacebuilding, stabilization,
reconstruction and international disaster relief
operations.

It is important to build up not just our own
capacities, but also those of others. It is obvious to say
this, but it would always be preferable to have built up
capacities before a crisis than to act as a substitute
afterwards. To that end, our Federal Police is the first
police force to conduct United Nations-recognized
predeployment training that meets the requirements for
United Nations peace operations.

No matter how good international assistance may
be, if it does not serve the national needs of the country
concerned, there is little point in providing it. Our help
must build up national institutions and leaders. And the
sooner we can back local authorities in reassuming full
responsibility, the better chance there will be of a
sustainable solution. The importance of diplomatic
efforts alongside security and development engagement
must also be recognized. We should ensure that
diplomacy is used to stronger effect, particularly in
situations where skilled diplomatic negotiations may
prevent a relapse into conflict.

The United Nations clearly has an important role
in promoting post-conflict and post-crisis stabilization.
We would welcome further advice from the Secretary-
General on how the Organization's contribution in this
area could be strengthened.

