Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
too thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his
briefing to the Council this morning. I want to join
other Council members in saying that the recent
violence in Kosovo was deplorable and should never be
repeated. Such violence is a dead end for the people of
Kosovo and for the people of the region. I would like
to extend once again the condolences of my
Government to those who suffered injury, to the
families of those who died and to those who lost
property. Our hearts go out to the families for what
they have suffered.

We are pleased to see that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) have already arrested
nearly 180 suspects in relation to the violence. Those
responsible for the killings and destruction must face
justice, and the authorities in Kosovo should apprehend
those responsible and bring them speedily to trial.

I would also like to commend those who stood up
to stop the violence. The quick response by UNMIK
and KFOR helped quell the violence, and the brave
soldiers, policemen and others involved deserve our
thanks. Most of the leaders of Kosovo's Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government reacted responsibly by
condemning the violence and urging the people of
Kosovo to solve their problem peacefully. Prime
Minister Rexhepi showed leadership in his calls to stop
the violence, as did those leaders in Belgrade who
called for calm.

Further destruction to Kosovo's patrimonial sites
was prevented by rapid KFOR intervention, including
the addition of more than 3,000 reinforcements sent to
Kosovo. According to UNMIK, more than 22 churches
were nonetheless destroyed and another 11 were
damaged due to the initial outbreak of violence. We
encourage KFOR, in coordination with UNMIK and
the Kosovo Police Service, to ensure protection of
Kosovo's cultural and religious sites, and we urge the
Provisional Institutions to follow through on promised
reconstruction efforts to rebuild damaged churches and
homes.

The violence was clearly a setback in Kosovo's
development into a society that can become part of
Europe. It was also a challenge to the international
community. The United States remains fully committed
to multi-ethnicity, peace, prosperity and democracy for
Kosovo. We will not allow the violence to divert us
from holding Kosovo responsible for fulfilling the
United Nations standards, which will create a
democracy, peaceful multi-ethnic life and the rule of
law: the preconditions the international community has
set for initiating a process to determine Kosovo's
future political status.

We support the review date policy and a
comprehensive review of Kosovo's progress on
implementing the UNMIK standards in mid-2005, or
earlier if progress warrants. Those who believe that
violence can be used to further a political agenda
should know that the United States and the
international community will not pursue a final status
decision until Kosovo can ensure a peaceful and secure
environment for all its communities. We remain
committed to the fulfilment of the standards, which
represent the only path for Kosovo towards a process
of determining its future political status.

The standards remain the way ahead, but we
cannot continue as if nothing had happened. The recent
violence made clear that an intensified effort is
required in Kosovo. In that regard, we welcome the
issuance last month of the Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan, which lays out the specific steps
that must be taken to implement the standards. The
Plan also specifies which steps should be taken as a
matter of priority in the light of the recent violence.
The Contact Group will be meeting in Pristina later this
month to support UNMIK and to assess the situation
directly. A stepped-up effort on standards
implementation in Kosovo should focus on issues of
immediate impact highlighted by the violence, in
particular establishing the rule of law and
apprehending and prosecuting perpetrators, as well as
the rapid rebuilding of private and religious properties
that were damaged and destroyed.

On a more general level, it is clear that Kosovo
must work doubly hard to ensure security for all
communities and must consider the devolution of
authority to establish more effective local government.

It is worth recalling the goal set out in the United
Nations standards: a Kosovo where all, regardless of
ethnic background, race or religion, are free to work
and travel without fear, hostility or danger, and in
which there is tolerance, justice and peace for
everyone. If the people of Kosovo are ready to move
forward on the standards, the United States, working
with the United Nations, NATO and the European
Union, is ready to help Kosovo succeed in building a
better future.

