Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia; the candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey; and the European Free Trade
Association countries Iceland, Liechtenstein and
Norway, members of the European Economic Area,
declare that they align themselves with this statement.

As this is the first time that I have taken the floor
under your presidency of the Security Council, please
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on the assumption of
your duties. I would also like to express my
congratulations to the previous President, Ambassador
Wang Guangya of China, for the excellent manner in
which he steered the Council's deliberations in
February.

I would first like to thank Lord Ashdown for his
comprehensive and informative report. Secondly, it is a
great pleasure to acknowledge the presence of Mr.
Adnan Terzic, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I also wish to thank Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno for his very
helpful contribution this morning.

The work of the High Representative and of his
Office is of great importance to the full implementation
of the Dayton Agreement and to the consolidation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The European Union (EU)
underscores its support for High Representative
Ashdown - who is also the European Union's Special
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina - and in
particular for his focus on promoting the rule of law
and on encouraging economic growth and the creation
of employment through reforms.

The EU-Western Balkans Summit, held in
Thessaloniki last June, confirmed clearly that the
shared objective of the European Union and of the
countries of the region is their integration into
European structures. That will be achieved through the
implementation of the strengthened Stabilization and
Association Process. The rate at which the countries of
the region make further progress towards the EU is
now effectively in their own hands. It will depend on
their individual performance in implementing reforms,
with the full support of the European Union.

The EU has been actively involved in the reform
process. In November 2003, the European Commission
presented its feasibility study on the preparedness of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to negotiate a stabilization and
association agreement. The EU calls on the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to strengthen
its efforts to meet 16 wide-ranging priorities -
including improving governance and administration,
cooperating with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia, strengthening the fight
against organized crime and corruption, improvements
in the rule of law, human rights reform and economic
reforms - which the feasibility study identified as
being essential for making any decision on the opening
of negotiations on a stabilization and association
agreement. The Commission hopes that it can make a
recommendation on the opening of such negotiations in
the latter half of 2004. The EU is already assisting with
those reforms, including through targeted support
under the Community Assistance for Reconstruction,
Development and Stabilization assistance programme.

The European partnership with Bosnia and
Herzegovina will see the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina agree with the European Union on overall
priorities for action. This partnership is being
elaborated by the European Commission in the context
of the 16 reforms identified in its feasibility study. The
European Council has also decided that one of the four
initial priorities for the European security strategy is
the elaboration of a comprehensive and coherent policy
for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

There has been important progress in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in such areas as the reform of the
judiciary and defence. However, the pace of reform has
slowed. Much remains to be done to reinvigorate the
economy and consolidate the central structures of the
State. This responsibility lies in the hands of the local
authorities, who need to engage fully in the reform
process. Their cooperation with the international
community is also essential. The European Union fully
supports the recent decision by Lord Ashdown to enact
a new statute for the city of Mostar.

The European Union strongly supports the clear
message set out in Security Council resolution 1503
(2003), which expresses the need for the countries in
the region to improve and intensify their cooperation
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). Full cooperation with the Tribunal,
especially improved cooperation in arresting and
transferring indictees to The Hague, is vital for further
movement towards the European Union, as is
compliance with the Tribunal's requests for documents,
access to archives and availability of witnesses. We
reiterate the need to intensify efforts to bring Radovan
Karadzic, Ratko Mladic and Ante Gotovina before the
ICTY.

The European Union supports the ongoing work
of High Representative Ashdown to establish a special
War Crimes Chamber within the State Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. This is an important step in the
building of institutions of justice in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It will contribute to the significant
progress being made in Bosnia and Herzegovina
towards the creation of a society based on the rule of
law and respect for human rights.

The European Union is closely involved in
ensuring security in Bosnia and Herzegovina through
the European Union Police Mission (EUPM). I would
like to take this opportunity to express our profound
sadness at the recent and untimely death of the head of
the EUPM. in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Commissioner
Sven Frederiksen. We offer our full support to his
successor, Commissioner Kevin Carty, as he takes up
the challenging tasks that lie ahead. It is important also
to make progress in resolving the legal problems
arising from the police certification procedure, and we
look forward to a renewed cooperative effort with the
United Nations in addressing this matter.

The European Union has also confirmed its
readiness to undertake a follow-on mission to the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) within the context of
European integration and a comprehensive and
coherent approach to Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that
regard, we have put in hand preparatory work in close
consultation with NATO, while keeping the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities fully involved.

