The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

As I believe members know, I decided to speak
last in this open debate in order to be able to bring into
my statement suggestions and comments that were
made here today.

I think that the wide participation in this debate is
evidence that the issue of the Security Council's
working methods is indeed a matter of interest for us
all. While it is up to the Council to adopt its own rules

of procedure, questions regarding its efficiency,
transparency and interaction with the general
membership concern all Member States.

That is why debates such as this one, open to the
wider membership, are of crucial importance. They
help the Council to assess regularly how its practices
match those aims, while presenting us with an
excellent opportunity to collect invaluable inputs from
the wider membership on ways to improve it further.

Enhancing transparency, efficiency and
interaction with non-members of the Council is our
collective goal. This is a substantive concern, not a
formal one. The question is how to make the Council
more operational and effective, with a better use of its
time and resources and with the full engagement and
participation of all its members, and how to strengthen
its global influence as a principal body which acts on
behalf of all States Members of the United Nations by
bringing it closer to them. The question is, ultimately,
how to underline the Council's authority through
enhanced accountability, through a better
understanding of its decisions, and through a more
open, participatory and efficient decision-making
process.

In recent years, much has been done by the
Council on the issue of working methods, as has been
repeatedly stated today, including through its Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. Note 507 (S/2010/507) reflects
an important set of substantive improvements in
Security Council practice. Portugal commends the
efforts of Council delegations leading to the adoption
of that important document last year. In particular, we
would like to underline the leadership of Japan in this
meticulous enterprise.

Now it is important to ensure that those collective
efforts were not made in vain. We must intensify our
commitment to monitoring the implementation of the
new agreed practices on methods of work and assess
their impact on the intended goals of enhanced
transparency, efficiency and interaction with the United
Nations membership.

There is always room for improvement, and we
welcome in this regard the input of all Member States.
Allow me also to recognize the leading role of the
group of five small nations in their tireless efforts to
present us, in recent years, with useful thoughts and
proposals aimed at improving the Security Council's
working methods.

On the issue of transparency, the Council, in our
assessment, during the past year continued the trend of
holding more public meetings. Briefings were regularly
made in public, giving the opportunity also to
non-members of the Council to benefit from useful
information on various situations on the Council's
agenda. While consultations are useful in order to
better prepare Council decisions, some effort still has
to be made, in our view, not to resort so often to
consultations, instead leaving consultations for when
they are really needed, as informal and reserved closed
settings - which they are indeed - to help build
consensus and speed up decision-making.

Monthly briefings by the Presidents, including
wrap-up meetings, should be encouraged. This point
was also made by the representatives of Guatemala,
Egypt, Costa Rica and Spain, referring to the recent
example set by Brazil. We intend to follow this practice
and hold, as announced in the Journal, an informal
meeting tomorrow at 4.30 pm. with the wider
membership, as a wrap-up of the Portuguese
presidency. These are useful practices to enhance both
transparency and interaction with the wider
membership, and it is a positive development that these
are becoming regular practices.

A more active role on the part of Council
Presidents should, however, be encouraged, so as to
enhance the visibility of the Council, including in their
regular contacts with the press. The contribution of the
presidencies in preparing more informative monthly
assessments should also be nurtured. Assessments are
useful instruments that will increase awareness of the
work of the Council once they are circulated among the
wider membership. They should provide useful insights
from the perspective of the presidencies, not mere
factual descriptions. More thought should be put into
improving the analytical aspect of the assessments, as
they are the source of the introduction to the Security
Council's annual report. This point was also made by
many delegations here today, including Switzerland,
Egypt, Japan and Morocco.

On the issue of efficiency, some improvements
were made in consultations, where a considerable part
of the Council's work takes place, as reflected in the
Council's annual report: shortening the scripts and the
use of videoconferences are some of the positive
measures taken in this regard. Greater conviviality,
interaction and informality in such an informal setting
only add to efficiency, and some efforts has been made
this year by Council members in that regard.

Nevertheless, some work also has to be done as
regards the unbalanced workload in the monthly
agenda. Many months are overloaded, with several
overlapping reporting deadlines and mandates
requiring extension at the same time i a situation that
requires some rethinking of how the Council can better
deal with recurrent matters without that exercise
absorbing most of its time, leaving little space on its
agenda for it to react to emerging crises and, most of
all, to exercise its role in the area of conflict
prevention.

Some thought is being devoted to this issue in the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, as was noted by the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina at the start
of this debate. I take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Ivan Barbalie for his leading role as Chair
of the Informal Working Group.

Overall, with respect to the day-to-day internal
work of the Council, more effort should be put into
improving the exchange of information among all
members, promoting wider participation and initiative
in its internal decision-making process. In our view,
this would enhance not only the Council's efficiency
but also its legitimacy as a principal organ of the
United Nations; this matter was raised by a number of
delegations here, including that of India.

Further efforts also have to be made as concerns
public meetings from the perspective of their
efficiency. Statements by delegations are usually too
long. Open debates in particular take too much time.
Further efforts must be made to focus our
interventions, both Council and non- Council, and
abide by the time suggested. Concept papers on
questions to be addressed are useful tools in this
regard.

Turning to interaction with non-members of the
Council, in informal consultations the Council
continued to avail itself of the possibility of holding
interactive dialogues, which continued to prove very
useful in that different actors were heard in an informal
setting, with the aim of helping the Council in its
decision-making process. This trend should be
encouraged. Arria-formula meetings also continued to
be organized. These new formats may be very
beneficial to the Council's work, promoting interaction
at an informal level, enhancing dialogue and improving
information exchange. In our view, they could be used
more frequently. Tour d'horizon meetings with the
Department of Political Affairs are now being held
regularly and have proved to be useful instruments
from the perspective of conflict prevention, and I must
thank the British presidency for having introduced
them. Meetings with Special Representatives of the
Secretary General have also proved beneficial to the
Council's work, as highlighted by some delegations
here today.

Debates, in particular open debates, could
facilitate greater interactivity. When the Council
decides to hold an open debate, the goal is to listen to
the wider membership and, if appropriate, reflect the
relevant inputs in the ensuing outcomes, when there are
any - not speaking first, deciding on the outcome and
then listening to the wider membership. I think that
there is undoubtedly room for improvement here, as
well as in terms of increased interactivity, greater focus
and shorter statements - giving real meaning to the
very concept of Council open debates. This point was,
as will be recalled, underlined here by some
delegations, including those of Mexico, Slovenia and
Morocco.

What more can we do? Surely, we can continue to
intensify the implementation of note 507 in all its
aspects. The Secretariat has a central role to play in
supporting presidencies and in reminding delegations
to use different tools agreed in that note.

I also would like to highlight some useful
suggestions put forward here today. On the annual
report, more analytical information, as well as
information on Council working methods, could be
requested. In our View, we could take more benefit
from the presentation of the annual report to the
General Assembly, and in this sense we welcome the
decision of the President of the Assembly to devote the
debate at this session entirely to the Council's annual
report. But we think that these presentations could
improve as well, by focusing on specific aspects of the
Council work that were more salient during the
precedent year. Once again, more leeway could be
granted to the presidencies in drafting their
introduction to the report.

More work has to be done to establish a closer
Council relation with other bodies, such as the
Peacebuilding Commission, especially in the informal
work with the chairs of the country-specific
configurations and the President of the Economic and
Social Council. We agree with those delegations -
Brazil, Luxembourg and Switzerland - that referred to
the usefulness of such interaction. The need for further
reflection on the role of the Military Staff Committee
was also encouraged.

Some important suggestions were also made as to
the need for more transparency in the work of the
subsidiary bodies, the selection and independence of
the panels of experts, and the need for more
inclusiveness in the process leading to the election of
the chairs of the subsidiary bodies. We need also to
give further reflection to the implementation of
presidential note S/2006/507 concerning the work of
subsidiary bodies, which was the outcome of several
years of work in the former Working Group on
Sanctions. Relevant statements, including those of
Jordan, Liechtenstein, New Zealand and Spain, touched
upon the use of the veto, making substantive
contributions to this debate.

I wish to make one final remark to highlight the
importance of this debate. The number and complexity
of situations that the Council has to follow require an
increasingly demanding managing capacity of its
programme of work. However, in today's world, with
new threats and challenges to peace and security
emerging, the Council has to look ahead be able to
anticipate crisis and devote enough time to conflict
prevention. And, to that end, it needs to work
continuously on its working methods to increase its
efficiency and to be able to fully exercise its
responsibilities.

I personally found this debate extremely useful,
and I thank all delegations for their interest in this
matter and their relevant contributions, which
encourage us to pursue our efforts to always improve
the working methods of the Security Council.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. Before adjourning the meeting, however, and as
this is, I hope, my last meeting as President of the
Council, I wish to make two very brief but heartfelt
remarks.
The first is to Movses Abelian and the Security
Council secretariat for the extremely professional,
knowledgeable, kind and even affectionate way in
which they supported us this month. They are indeed
not only the sixth permanent member of the Security
Council, but truly indispensable. We are very grateful
for all the support Mr. Abelian and his team have given
us.
11-61406

My second remark is one of deep appreciation for

our interpreters. They are extremely professional

people who permanently show enormous dedication

and great patience in dealing with our idiosyncrasies. I
thank them all very much indeed.

The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.
21
