Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank all our briefers today and congratulate
Special Representative Swan on his new role. His deep
experience will be of great help to the international
community in supporting Somalia in the challenging
period ahead, through its political and security reforms,
and we stand ready to support him.

Somalia continues to face significant challenges on
its path towards building a safe, stable and prosperous
State, underscored by A1-Shabaab's recent attacks in
Mogadishu and Kismaayo that killed the mayor and
more than two dozen people, including two United
States citizens. Despite those attacks, the reform efforts
of the Federal Government of Somalia, with support
from the United Nations, the African Union and
international partners, offer hope that progress is under
way. We encourage both the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali Government to
continue to work towards a conditions-based transfer
of security responsibilities and international partners to
closely coordinate in that effort. Similarly, the Somali
police need ongoing capacity-building support to help
stabilize areas reclaimed from A1-Shabaab.

As our colleague of the United Kingdom noted,
Somali officials must also cooperate and engage with
the sanctions committee Panel of Experts to address
shortcomings highlighted by that Panel that impede
Somalia's progress.
On the political front, the Federal Government's
political and governance reform, including the draft
electoral law and constitutional reform, offers the best
hope for sustainable stability and economic growth.
The United States regrets that those important reforms
have not yet been finalized or implemented. We urge all
Somali stakeholders to earnestly commit to advancing
those reforms.

We applaud Prime Minister Khayre's reconciliation
efforts among competing clans and the Federal
Government and his support for the integration of local
militias into Somalia's national security architecture.
Somalia's success depends on continued productive
collaboration between Mogadishu and the member
states. The upcoming Jubaland presidential election
provides an opportunity to reaffirm mutual respect
between the central and state governments. We call on
all parties to support a peaceful election and to avoid
any interference in the electoral process. As the country
continues to work towards a one-person one-vote
democratic system in preparation for the presidential
election in 2020 or 2021, we underscore the need for
close coordination between the Federal Government's
electoral security task force, AMISOM, the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia to provide
voter security during each stage of electoral planning
and implementation.

We must also not lose sight of Somalia's ongoing
humanitarian crisis. Poor rainy seasons have caused
widespread crop failures, deteriorating livestock
conditions and a heightened risk of drought-related
diseases. An estimated 2.2 million people in Somalia
face life-threatening food insecurity, and at least
5.4 million people require urgent humanitarian
assistance. Since 2018, the United States has been
helping by providing more than $670 million in
funding for food, water, health, nutrition, sanitation
and hygiene. We call on the international community to
also help fund the humanitarian response.

