Mr. Motoc (Romania) (spoke in French): First, I
congratulate you, Sir, and wish you every success
during your presidency of the Council, which you have
just assumed. I also commend the Chinese presidency
and Ambassador Wang Guangya on their wise and
effective management of the Council during the month
of February.

Allow me to welcome the presence before the
Council of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. His participation attests to the
interest he shares with the international community in
consolidating the stabilization process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I also thank the High Representative,
Lord Paddy Ashdown, for his very interesting briefing,
which accompanied his illuminating and
comprehensive report (S/2004/l46, annex, enclosure),
and I take this opportunity to assure him of our full
support in his future activities.

I shall be brief because Romania aligns itself with
the statement to be made shortly by the Irish
presidency of the European Union.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country
for Romania, which attaches the greatest importance to
its stability and development and to the full
implementation of the Dayton Agreement and of the
reforms necessary for its integration into Europe.

We welcome the good news from Sarajevo
concerning the progress made on the ground, which is
to a large extent the result of the remarkable work of
Lord Ashdown and his Office. His contribution
towards positive developments has truly been decisive.
At the same time, we are convinced that Bosnia and
Herzegovina's goal of becoming a member of the
European Union and of NATO also plays a key role in
the progress that has been made.

In that context, we can see that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is making tangible progress in all areas
important for State cohesion, be it through the
establishment of a High Judicial and Prosecutorial
Council, the creation of a single body responsible for
indirect taxation or the adoption of a law on defence.
Those actions bear witness to the fact that Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains on the right course. We hope that
this conduct will serve as a model for the entire
western Balkan region.

Of course, much remains to be done.
Accordingly, we are in complete agreement with the
Office of the High Representative's four-point strategy,
whose goals are to strengthen the rule of law, to
implement economic reform, to strengthen the capacity
of State institutions and to establish civilian control
over the armed forces at the State level. All those
measures are essential to encouraging the country's
rapprochement vis-a-vis the European Union and
NATO.

The European Commission feasibility study and
the membership requirements of NATO's Partnership
for Peace provide the clearest indication of what
priorities Bosnia and Herzegovina must pursue to
advance its aspiration to join the European Union and
NATO. We encourage the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities to expedite the necessary reforms to that
end, especially with respect to strengthening economic
reform and improving administrative capacity, which
are fundamental conditions for building a State that is
stable, effective and capable of integration into
European structures.

Recent measures taken by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities with respect to the
appointment of military leaders constitute a significant
advance in the efforts for armed forces reform
requested by the international community. We welcome
the progress made by the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on the return of refugees, reconstruction
and the restoration of property, which could serve as a
model for the entire region. In that connection, I stress
that full cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia would be the
clearest way of signalling a break from the past
thinking and demonstrating a desire to move towards a
more stable and honest future.

Romania takes great interest in progress in
strengthening the police and the fight against organized
crime. In that connection, we would like to be assured
that the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities, the High
Representative and the other international
organizations active on the ground will take all
necessary measures to resolve the questions Lord
Ashdown raised concerning the police certification
process. We are thankful for the clarifications on that
point made by Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guehenno.

I take this opportunity to welcome Bosnia and
Herzegovina's substantial regional cooperation
activities as current Chairman of the South-East
European Cooperation Process. We are convinced that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will continue its active
involvement when the chairmanship passes to Romania
at the beginning of April. Furthermore, Romania is
working with Bosnia and Herzegovina to develop
sound cooperation at the political and economic levels.
We also have a presence in the country, with our troops
and police officers taking part in international forces
there.

I would also like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the cooperation between NATO and the
European Union with a view to transferring the
Stabilization Force mission to the European Union - a
sign of the emergence of a common vision of the two
pillars of stability in the Balkans that is encouraging
for the future of the region.

Romania fervently hopes that for Bosnia and
Herzegovina 2004 will be marked by substantial
progress in establishing the rule of law, political and
social consolidation, inter-ethnic coexistence and
economic development.

