Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Iwish to thank the Secretary-
General, the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the President of the Commission of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) for their valuable remarks this morning.

During our very first month as a Security Council
member, in January 2017, we organized a debate on
conflict prevention and sustaining peace, at which the
Secretary-General had the opportunity to set out his
vision for a surge in diplomacy for peace and effective
conflict prevention (see S/PV.7857). We did so because
we saw a need for a new political consensus in support
of prevention and a commitment to policies and actions
that prevent conflicts before they begin. Now, nearly
24 months later, how have we done? As our term on
the Council is ending, it is only natural to look back at
what has been achieved and what conclusions can be
drawn. Even though we have seen a new momentum
for prevention overall, when it comes to the actual
prevention of conflict, the Council is still falling short.
We should all be held to account for that.

The Charter of the United Nations provides us with
a clear mandate to investigate any situation that might
lead to international friction or give rise to a dispute.
Yet we still spend the majority of our time and resources
trying to manage the conflicts on our agenda. A culture
of complacency surrounding conflict prevention has
very real costs and, in the long term, risks undermining
the credibility of this institution.

Today's meeting therefore provides us with a useful
opportunity to focus on the earlier phases ofpreventing
and resolving conflicts and on how to overcome the
current status quo. That includes an important discussion
on how to strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
as they play a key role in complementing the United
Nations in the fields of conflict prevention and conflict
resolution. Regional organizations are crucial partners
in that work, as they are often the first to identify the
initial signs and risks of potential conflicts and have
a good understanding of the issues at stake and carry
credibility at the local levels. We have seen numerous
examples in which their early engagement has changed
potentially negative outcomes for the better, and we
have also seen the effectiveness of regional approaches
in resolving conflicts.
ECOWAS played a key role in achieving a successful
outcome in the Ivorian peace process and in its resolute
actions in the Gambia, which, with the active support of
the Council, ushered in a peaceful transition ofpower in
January 2017. In the Horn of Africa, we have seen how
the courageous decisions of leaders have generated hope
and prospects for peace and development in the whole
region, and how the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) has been instrumental in reaching
a revitalized peace agreement for South Sudan. It is
crucial that organizations such as the African Union
(AU), ECOWAS, the Southern African Development
Community and IGAD have the necessary capacity to
engage in the early stages of conflict.

The United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations have important, complementary roles in
conflict prevention. Sweden has therefore been a long-
standing supporter of an enhanced strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the AU, and we
welcome the renewed momentum and concrete steps
taken to advance that, not least thanks to the dedicated
leadership of the United Nations Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission.

We have already benefited from that closer
cooperation, including during the recent joint visit by
United Nations and AU officials to Lake Chad, South
Sudan and the Sahel. The collaboration between our
two Councils has also increased, as demonstrated by
the fruitful meeting between the Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council in July,
in which we saw constructive discussions, concrete
outcomes and unified messages. That spirit now
needs to be further built upon, including through our
two Councils conducting joint field visits in order to
further facilitate a shared analysis of the situations on
our agendas.

The United Nations regional offices represent some
of the most effective mechanisms at our disposal for
conflict prevention and resolution, and we see scope
for establishing further such offices in other parts of
the world. The United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel and its preventive functions must be
built upon, and we should learn from its successes. We
welcome the enlarged mandate for a Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa, as we
see potential for an enhanced role for IGAD in leading
integration in the region. The proactive and successful
cooperation between the United Nations regional
offices and regional organizations should be harnessed
to enhance subregional capacities and create synergies.
We commend the work carried out by the AU to
strengthen its capacity in preventing, mediating and
settling conflicts on the African continent, consistent
with Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. We
also commend the ongoing effort of the AU to enhance
self-reliance and the financing of its activities, and
especially welcome its commitment to funding 25 per
cent of its peace support operations by 2020, as well as
the progress made in fulfilling that commitment.

To realize the full potential of the AU-United
Nations partnership, additional financial and political
support is now needed. We welcome the ongoing
collaborative work on strengthening the oversight and
accountability of AU-led peace operations, including
by further reinforcing the women and peace and
security agenda. We also welcome the ongoing work
to strengthen respect for human rights, international
humanitarian law and the conduct and discipline
framework for AU-led peace operations, in order to
enable access to assessed United Nations contributions.
The ongoing work on a draft resolution to that effect is
important and has our full support.

Our efforts to enhance African capabilities must
go beyond strengthening military responses and should
rather be based on the presumption of prevention and
a focus on early investments, given that prevention
not only saves lives, but, as the Secretary-General
pointed out this morning, is also economically sensible.
There is a need to shift from a silo mentality between
mediation, political dialogue, security and development
towards taking a holistic and integrated approach. That
includes structural prevention at the national level and
building strong and inclusive institutions. Based on the
recent discussions and conclusions of the Council and
the African Union, we should also cooperate to ensure
adequate risk assessments and forecasting analysis
pertaining to the root causes of conflict, not least with
respect to climate-related security risks. Regional
integration is also a powerful vehicle for conflict
prevention in the long haul and should therefore be
encouraged.

In addition, triangular partnerships between the
AU, the United Nations and the European Union should
be further explored. The European Union has been a
long-standing supporter of the AU's peace operations,
not least in Somalia and the Sahel, where we have seen
fruitful collaboration between the three organizations.
We welcome further opportunities for such trilateral
cooperation. We also see the potential for increased
European participation in United Nations peacekeeping.
In conclusion, upon entering the Council, incoming
elected members are often told that conflict prevention
is a difficult topic and that it is too sensitive to try
to push this agenda. But really it should be more
politically sensitive to continue to fail in that regard.
We all have a joint responsibility to do everything we
can to ensure that conflict prevention now becomes the
new normal and at the very core of our efforts. The
permanent members of the Council have a particular
responsibility in that regard. Moving forward on
enhancing the partnership between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations is one
critical part in making the Secretary-General's vision
for a surge in diplomacy for peace a reality. That will
require our substantial and sustained political and
financial investments, and Sweden intends to continue
to actively contribute to that end.

