Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): First,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August. I am confident that your
wisdom, experience and expertise will lead the work of
the Council to the desired success.

My delegation also wishes to avail itself of the
opportunity to express its appreciation to your
predecessor, Mr. Wang Yingfan, the Permanent
Representative of the People's Republic of China, for
the efficient manner in which he managed the work of
the Council under his presidency. We also wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for holding this important
emergency meeting to consider the dangerous and
tragic developments unfolding in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem.

The Council is meeting today at one of the most
critical stages of the Palestinian people's struggle to
regain their fundamental rights in accordance with
international legitimacy. That people -men, women
and children - are suffering at the hands of the Israeli
forces. The time has come for international legitimacy
to be respected by all States and Governments, without
double standards. Doing so would help to uphold the
rule of law and ensure equality and justice without
discrimination for all peoples of the world.

What is taking place in the occupied Palestinian
territories is a clear and flagrant breach by Israel of the
Fourth Geneva Convention with regard to torture, the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and other
international human rights legal instruments, including
the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. All of
these apply to Palestinian territories occupied by Israel
since 1967.

The Palestinian people, who demand their
legitimate rights to life and national sovereignty, are
facing daily confrontations between their young people
and one of the best equipped armies of the world - an
army that employs heavy tanks, armed personnel
carriers and helicopter gunships in a very unbalanced
and inhumane manner. The daily raids launched by
Israel against Palestinian buildings and institutions and
its arrogant and excessive use of force against the
unarmed Palestinian people, who have only their souls
to defend their homeland with, have made Palestinians
more determined to continue their struggle and their
uprising against the occupation by Israel that blocks the
way towards permanent peace with the Palestinians.

Late on Friday, 10 August 2001, Israeli security
forces raided Orient House and other Palestinian
properties in and around occupied East Jerusalem.
They confiscated important Palestinian archives,
including maps and titles to Palestinian properties.
Furthermore, the Israeli occupation forces used
excessive force to change the status quo of Abu Dis,
near East Jerusalem. These actions represent a serious
escalation in the bloody military campaign launched by
Israel against the Palestinian people since September
2000 - not to mention Israel's military invasion of
J enin with tanks.

In its capacity as the current Chairman of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the
State of Qatar has, among other things, expressed its
condemnation and denunciation of Israel's occupation
of Orient House in East Jerusalem. It considers such
acts a flagrant breach and serious violation of all the
agreements between the Palestinians and the Israelis, a
manifestation of the collapse of the peace process and
testimony to Israel's violation of all international laws
and norms. It has also called on the international
community strongly to condemn such acts, and has
called on the Security Council and the United Nations
to shoulder their responsibilities by taking action to
halt such inequitable and unwarranted Israeli practices.
This position was announced in an official
communique of the Qatar Ministry of Foreign Affairs
that was issued as an official document of the Security
Council and the General Assembly under the symbol
A/55/1027-S/2001/784.

Qatar also made the same official statement on 30
July 2001 to express its condemnation and
denunciation of the dangerous Israeli escalation
illustrated by the decision of an extremist religious
group to lay a cornerstone for an alleged temple at Al-
Haram Al-Sharif. That act was regarded as a
provocation to religious sentiment and as an effort to
violate the sanctity of Islamic Holy Places and the
heritage of human civilization. It was also considered
an act of wanton aggression against all holy sites. This
was an affront to the sentiments of Arab and Muslim
peoples throughout the world, an act that fuelled the
deterioration of the situation in the region.

In that regard, the State of Qatar has appealed to
the international community, and to the Security
Council and its permanent members in particular, to
shoulder their responsibilities to prevent such
provocations. Furthermore, the State of Qatar, in its
capacity as the current Chairman of the OIC, has
stressed its support for the Palestinian people in its just
struggle to regain its land and legitimate rights in
accordance with resolutions of international legitimacy
and the principle of land for peace. It has also called on
Israel to respond to all international initiatives and
efforts in the interest of peace, security and stability in
the Middle East. That statement was also issued as an
official document of the Security Council and the
General Assembly.

In that connection, His Highness Sheikh Hamad
bin Khalifa Al-Thani, the Emir of the State of Qatar
and Chairman of the Ninth Summit of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference, called for an emergency
meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
Conference. That meeting was held on 26 May 2001 at
Doha, Qatar, to discuss the highly dangerous
conditions facing the Palestinian people as a result of
ongoing escalating Israeli aggression. The meeting
heard an important speech by His Highness and held
extensive deliberations and negotiations on the content
of the declaration of the Ninth Islamic Summit entitled
"The Al-Aqsa Uprising: An Uprising for an
Independent Palestine".

Concerned about the possibility of a further
deterioration in the security situation endangering the
entire region, and in an effort to provide protection for
the Palestinian people against serious and oppressive
Israeli practices, the conference decided to call on the
Security Council to hold an emergency meeting to
determine the steps necessary to provide international
protection to the Palestinians from wanton Israeli
aggression and to calm the situation and work towards
a resumption of negotiations aimed at a just and
comprehensive settlement that ensures a return of
peace to the entire Middle East.

The Summit charged His Highness the Emir of
Qatar and the follow-up ministerial committee
established by him to immediately resume their work
by calling for the holding of an emergency meeting of
the Security Council to consider the serious situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories and to provide the
necessary international protection to the Palestinian
people and to implement relevant Security Council
resolutions on Palestine and the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The committee was also instructed to be permanently
seized of the matter.

Responding to a request submitted by Sheikh
Hamad bin Jassem bin Jabr al-Thani, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the State of Qatar and Chairman of
the ministerial committee, on the basis of instructions
from His Highness the Emir, the Security Council met
on 27 November 2000 to examine Israeli actions
against the Palestinian people. In a speech to the
Security Council, the Foreign Minister of the State of
Qatar stressed the urgent need for the international
community, and for the Security Council in particular,
to take immediate measures to provide international
protection for the Palestinian people, to end the
ongoing campaign of violence, murder and destruction
against them, to ensure the safety and sanctity of Al-
Quds Al-Sharif and to enable the Palestinian people to
gain their national rights. He emphasized that future
peace and prosperity in the Middle East is contingent
upon the Council's decision, bearing in mind the
responsibility conferred upon it by the conscience of
mankind.

In this context, we reiterated in that statement by
His Excellency the Foreign Minister the need to
provide international protection to the Palestinian
people and to condemn the acts of violence committed
by the Israeli forces, as well as their excessive use of
force, which led to a high number of casualties and
extensive damage to property. We call upon Israel, as
the occupying Power, to strictly comply with its legally
binding responsibilities under the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War. We also called for the
immediate resumption of peace negotiations in the
Middle East, in accordance with the agreements made
so far, in order to avoid further deterioration of the
situation. We also called for total compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Otherwise, the
authority of the United Nations and its credibility
would be severely undermined. We further emphasized
that Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) still represented a viable framework for a
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

In conclusion, we would like to stress that
infringing upon religious holy places, in particular A1-
Quds Al-Sharif, and other holy sites that have a special
place in the hearts of every Muslim, as well as the
endeavour to change the legal, demographic, urban,
traditional and cultural status of the Holy City
constitute an outrageous affront to the sentiments of
more than a billion Muslims all over the world. That
could be the spark that would burn any hope for peace
in the region. Therefore, Al-Quds Al-Sharif is still at
the heart of any comprehensive settlement of the Arab-
Israeli conflict. There can be no peace in the Middle
East unless and until the Palestinian people regain their
legitimate rights, including the right of having an
independent state, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital, and in exercising total sovereignty over
Al-Haram Al-Sharif of Al-Quds.

