Mr. Vale de Almeida: I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the floor and the opportunity to brief
the Security Council. I am honoured to once again
address the Council on behalf of Federica Mogherini,
High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, in her capacity as
Coordinator of the Joint Commission established by the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).

First, I would like to thank Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres and the Ambassador of the
Netherlands, Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), for their excellent cooperation.
Let me also express my gratitude to our colleagues of the
Secretariat and the Security Council Affairs Division
for their unwavering support, in particular regarding
the running of the procurement channel. I would also
like to note my appreciation for their work in the
preparation of the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/602) on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). Last, but not least, I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing today.

We are in a difficult situation, which had not been
foreseen back in July 2015 when resolution 2231 (2015)
was unanimously adopted by the Security Council
(see S/PV.7488). While the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) has confirmed as recently as
24 May - for the eleventh time in a row - that Iran is
respecting its nuclear-related commitments under the
JCPOA, United States President Trump announced on
8 May that the United States will withdraw from the
agreement. The European Union (EU) and all other
remaining JCPOA participants have expressed deep
regret at that decision, including at the last meeting of
the Joint Commission on 25 May.

The preservation of the JCPOA is a key security
interest not only for the European Union, but also
for the international community as a whole. The
unanimous endorsement of the JCPOA by the Security
Council confirmed the importance of the JCPOA in
ensuring the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's
nuclear programme. The recent messages of support
expressed by an overwhelming number of partners
around the world - in Africa, Asia, Latin America and
in the Pacific - are yet another signal that the JCPOA
needs to be preserved and fully implemented.

The full implementation of the JCPOA will prevent
a nuclear arms race in the region. Such an arms race is
in no one's interests. There is no positive alternative
to the JCPOA, which is the fruit of more than 12 years
of negotiations and constitutes a lO4-page document
that is endorsed at the highest level by the international
community. Undoubtedly, it remains the standard of
a multilateral nuclear non-proliferation agreement to
which other initiatives still have to live up.

The EU has taken the position that, as long as
Iran implements its nuclear-related obligations, we
will remain firmly committed to the full and effective
implementation of the JCPOA. That has also been
echoed by the other remaining participants at the highest
level, and in that regard I would like to express sincere
thanks to the Russian Federation and the People's
Republic of China for their unwavering commitment
to the nuclear deal. Their support in facing the global
challenge of nuclear proliferation through the hard
work of multilateral diplomacy cannot be overstated.

The remaining parties to the JCPOA have held a
number of discussions on how to preserve the deal.
We recognize that sanctions-lifting is an essential part
of the agreement, and the Iranian people have a very
understandable expectation that the benefits of the deal
will continue to be felt. The European Union, together
with its partners, will continue to employ its best
efforts to preserve legitimate financial and trade flows,
preserving the interests of businesses acting in good
faith and with the endorsement of the Security Council.
The measures that we are putting in place at home are
designed to allow those businesses and investors to
continue to do their work, as governed by international
and European law.

We are of course aware that within Iran a difficult
debate is being held on the JCPOA and on the benefits
that it brings to the country and its citizens. I am
convinced that those benefits continue to be tangible,
even though I cannot hide the fact that there will be
a number of companies that do not see themselves in
a position to continue their current engagements in
Iran. The European Union continues to explore with
Iran the possibilities of preserving legitimate trade
and investment and continuing our overall bilateral
cooperation, which has taken place since 2016.

On the nuclear side, under the JCPOA Iran
is undergoing the most rigorous monitoring and
verification regime in the world. The IAEA issued
on 24 May, as I mentioned earlier, its eleventh report
since implementation day, which acknowledges once
again Iran's full compliance with its commitments
undertaken under the J CPOA. That is further reflected
by the large number of inspections on the ground. It
goes without saying that, at this juncture, it is critical to
strictly follow the terms of the deal. That is essential to
upholding the agreement and continuing to build trust.

While the JCPOA deals with nuclear
non-proliferation aspects, a number of serious issues
outside of the deal continue to cast a shadow over our
overall relationship with Iran. I regret that I have to
stress again that the situation in the region has clearly
worsened over the past few months.

Regarding the situation in Yemen, the European
Union is seriously concerned about the recent
intensification of military operations, in particular
in Al-Hudaydah, and we have urged all parties to the
conflict to ensure the protection of civilians and fully
respect international humanitarian law. The European
Union has also engaged in a regional dialogue with
the stakeholders to urge the parties to support the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen and
resume political negotiations. We note with concern the
findings of the Secretary-General's report and the Panel
of Experts on Yemen report (see S/2018/68) regarding
the proliferation of ballistic missiles and technology.
Those actions feed regional tensions and threaten the
safety and stability of Yemen's neighbours, freedom of
navigation and global sea trade.

As the Council is aware, the European Union has a
long-standing track record of expressing its concern at
the regional military build-up, including Iran's missile
programme. We have repeatedly called upon Iran to
refrain from activities that may deepen mistrust, such
as ballistic missile tests, which are inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015) and the statements associated
with it.

The situation in the region, including the
proliferation of ballistic missiles, needs to be addressed
as a priority. But those issues are distinct from the
JCPOA. Dismantling a nuclear deal that is working
would certainly not put us in a better position to
discuss other issues. Walking away from a robust
non-proliferation agreement will not provide a solution
to regional tensions or ballistic missile proliferation.

In addition to Iran's nuclear obligations, which
are laid out in annex l of the JCPOA, and to elements
related to sanctions-lifting, contained in annex 2, allow
me to reiterate the need to further engage on the basis
of annex 3 of the JCPOA, which foresees civil-nuclear
cooperation. The European Union sees this annex as
key to the overall balance of the agreement and essential
to the overall objective of ensuring the exclusively
peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme.

We continue to engage with Iran in a number
of concrete projects focused on nuclear safety and
research, and we look forward to a civil nuclear liability
seminar, to take place in Vienna in mid-July, and to
the third high-level seminar on nuclear cooperation and
governance, scheduled for November, building further
on the concept that civil-nuclear cooperation and
adherence to international norms on nuclear governance
have to go hand in hand. While implementing projects
on the ground and conducting research, Iran is also
taking steps towards its accession to the international
nuclear regulatory framework. Those steps need to be
encouraged and supported further. All of the foregoing
are significant measures that enhance the credibility
of the international community with respect to the
peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme.

Let me continue in this spirit by focusing on the
reporting related to annex B of resolution 2231 (2015),
in particular on the work of the Procurement Working
Group, which is responsible for reviewing proposals by
States seeking to engage in activities with Iran that are
for nuclear and non-nuclear civilian end uses.

The procurement channel is a key pillar of the
JCPOA. The procurement channel and the Procurement
Working Group will continue their activity in the same
spirit as our continued implementation of the other
parts of the JCPOA. Since implementation day, the
Procurement Working Group has been in full operation,
with the EU reaching out and coordinating its meetings
with the aim of promoting the Channel as the only
mechanism for legitimate transfers of Nuclear Suppliers
Group-listed items to Iran. After the United States
withdrawal, the Group met twice in the new format of
E3/EU+2 and Iran, and mandated the Working Group
Coordinator to continue the work of the Channel as the
only alternative to attempts for irregular transfers. It is
a fact that confidence in the Channel can be built only
if new proposals are officially received and reviewed. I
therefore find it positive that the Channel currently has
five proposals under review.

Transparency remains a guiding principle and
cornerstone of the JCPOA. According to paragraph
6.10 of annex 4, the Joint Commission reports to the
Security Council every six months on the status of
the Procurement Working Group's decisions and on
any implementation issues. In that context, on 8 June
the Coordinator of the Procurement Working Group
submitted to the Facilitator, on behalf of the Joint
Commission, its fifth biannual report. The report
aims to provide the Facilitator and Security Council
members with an overview of the work undertaken
by the Procurement Working Group from 1 December
2017 to 12 June 2018. The report has been circulated in
document S/2018/601.

During this period, the Procurement Working Group
continued to discuss relevant topics, including end use,
common outreach messaging and procedural aspects
relevant to the smooth processing of the proposals. It
also intensified efforts to be as transparent as possible,
without compromising confidentiality, by reaching
out to United Nations Member States and promoting
a better understanding of its aims, objectives and its
review process, which are embedded in the JCPOA'S
multilayered system of checks and balances.

Impressive outreach activities have been conducted
over the past few years, and countries around the world
are aware of the procedures of the channel. Therefore,
it is regrettable, as reported by the Secretary-General,
that some exports of listed items have been undertaken
contrary to the provisions of paragraph 2 of annex B
to resolution 2231 (2015). We see the need to further
familiarize countries and potential exporters with the
procurement channel. To that end, our outreach efforts
will continue, together with colleagues from the Security
Council secretariat and the Facilitator. Member States'
governmental export-control stakeholders should
continue supporting the engagement of their companies
in any new transfers, through only the official channels.

Noting the challenges relating to the procurement
channel in the wider JCPOA framework, we have no
time for complacency. Immediate action is required to
find a sustainable solution on overall trade with Iran,
since that would also have an important impact on the
procurement channel.

I wish to conclude my briefing with two further
comments. Should the momentum on the JCPOA's
preservation and implementation be lost, that would be
very detrimental to Iran, all other remaining JCPOA
parties and the wider international community, and
it would damage the trust in the effectiveness of
multilateral diplomacy and the non-proliferation
architecture. That is why the European Union once
again calls on the international community to support
this internationally endorsed common engagement.
All remaining signatory parties need to implement
the JCPOA in full and resolution 2231 (2015) in all
its dimensions. We need to continue to build on this
achievement of multilateral diplomacy, which is the
best hope for security and stability in the region. As
ever, the Coordinator of the Joint Commission stands
ready to work with United Nations bodies and Member
States in order to support the objectives of the JCPOA.

