Mrs. Chartsuwan (Thailand): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), namely, Brunei,
Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines,
Singapore, Viet Nam and my own country, Thailand.

At the outset, I wish to congratulate Malaysia, a
fellow ASEAN country, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August and
on its chairmanship of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. We also commend the initiative
to hold this annual open debate. Let me also express
our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
opening remarks, as well as for the briefings provided
by the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict and by the Executive Director of UNICEF.

We recognize the contribution of the Graca Machel
report (see A/51/306) published 20 years ago, which
called the international community to action to address
the effects of armed conflict on children. Since then,
the international community and the United Nations
have taken up this issue seriously and have made great
strides in reducing the suffering of children in armed
conflicts. Awareness has been raised, institutions
have been established, criteria has been put forth and
initiatives have been launched and implemented. Since
then, many children have been released from armed
forces. The Children, Not Soldiers campaign has
gained momentum and many, if not all, Governments
are now engaged in ending violations against children.
Yet children continue to face growing threats from new
conflicts and the urgent rise of violent extremism.

We share the view that a comprehensive approach
is needed to protect children in armed conflicts. While
stressing the primary responsibility and authority of
States, we once again emphasize the need to address the
root causes of hardship that children bear. It is just as
important that the Security Council and the international
community continue their efforts to address the impact
of armed conflict on children, including through the
formulation of a long-term strategic plan for their
reintegration and rehabilitation.

The monitoring and reporting mechanism
established in accordance with resolutions 1612
(2005), 1882 (2008), 1998 (2011) and 2225 (2015)
is a key instrument of the United Nations child-
protection mandate. The integrity and credibility of the
mechanism and the work of the Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict should be supported
by constructive engagement with Member States and
the use of accurate, objective, reliable and verifiable
information in reporting.

The Secretary-General's annual report (S/2016/360)
plays an important role in guiding Member States in
their efforts to strengthen child protection in armed
conflicts. All listing efforts should be objective and
comprehensive, based on credible and impartial
information, must take into account efforts made by
Member States and must be in line with the principle of
the responsibility and authority of States. Furthermore,
in implementing the mechanisms and action plans
already in place, it is important that all the relevant
actors be properly informed and coordinated. The
Council should continue to take a cooperative approach
and provide necessary assistance to the relevant parties
that cooperate with the United Nations.

At the regional level, ASEAN member States have
been stepping up efforts to tackle issues that children
face, both at national and regional levels, as well as in
institutional and practical areas. In November 2015, our
leaders adopted the ASEAN Regional Plan of Action
on Elimination of Violence against Children, which
provides a comprehensive framework for regional
action for a period of 10 years from 2016 to 2025,
ranging from prevention to monitoring and evaluation.
ASEAN also closely cooperates with United Nations
agencies and their mechanisms.

ASEAN Member States remain strongly committed
to combating violations of children's rights, anywhere,
and by any one. Let us work closely together to ensure
the betterment of our children's lives, because they are
also our common future.

In my national capacity, allow me to briefly share
a few points.

Thailand would also like to align its national
statement with the statement to be delivered by Slovenia
on behalf of the Members of the Human Security
Network.

Thailand is of the view that efforts through national
strategies to promote the rule of law and quality
education and improve socioeconomic conditions
can contribute to the promotion and protection of
children's rights. We also welcome the efforts of the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in its endeavours to end all violations against
children by engaging constructively with Member
States and all stakeholders. Lastly, Thailand remains
committed to fulfilling its international obligations
under the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
its Optional Protocols to ensure the protection of our
children in all instances. We would like to echo the call
for the universal ratification of the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.

