Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
the British presidency for having organized today's
meeting. By way of general comment, I would like to
say that Spain fully supports the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/682) and all its recommendations.

The report comes at a particularly momentous time,
just after we have thoroughly reviewed the women and
peace and security agenda and as we are considering
the review process of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Therefore, the moment chosen by the United Kingdom
President could not have been more timely. I will try to
summarize the Spanish position in four main points.

First, we particularly value the centrality of the
political element in peacekeeping operations and the
strengthening of prevention and mediation. The focus
on prevention based on a thorough analysis of the
local context, clearly indicates the path to be followed.
Secondly, as the Security Council has acknowledged in
its recent resolution 2242 (2015), we need to improve
the integration of the recommendations on women and
peace and security in the work of the various bodies
of the United Nations system. The Secretary-General
mentioned that point in his briefing. Thirdly, the
protection of civilians must remain at the heart of our
concerns. That is why we are pleased to see the progress
made by introducing periodic assessments of the
missions. The fourth main principle of Spain's position
concerns the need to improve peacekeeper training
and to improve the accountability of our mandates.
Mandates must be clear, coherent and realistic.

Iwill now comment briefly on sequenced mandates.
Such mandates must have better adaptation to the reality
on the ground as an objective. Better sequencing does
not lead to mandates of greater economy, but rather to
mandates of greater efficiency. We must prioritize the
goal sought through sequencing. Sequencing cannot
sacrifice essential priorities, such as defending and
promoting human rights or protecting civilians, which
are crucial conditions in preventing conflict, and
therefore in building lasting peace.

The final objective guiding our work must be the
implementation of inclusive political solutions and
translating the ground-based, people-centred approach
into reality, as called for by the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations. The prioritization of ongoing
tasks initiated by the Council, such as in the Central
African Republic, is very useful in terms of focusing our
future work. It would be suitable to increasingly make
use of the potential granted by periodic mandate reviews
in order to increase progress in that area. With respect
to periodic mandate evaluations, the responsibility of
the penholders is particularly important.

I would now like to say a few words on the
transparency of the Council and its mandates. To ensure
the success of all of those initiatives, transparency in
the Council's functioning needs to be improved. First,
as Spain stated on previous occasions, we support
greater openness in the penholder system, with, as a
general rule, the sharing of the that function among the
elected members. We believe that would be a step in
the right direction, in that it would facilitate the flow
of information.

Secondly, we believe it is important for the process
of selecting mission penholders to be rigorous and,
moreover, transparent.

Thirdly, as proposed by New Zealand, we believe it
would be suitable for the Council to be able to regularly
receive briefings on the situation on the ground, in
which the United Nations Operations and Crisis Centre
would participate.

With regard to special political missions, the report
of the Secretary-General includes a recommendation
to establish new regional offices, and notes the
appropriateness of special political missions to
strengthen the political element of peace operations.
Spain of course supports those recommendations.

I wish to conclude my statement by reiterating once
again Spain's commitment to United Nations peace
operations, which has been steadfast in the past and
will continue to be so in the future.

