I would like to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing. I hope I can count on her understanding, as my statement will focus on the remarks made by the other briefer at today's meeting, whose appearance before the Security Council has been highly anticipated and whose very participation has been the subject of intense discussion among the members of the Council. I would like to welcome Mr. Fernando Arias, the Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), and to take this opportunity to ask him a number of questions concerning the approach that the OPCW is pursuing with regard to the Syrian chemical dossier. With your permission, Mr. President, I will now switch to English to ensure that it is easier for Mr. Arias to understand my questions without the possibility of anything being lost in translation. We all remember when, with our encouragement, Syria joined the OPCW, made its initial declaration and subsequently got rid of its stockpiles of chemical weapons, a fact that the OPCW has confirmed on numerous occasions. That development led to hopes that the allegations that Damascus had used chemical weapons against its own population would become a thing of the past. However, the situation gradually changed. Our Western colleagues consistently increased the pressure on the Syrian authorities, trying in vain to topple the Government with the help of the armed opposition groups that they supported. I will not dwell on the details. To cut a long story short, Western countries made a number of serious accusations against Damascus, mostly on the basis of video footage from social media and questionable testimonies by witnesses on the ground, relayed through foreign-based Syrian opposition and non-governmental organizations such as the White Helmets, which formed the basis for the reports of the OPCW's Investigation and Identification Team (IIT). The West has maintained its anti-Syrian narrative despite all the apparent discrepancies and evidence to the contrary put forward by Syria, Russia and independent experts, and Western countries continue to exploit the allegations as part of their political crusade against the Al-Assad Government. There can be no doubt that the OPCW, under the leadership of Mr. Arias, plays an important role in that process and is actively used by our Western colleagues to support their claims that Syria has used chemical weapons on several occasions. However, the conclusions of the OPCW have been repeatedly called into question, not only by external experts but also by those from inside the Organization who participated in the investigative activities. In general, the public has a lot of questions for the OPCW. We believe that those questions need to be addressed in order to uphold the credibility of the OPCW. That is why we insisted on inviting Mr. Arias to Security Council meetings and believe that he should be welcome to address the Council regularly. Russia attaches great importance to the OPCW and strongly condemns all instances of the use of chemical weapons, no matter who the perpetrators. However, we reject speculation and political smear campaigns, which, unfortunately, are poisoning the OPCW on an increasingly frequent basis. In order to facilitate the Director-General's work, we have prepared a series of questions. First, while investigating the incident in Aleppo in November 2018, the OPCW Technical Secretariat received exhaustive evidence from the Syrian authorities, including information from Russian military experts, showing that the opposition was responsible for that chemical attack. However, the latest report of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission claims that the available evidence is not sufficient to conclude that chemical weapons were used in that attack. In contrast, during the investigations into the incidents in Douma and Khan Shaykhun, the evidence provided by notorious non-governmental organizations such as the White Helmets was accepted readily and without hesitation by the Technical Secretariat. What comments does the Director- General have regarding that clear example of double standards? Second, almost every Technical Secretariat report is based on the notion of "highly likely", with evidence provided by sources whose reputation is questionable at best. Rather than collecting samples on-site, the Technical Secretariat is conducting its investigations remotely, relying on information from external and open sources. Meanwhile, States members of the OPCW are expected to be satisfied with those investigations. Does the Director-General accept that such practices violate the basic requirements of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), in particular with regard to preserving the chain of custody? What measures does he plan to implement in order to bring the working methods of the OPCW Technical Secretariat into compliance with the CWC? Third, at one point in time the OPCW Technical Secretariat offered to help Syria in submitting its initial declaration, which was prepared within a limited time frame and amid an ongoing military conflict on Syrian territory. It is evident, even to external observers, that the Syrian authorities are willing to cooperate with a view to closing all outstanding issues. However, the same does not appear to be the case for the OPCW Technical Secretariat. There are indications that it is deliberately stalling the process by inventing further pretexts with a view to keeping the Syrian file open. In particular, Mr. Ian Henderson, a former OPCW inspector, who has first-hand experience of the situation, claims that several States had issues and gaps similar to the Syrian Arab Republic related to their initial declarations. Yet none of those countries have ever faced the same level of criticism as Syria. He described the Technical Secretariat's approach to Syria's initial declaration as "keep the file open" and "keep the pressure on". The Technical Secretariat is also attempting to turn a blind eye to 200 tons of missing chemical-weapon precursors in Libya, while at the same time pressuring Syria to explain the disappearance of tiny quantities of chemical substances. Can Mr. Arias confirm that the issues concerning Syria's initial declaration are not extraordinary for the OPCW? And if that is the case, then how does he explain the discrepancy in the way the Technical Secretariat has approached the Syrian initial declaration as compared to other countries? Why are the requirements for Libya different from those for Syria, for example? Fourth, the controversy surrounding the OPCW's Douma investigation and report has been widely publicized. Some of the investigators claimed that there was irregular and scientifically fraudulent behaviour in the process involving the suppression and manipulation of, among other things, chemical and toxicological evidence, as well as a failed attempt to publish a doctored version of the team's original report. Mr. Arias said that all views were taken into consideration, yet the inspectors say otherwise. Many, including the first Director-General of the OPCW, Jose Bustani, believe that an open and free discussion between the OPCW management team and all of the investigators would help the organization resolve that controversy. After all, the CWC provides for inspectors to attach any differing observations to inspection reports, including reports on the alleged use of chemical weapons. In that respect, has Mr. Arias met or would he be willing to meet with those inspectors to allow them the opportunity to share their concerns? Fifth, it is now well established via leaked documents and the testimonies of former OPCW inspectors that the Fact-Finding Mission's original interim report on Douma was heavily redacted and that there was a failed attempt to publish that redacted version without the knowledge of the Douma Mission team, including the insertion of a number of unsubstantiated conclusions. That failed attempt was widely reported and, as far as we know, has not been publicly denied. That incident constitutes a major act of deception on the part of the OPCW and was, as the Director- General is aware, the cause of the original rift within the Fact-Finding Mission. In an email recently published by the Grayzone news outlet, it is claimed by the OPCW's former Chief of Cabinet that the report was not redacted at the behest of the Office of the Director-General. Has an investigation been conducted to determine at whose behest it was carried out, and if so, what was the outcome of that investigation and what actions were taken as a result? Sixth, in October 2018 the Courage Foundation panel reported that there were detailed anomalies in the Fact-Finding Mission's final report on the Douma incident, including with regard to chemical analysis, toxicology consultations, ballistics studies and witness testimonies. Those anomalies were corroborated by leaked documents and are now well understood. However, the OPCW has refused to respond to any of those clearly defined issues and instead repeatedly dismissed those issues based on the assertion that most of the work was carried out after the departure of Inspector B. But if we compare the final report with the original report that was leaked, it is clear that the bulk of the text was already written by June 2018. In the light of those facts, does the Director-General still stand by his assertion that the bulk of the Fact-Finding Mission's investigation was carried out after the departure of Inspector B? Seventh, in recent weeks OPCW personnel are reported to have leaked a draft letter to the Bellingcat news website. The Bellingcat article claims that Mr. Arias said that Inspector B's assumptions concerning the final report were wrong because "he simply wasn't aware of the latest scientific techniques used by the OPCW, because they were developed after he had left the Organization. It was these techniques that allowed the OPCW to conclude that chlorine gas had been released in the building in which the Syrian civilians died". Regarding the draft letter that was leaked to Bellingcat, can Mr. Arias confirm whether the source of that leak was from inside the OPCW, whether he agrees with the information in the article and whether an investigation has been launched into the suspected leak? Eighth, over the past week new documents have emerged, again via the Grayzone, confirming that other senior officials also shared concerns regarding the Douma investigation and supported the dissenting inspectors. One senior official is reported to have made highly politicized and prejudiced comments that the Douma investigation could not be challenged because that would "feed into the Russian narrative". Has the Director-General been made aware of that, and what comments does he have in that regard? I will stop there. Eight questions will be enough for now, but I can assure Mr. Arias that we have many more. I want to draw the Director-General's attention to the fact that yesterday we circulated as an official document of the Security Council and the General Assembly the summary of our Arria Formula meeting in September, which contains the statements of all the participants who sent them to us. I will make sure that Mr. Arias receives a copy of that document, which I believe will be of particular interest to him. In conclusion, I wish to remind the Director-General of the special responsibility that rests with him in leading a key pillar of the chemical-weapon non- proliferation regime, namely the organization responsible for its implementation and verification. Though it may be technical in nature, its conclusions have far-reaching political consequences that affect people's daily lives. I have intentionally refrained from elaborating on the Executive Council's disputed decision of 9 July, which is based on the controversial and biased report of the illegitimate IIT. However, the Council should be mindful of the fact that that report, coupled with the artificial delay in resolving the outstanding issues related to Syria's initial declaration, triggered a chain of unfair, discriminatory and oppressive initiatives against Syria, both in The Hague and in New York. One such unfortunate example is the campaign being led by Western countries to implement a decision of the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention to disqualify Syria from the OPCW. That is another destabilizing step that could have severe and irreversible implications. The Director-General mentioned the Alexei Navalny situation in his briefing. We also have questions to raise on that issue, but I will save them for the closed consultations that will follow this meeting.
