Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, we would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing and to welcome once again our old
friend Ambassador Olof Skoog, who is now wearing a
different hat. We ofcourse also thank Ambassador Marc
Pecsteen de Buytswerve of Belgium for his briefing on
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). I would
like to highlight several points.

First, Indonesia continues to support the full
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) and ofresolution 2231 (2015) as awhole.
We continue to regret the United States withdrawal from
the JCPOA and its further reimposition of unilateral
sanctions. While we understand the difficulties in the
implementation of the JCPOA in the context of the
United States sanctions, we are also concerned by Iran's
moves to reduce its JCPOA commitments. Indonesia
strongly calls on all parties to remain committed to the
full and effective implementation of the J CPOA and of
resolution 2231 (2015), in good faith.

We commend the independence, professionalism
and impartiality of the work of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in verifying and
monitoring Iran's implementation of its nuclear-related
commitments under the JCPOA. We call on Iran to
continue to cooperate with the IAEA. Furthermore,
the deal is not only about non-proliferation, but also
about the economic interests of Iran. In that regard,
we continue to support legitimate trade activities with
Iran and welcome the decisions of Belgium, Denmark,
Finland, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden to join
the Instrument in Support of Trade Exchanges, as
elaborated earlier by Ambassador Skoog.

Secondly, we continue to note with concern the
differences in the interpretation and implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). Annex B of resolution 2231
(2015) is designed to improve transparency and create
an atmosphere conducive to the full implementation of
the JCPOA. It is therefore pertinent to implement that
resolution as a whole, together with the JCPOA. We
urge the parties to engage in a constructive dialogue to
solve those differences. In the same spirit, in order to
create an atmosphere conducive to implementation and
ensure stability in the region, we call upon Iran to take
into consideration the lawful concerns of other States
when carrying out its activities.

Thirdly, as aproponent of a balanced implementation
of the three pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), Indonesia continues to
believe that the JCPOA is an essential element of the
global non-proliferation architecture. The JCPOA
was a significant diplomatic achievement endorsed by
the Security Council through resolution 2231 (2015).
Now the international community must live up to its
obligation to fully support it.

We must also not forget our commitment to
achieving a world free of nuclear weapons. As a party
to the NPT, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty and the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone, and as a main proponent of the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, Indonesia calls on all
to support global nuclear disarmament. To that end, we
fully support the process towards the establishment of
a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction, the first conference of
which has just concluded its first session. That takes us
one step closer to a world without nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction.

In closing, we call on everyone to demonstrate their
full commitment to peace, stability and the rule of law.
Only when we achieve those ends can we have a safe
and prosperous world for all.

