Mr. Theron (Namibia): I wish to join other
delegations in thanking Special Representative Vieira
de Mello for his interesting and comprehensive briefing
on the situation in East Timor and the work of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET). I also want at the outset to
commend Mr. Vieira de Mello and his staff for the skill
and dedication with which they are performing their
work. The notable progress and successes of UNTAET
are testimony of this.

Today's briefing, in our assessment, has shown
that, despite obstacles, considerable progress has been
achieved in East Timor. This progress began with the
relief efforts last year after the large-scale destruction
of the territory and led to where we are today, with
solid plans for major reconstruction and development
programmes. It has to be admitted, though, that serious
challenges remain for the implementation of the
reconstruction programmes. We have noted and support
Mr. Vieira de Mello's proposals on how to address
these challenges.

However, with the excellent support pledged at
the donor conference hosted by the Government of
Portugal last week, as well as the endorsement of the
work programme for the territory's development, my
delegation is confident that these programmes will be
implemented in a successful and timely fashion. My
delegation is particularly gratified to learn today that
many of the earlier obstacles that hampered
rehabilitation work - such as the slow disbursement of
funds - are being overcome.

In rebuilding societies and nations it is always
important that the groundwork be properly laid. East
Timor is certainly on the right track, and we welcome
the continuing efforts to achieve reconciliation and
nation-building. In this regard, we strongly support the
establishment of a national reconciliation commission.
We also support the work of the National Consultative
Council in its work to bring East Timorese together.

Also of great significance to my delegation was
the recent convening in Dili of the first congress on
women's issues. It was a commendable early start to
women's efforts to ensure that their views are fully
taken into consideration during the development of the
territory.

While welcoming the overall stability in the
security situation, my delegation deplores the recent
attacks on peacekeeping forces. We furthermore share
the concerns expressed by other delegations about the
assaults on personnel of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which
resulted in the withdrawal of personnel from three
major refugee camps in the Kupang area. We trust that
concrete steps will be taken to ensure the safety and
security of relief workers. My delegation also remains
concerned about the reports of continuing militia
activities in the refugee camps in West Timor.

With regard to the return of refugees, my
delegation has noted that repatriation continues,
although the rate of return has slowed over the past two
months. We agree with Mr. Vieira de Mello that
Indonesia should be assisted by the international
community in resettling refugees that wish to remain in
West Timor. On this point, I wonder if it is possible for
Mr. Vieira de Mello at this stage to tell us with what
degree of certainty we can determine the number of
refugees that may wish to stay in West Timor.

Finally, my delegation again wishes to reiterate
its support and encouragement for Mr. Vieira de Mello
and all the staff of UNTAET in their difficult work
ahead.

