The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Costa Rica, Cuba, Indonesia, Jamaica,
Japan, Malaysia, Nepal, New Zealand, the Philippines,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Spain, Thailand,
Ukraine and Venezuela, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dauth
(Australia), Mr. Fonseca (Brazil), Mr. Serbini
(Brunei Darussalam), Mrs. Chassoul (Costa Rica), Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba),
Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia), Miss Durrant
(Jamaica), Mr. Satoh (Japan), Mr. Hasmy
(Malaysia), Mr. Sharma (Nepal), Mr. MacKay
(New Zealand), Mr. Yuchengco (Philippines),
Mr. Seixas da Costa (Portugal), Mr. Lee
(Republic of Korea), Mr. Arias (Spain),
Mr. Kasemsarn (Thailand), Mr. Kuchinsky
(Ukraine) and Ms. Pulido Santana (Venezuela)
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2002/432 and Add.l, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor.

This public meeting has been organized as a
parallel commemorative event for the Security Council
and the wider membership to celebrate East Timor's
independence. It is also an opportunity for all of us to
reaffirm our support for and solidarity with East Timor.

I welcome the presence at the Council table of
Ms. Louise Frechette, the Deputy Secretary-General,
and give her the floor.


