Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me start
by thanking Lithuania for taking the initiative to
organize this very important open debate and also
for the excellent concept note that has been circulated
(S/2015/306, annex). It provides valuable guidance for
our debate today.

In the view of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
the availability and uncontrolled spread of small
arms and light weapons constitutes a threat to peace,
justice and development in many regions around the
world. Therefore, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
welcomes this open debate and would like to encourage
the Council to adopt the draft resolution that is under
consideration.

We align ourselves with the statement made earlier
on behalf of the European Union. In view of time
constraints, I will limit myselfto a shortened version of
this speech. The full text will be available on Twitter. I
would like to make three points concerning the human
cost, the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), and the need for a
comprehensive approach.

First, we all know that the human cost of the illicit
trade, accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons is tremendous. Small arms and light weapons
are the most deadly weapons worldwide. They are truly
a global public ill. The proliferation of small arms
and light weapons increases the risk that both smaller
and larger conflicts will give rise to mass atrocities.
The misuse of these weapons results in grave crimes
and thereby poses a threat to international peace and
security. We see a direct link with the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and the responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.

Secondly, let me stress the great importance of
the ATT. Its entry into force in December 2014 was
a great step forward, especially its obligation for the
States party to the Treaty to set up export control
systems. The inclusion of ammunition in the Treaty,
of course, was vital, as it enables the weapons to be
used. We are proud to have been an active participant
in the drafting of the Treaty. The current challenge is
to effectively implement the ATT and work towards its
universalization. We call on all States Members of the
United Nations to ratify the Treaty, as well as on the
current signatories and States parties to the Treaty to
make the first conference of State parties in Mexico
City a success. Together we must implement the ATT.

My third point is on the need for a comprehensive
approach to address small arms and light weapons
issues. Such a comprehensive approach is of the utmost
importance, as the effects ofillegal small arms and light
weapons touch on many different policy areas. The
availability and uncontrolled spread of small arms and
light weapons feed political instability and conflicts.
They threaten the conditions for social, economic
and human development, and the presence of large
quantities of such weapons in societies, especially in
fragile States and under-governed areas, causes social
tensions and fuels violence.

Therefore, in our view, small arms and light weapons
issues should be approached in a comprehensive,
integrated manner, addressing good governance,
strengthening the rule of law and providing alternative
livelihood initiatives. This issue should also be part
of broader security programs, such as security sector
reform, as well as United Nations peace operations.
As our Moroccan colleague, who preceded me, also
mentioned, we see a direct link with anti-terrorism
efforts. We pay tribute here to the cooperation the
Kingdom of the Netherlands enjoys with the Kingdom
of Morocco on anti-terrorism efforts. Together we are
going to chair the Global Counter-terrorism Forum.

In conclusion, in 2001 Secretary-General Koffi
Annan stated the following while addressing the
Security Council:

"Small arms are easy to buy, easy to use, easy
to transport and easy to conceal. Their proliferation

exacerbates conflict, sparks refugee flows,
undermines the rule of law and spawns a culture of
violence and impunity. This is not just a question
of disarmament; it is also an issue of development,
democracy, human rights and human security."
(S/PV4355, p. 4).

Let those words serve as a rallying point for
action on our behalf. For our part, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands looks forward to continued work with our
partners for peace, justice and development. Together,
let us end the devastating effects of the illicit transfer,
destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms
and light weapons for peoples and societies worldwide.

