Mr. Petrie: It is an honour for me to brief the
Council on the preparations for the forthcoming
elections in Burundi in my new capacity as Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General for Burundi.

This is a historic moment for Burundi, and for the
region. Marking the end of its transition in 2005,
Burundi held elections that led to the installation of a
democratically-elected Government. Now, in 2010,
Burundi is set to set an extraordinary example of
political maturity. A country until recently embroiled in
internal violence is hopefully on the verge of
demonstrating how one democratically-elected
Government cedes place to another.

Since my deployment to Burundi, while nuances
of view obviously remain, all of the political and civil
society interlocutors I have encountered have
expressed cautious optimism for the success of the
impending elections. We plan to remain closely
engaged in support of the Burundian people to ensure
that this cautious optimism is translated into reality.

Let me turn to the details of electoral
preparedness. On 15 December 2009, the National
Independent Electoral Commission set forth an
ambitious electoral calendar. This entails five polls,
starting with the communal elections on 21 May and
followed by the presidential elections on 28 June, the
legislative elections on 23 July, the senatorial elections
on 28 July and the collines elections on 7 September.
10-35583
In the event that a second round of presidential
elections proves necessary, it could be held on 26 July.

An essential step in the electoral preparations was
the issuing of some 900,000 free identity cards. In
addition to these cards, the President of the Electoral
Commission also authorized the use of other
documentation to complete registration. Together, these
steps paved the way for voter registration, which took
place from 21 January to 8 February. Some 3,541,596
voters were registered at the close of the process, well
above initial expectations. Provisional voter lists were
thereafter issued and corrected, though not necessarily
to the extent initially expected.

To date, 24 political parties have submitted the
names of their candidates for the communal elections.
Twelve of these parties are registered in 50 per cent of
the communes, While five have registered candidates in
all 129 communes. Fifteen political parties have
designated presidential candidates and there are two
independent candidates. The Commission plans to
establish 7,000 polling stations countrywide, an
increase of 700 stations compared to the 2005 elections.

The code of conduct established for political
parties, the media and the administration has now been
signed by almost all concerned. While it is yet to be
signed by the Front pour la democratie au Burundi and
the Conseil national pour la defense de la democratie-
Nyangoma, efforts are still ongoing, with the support
of Governments and organizations in the region, to
encourage these parties to adhere to the principles.

Security during the electoral period is a key
priority for the Government and its partners. A
technical commission to coordinate all dimensions of
this was established in 2009, bringing together the
Ministers of Public Security, Defence, Interior and
Justice. The Commission has been working on an
integrated operational security plan. The draft decree
was to have been endorsed by the Council of Ministers
on 3 May, but the meeting was postponed. This has not
stopped the relevant security structures from
continuing to implement the various components of the
integrated operational security plan.

On 4 May, President Pierre Nkurunziza issued a
decree setting the duration of the campaign from 5 to
18 May. On the same day, the Minister of the Interior
called upon all Burundians to respect the electoral
code, the guidelines concerning demonstrations and the
code of conduct.
10-35583

Turning to the budget for the elections, I am
happy to report that, through the collective efforts and
contributions of the Burundi Government and its
partners, the electoral budget has now been all but met.
The remaining budget gap is now estimated at just over
$1,700,000. The electoral cycle can begin in May while
our joint efforts continue to meet that final amount.
Contributors to the United Nations-managed basket
fund include Belgium, Egypt, the European Union,
France, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, the United
Nations Development Programme and the
Peacebuilding Fund. Belgium, China, the European
Union, France, Germany, the Netherlands, the United
Kingdom and the United States have also made
additional bilateral contributions to these elections. For
its part, I am pleased to inform the Council that the
Government of Burundi has provided a total of
$8.1 million towards the electoral budget, including
$2 million for the security costs of the elections.

In response to the President's request, a number
of international partners have committed to deploying
long-term electoral observers. The European Union has
already deployed its observers, and I understand that
Belgium, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Kenya, Namibia, South Africa, Uganda, the United
States, the African Union, the East African Community
and some international non-governmental
organizations are all considering deploying observers.

Concerning direct support to the Electoral
Commission, a group of international experts,
supported by the United Nations, is providing technical
assistance. The United Nations has, of course, played a
long and important role in helping to prepare the
ground for these elections, either by supporting the
various mechanisms established to coordinate
international assistance, conducting field monitoring
missions, advocating to help Burundi narrow the
electoral funding gap, providing assistance during the
identity card delivery campaign, or building capacity in
security, human rights, media and gender-based aspects
of the electoral process.

Despite all of these positive developments to
date, I would not pretend that significant challenges do
not remain. I need hardly remind this Council that the
elections are taking place against a backdrop of the
violence and real human suffering that affected the
country only a few years ago. In my view, the
challenges ahead relate particularly to the tightness of
3
the electoral calendar and to the management of
tensions that may arise on the day of elections, as
results are announced, or in the resolution of any
subsequent electoral disputes. We have established a
United Nations task force which will closely monitor
and react to any contingency needs for logistical or
other support to the National Independent Electoral
Commission. I am also happy to note that the
Commission has provided training to political parties
to sensitize them on the peaceful management of
electoral results. And again, the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB) is working
attentively with partners to support a process for the
orderly, careful and non-partisan management of any
disputes.

I am happy to note that, by the start of this year,
incidents of pre-eIectoral violence on the part of young
people associated with political parties had already
started to decrease. That said, isolated incidents
continue to be reported. We must all watch vigilantly to
ensure that, with the formal electoral campaign now
under way, such violence does not re-emerge as a
significant threat.

The forthcoming elections will represent the
culmination of almost two decades of hard work in the
cause of peace by the people of Burundi, their political
leaders, the leaders of the region and the African
continent, and supported by us, Burundi's friends and
partners at the international level. As I have suggested,
the preparations for the elections are grounds for
cautious optimism. I would like to reiterate that the
elections in Burundi are significant not only for the
country, but also for the subregion. Many of Burundi's
close and less close neighbours are also embarking
upon challenging electoral cycles. We believe that
successful and peaceful elections in Burundi would
raise the bar and set the true standards for remarkable
progress in the broader region.

But looking beyond the elections, the country
will continue to face socio-economic, political and
security challenges that will continue to need
addressing. Continued close engagement by the wider
international community will remain crucial to
ensuring that the gains achieved are irreversible and
that the country continues on its path of economic
recovery and sustainable development. One question
that the Government has already begun to discuss in
very broad terms with the United Nations is what form
United Nations engagement should best take after the
installation of a new Government, and I look forward
to continuing that conversation with the Government,
with the successor administration that issues from the
elections, with international partners, and with this
Council.

Finally, I would be remiss indeed if I did not take
the opportunity of this briefing to salute the tireless
work of my predecessor, Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, as
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General, as
well as of Deputy Executive Representative Bintou
Keita, who has played such a pivotal role in the run-up
to these elections and during the interregnum in the
leadership of BINUB.

