Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
supports Kuwait's request for today's emergency open
meeting on the Middle East. I would also like to thank
Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing to the Security Council.

Recently, there have been protests and
demonstrations in Gaza. In that regard, Israel used force,
which has caused heavy casualties among Palestinian
civilians, including many women and children. We
express our serious concern over that development.
We condemn any violent actions against civilians
and call on both Israel and Palestine, in particular the
Israeli side, to exercise restraint in order to prevent
further escalation of the tense situation. We convey our
condolences and sincere sympathy to the victims and
their families. We call for an objective and impartial
investigation in order to clarify the events.
China has consistently advocated that the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict be settled through peaceful
negotiations. China condemns any measure that
exacerbates tension and causes casualties among
innocent civilians. We urge the parties concerned to stop
the violence, the abusive use of force and, in particular,
actions against civilians. The use of violence and force
will not bring about security for anyone. We urge the
parties concerned to create enabling conditions, resume
contact and dialogue as soon as possible and seek to
return to the right track of the political negotiations.

The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip is
serious. That does not help regional stability. We hope
that the parties concerned will earnestly implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions, fully lift
the blockade on Gaza as soon as possible and provide
the people in Gaza with a normal and dignified space
for their survival and development. We call on the
international community to step up its assistance and
support to the Palestinian people.

The question of Palestine is at the heart of the
Middle East issue. It is fundamental to peace in the
region. In that regard, the status of Jerusalem is a
highly complex and sensitive issue. It represents the
basis for the settlement of the Palestinian issue. Several
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
include provisions pertaining to that issue. Under the
current circumstances, we call on all parties to bear
in mind peace and calm in the region, to exercise
restraint, to avoid any words and deeds that may
escalate the situation and to work together to facilitate
the de-escalation of the situation. All parties should
respect the historical differences, uphold fairness and
justice, implement international consensus and strive
for peaceful coexistence. In accordance with such
principles and the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the final status of Jerusalem should be settled through
negotiations so as to reach a solution that accommodates
the interests of all parties.

The two-State solution is the right way to resolve
the question of Palestine. It is also an important guide
for action. The international community should uphold
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the principle
of land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative and
resolve differences through negotiations in order to
achieve a comprehensive, lasting and just solutuion to
the Palestinian question as soon as possible.

China remains committed to supporting and
facilitating the Middle East peace process. We have
always stood in solidarity with the Palestinian people in
the pursuit of their just cause to restore their legitimate
national rights and supported the establishment of
a fully sovereign and independent Palestinian State
on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. China will continue to tirelessly strive
to achieve peace in accordance with the four-point
proposal put forward by Chinese President Xi Jinping
and to promote the political settlement of the question
of Palestine.

