Mr. Baja (Philippines): We are honoured,
Mr. Minister, that you are presiding over the Security
Council meeting on this important issue of the
protection of civilians, and we thank your delegation
for convening this open debate. I also thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Jan
Egeland, for presenting an update on protection issues
in conflict situations and for stressing his seven
challenges and recommended responses with regard to
those protection issues.

The continued and worsening suffering of many
civilians today is an unacceptable irony considering the
advances that man has achieved in the new millennium.
Just as collective efforts in commerce and information
technology have benefited mankind, collective efforts
are also essential in responding to the various
protection challenges that are bound to affect societies.
Three major points will give a fresh perspective on the
issue; a system-wide approach; more proactivity; and
domestic ownership of a culture of protection.

Concerning the system-wide approach, my
delegation is happy to note that the Security Council
appears to have accepted the link between security and
human rights and the growing consciousness within the
United Nations with regard to the crucial importance of
a coherent system-wide response to the situation of
affected civilians. No organ or entity of the United
Nations has a monopoly on effective response. The
work of the Council on the issue should, therefore, be
effectively integrated with the work of other entities in
the Organization - particularly with that of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the specialized agencies - and, in applicable
cases, with the work of non-governmental
organizations and civil society.
In that regard, we cannot overemphasize the
value of the road map for the protection of civilians,
which lays out the responsibilities of all concerned
United Nations entities. We call for a periodic
assessment, possibly to be led by the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, of the progress by
various concerned United Nations organs and agencies
in the discharge of their mandates in this area. That
information could very well feed into an enhanced and
accurate reporting and monitoring framework and also
provide valuable input for the review of the
Millennium Declaration, which identified the theme of
protecting the vulnerable as a priority.

The report of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change (A/59/565) stresses the need
for United Nations organs, including the Security
Council, to be more proactive in their work. Indeed,
my delegation believes that that recommendation cuts
across all the issues within the Council, including its
work on the protection of civilians.

It may be observed that the greater part of the
work of the United Nations in protecting civilians
involves after-the-fact operations that are mainly
reactive responses to crises. Although it is
understandable that work in protecting civilians occurs
more during or after a conflict, there should be more
effort to protect civilians in the face of imminent
conflict. That proactive way of protecting people will
save more lives and reduce vulnerability to the grim
consequences of conflict. Specific strategies would
entail a more systematic incorporation of protection
issues in the planning of all peace support operations to
include procedures, inter alia, to detect and prevent
sexual and gender-based violence, mitigate the
negative consequences of displacement and curb the
use of small arms to perpetuate conflict.

More fundamentally, being proactive in the
protection of civilians fosters the prevention of
conflict. Pivotal to meeting the challenges of
preventing conflict and related security threats is the
analysis of and response to the root causes of conflict.
As observed by the High-level Panel in its report, lack
of development undermines peace and security. The
Panel also emphasized that development is vital in
preventing the erosion of the capacity of States in
meeting the threats to security and constitutes the way
towards peace and security in the long term.

The United Nations is auspiciously placed to
forge regional networks of cooperation and support in
order to ensure the protection of civilians at all stages
of conflict - more favourably, at the pre-eruption
stages. The work that the Council undertakes in
harnessing regional and subregional cooperation
contributes to achieving a proactive strategy for the
protection of civilians. The role of humanitarian
organizations in that regard is important and has been
acknowledged to be so, and it will continue to be vital
in the future. Such recognition could best be evidenced
by granting those organizations unimpeded access to
civilians in need - and, more so, by ensuring the
safety of their personnel.

Finally, like many other principles and systems, a
culture of protection of civilians can hardly be imposed
on any society. For it to be truly absorbed, there should
be genuine domestic ownership of a culture of
protection. Nevertheless, the international community
needs to engage in emergency conflict situations where
there is a lack of willingness or capacity of States to
protect civilians.

The United Nations should lead efforts in
capacity-building for States that request it and in
facilitating the mobilization of needed resources.
Along those lines, peacekeeping operations should
have robust and well-resourced human rights
components focusing on children and gender. The
Security Council promotes domestic ownership of a
culture of protection by enabling concerned States to
effectively respond to crises and ensure respect for and
adherence to the principles of international law. United
Nations country teams and peace missions can also
play a role in facilitating the devolution of a culture of
protection from the national level to the local levels of
society. Once again, the reports, briefings and
proposals by humanitarian organizations, based on
their experience on the ground, will be of immense
help in that regard.

The agenda for the protection of civilians
requires sustained and pragmatic commitment. Political
will among all concerned should be heightened and
translated into tangible strategies to improve the
environment of protection for all civilians. That would
now best be applied in the specific crises cited by
Under-Secretary-General Egeland, such as those in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Cote d'Ivoire,
Afghanistan, the Sudan, Iraq, Liberia and Somalia. We
are happy to note that those protection issues are firmly
on the Council's radar.

