Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome His Excellency Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and to express Egypt's full
support for his work under his important mandate. I
would also like to express our appreciation to Sweden
for convening this debate, which addresses a central
aspect of the future role of the United Nations in
maintaining international peace and security.

In the light of the emerging and unconventional
challenges in our world - including the proliferation
of extremist organizations, organized crime, migration
and environmental challenges - we need to develop
a creative approach to address them. Given the nature
of those challenges, an overlap between conflict
prevention, conflict resolution, peacebuilding,
peacekeeping and sustainable development is inevitable

The comprehensive reviews carried out in 2015 have
given us a clear understanding of the impact of those
challenges on the role of the United Nations and on the
concepts governing peacebuilding and sustainability.
The subsequent resolution 2282 (2016) constituted the
political framework for such a conceptual development.
One of the most important conclusions to be drawn
from those reviews is the imperative to abandon the
concept of crisis or conflict management and to adopt
an approach that seeks to either prevent conflicts
before they occur or to find a sustainable resolution by
addressing their root causes. We must also take into
consideration that there is no one-size-fits-all solution
to all conflicts.

To that end, we call for improving the Secretariat's
analytical capabilities to suggest and propose detailed
solutions commensurate with the nature, dimensions
and varying contexts of every conflict. Egypt believes
that such a flexible analytical approach would help the
Organization and the Security Council to determine the
best means to address each stage of a conflict, whether
by deploying or amending a mandate, by withdrawing
a peacekeeping operation or a special political mission,
by resorting exclusively to mediation, by imposing or
lifting a sanctions regime or by giving precedence to
the efforts of regional and subregional organizations.

The concept of sustainable peace is the ultimate
goal of the work of the United Nations in maintaining
international peace and security. According to that
concept, the Organization must be able to adopt a
political and programmatic framework, especially in
countries and regions emerging from conflict. The
political framework calls for continued and long-term
regional and international support of the political
process in order to achieve political stability and
security, as a prelude to the programmatic framework.
That framework should invest in national capacity-
building to manage national reconciliation processes,
to recover economic activity and to improve the ability
of Governments to meet the basic education and health
needs of their citizens.

It is only natural for women and young people to play
a central role in all phases of planning, implementation
and follow-up of all sustainable peace processes as a
means to move from conflict to peace. We believe that
such an approach gives an objective and comprehensive
meaning to the concept of national ownership.

Assistance programmes should focus on building
the national institutions and capacities that will
enable transformative efforts to achieve sustainable
peace. Therefore, the United Nations must adopt a
new approach when determining the priorities of such
assistance programmes. National forces must be able to
set those priorities, instead of them being imposed by
donor countries.

The magnitude of the challenges to sustainable
peace requires a shift in the United Nations system
at the cultural, structural and administrative levels.
Resolution 2282 (2016) comprises a pragmatic
framework for improving the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Support Office and
the Peacebuilding Fund, in order to ensure consistency
between the programmatic and political frameworks
of sustainable peace. Given the overlap between
political, security, economic and institutional aspects
of sustainable peace, the Peacebuilding Commission
must play a role that varies depending on the nature
of each conflict. Therefore, the Commission must
demonstrate the necessary flexibility to deal with every
conflict separately.

Predictable funding for efforts to sustain peace
represents another main challenge. We need to adopt
funding mechanisms based on a broad partnership
among the United Nations, international financial
institutions and bilateral donors. Those mechanism
sshould take into consideration a degree of risk as a
by-product of investment in sustaining peace. The
Peacebuilding Fund can play an important role in that
regard, and all donor countries should be encouraged to
provide it with long-term funding.

We look forward to the upcoming report of the
Secretary-General on resolution 2282 (2016). We stress
the need for that report to include a comprehensive vision
of how to improve the role of our Organization and the
tools available to it to contribute to sustaining peace,
based on the outcomes of the previous comprehensive
reviews. That would represent a new agenda for peace
that coincides with the passing of 25 years since the
issuance of the Agenda for Peace report (S/24111) by
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali. The challenges of our day
are different from those existing when the report was
issued in 1992. but the goal remains the same. It is the
need for the United Nations to regain its important role,
as enshrined in the Preamble to the Charter. We hope
that the new Secretary-General will be able to formulate
that comprehensive vision and to garner international
commitment for such a vision.

