Ms. Mindaoudou (spoke in French): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
brief the Council today on the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in cote d'Ivoire (S/2015/940)
and to inform it about major recent developments
in the country, including the presidential election of
25 October 2015 and the challenges that remain to be
addressed.

Since the last time I briefed the Council (see S/PV.7459), Cote d'Ivoire has dealt with a huge
challenge - the holding of a presidential election.
The people of Cote d'Ivoire voted peacefully and
re-elected President Alassane Ouattara to a second
term. The voting, conducted in an atmosphere of calm,
has given the people of Cote d'Ivoire the opportunity
to definitively turn the page on the previous political
crisis, begin a new chapter in their country's history
and consolidate the progress they have made towards
long-term stability. Despite the withdrawal of three
candidates and the arrest and detention of several
persons for organizing unauthorized political gatherings
and demonstrations, the national authorities, including
the security forces, proved that they were capable of
taking charge of the organization and safeguarding of
the voting process. I would like to take this opportunity
to once again commend the efforts of the Independent
Electoral Commission to ensure that the election was
held without any major problems, and to thank all of
Cote d'Ivoire's bilateral and multilateral partners for
their technical, financial and logistical support.

In the run-up to the presidential election of
25 October, through my good offices, the Government
and the opposition parties resumed a productive
dialogue, which helped to ensure an environment
conducive to the holding of a peaceful election. In that
regard, I would like to commend the Government for
its efforts to respond to the opposition's demands ahead
of the election. The implementation of the mission
mandate and my good offices through dedicated
forums enabled us to engage civil society, traditional,
religious and community leaders, youth groups and
women's associations in working tirelessly to ensure
an atmosphere conducive to a free and democratic
presidential election.

Cote d'Ivoire is now the second-largest economy in
West Africa, which represents a remarkable recovery.
It is now hoped that the people of Cote d'Ivoire will
fully enjoy the dividends of the economic growth.
National reconciliation, however, lags behind economic
recovery. In this regard, I welcome President Ouattara's
statement in which he indicated his determination to
make national reconciliation a priority of his second
term. Without losing time, on 7 December 2015 President
Ouattara began his consultation on the subject with the
executive committee of the chamber of traditional kings
and chiefs of Cote D'Ivoire, and met with religious
leaders and representatives of the National Commission
for Reconciliation and Compensation of Victims in
Cote d'Ivoire. Further to these consultations, President
Ouattara granted presidential pardon to 3,100 prisoners,
including some from the post-electoral crisis.

Progress in the prosecution of alleged perpetrators
of crimes committed during the post-electoral crisis
remains slow. I urge the Government to complete
the investigations of the Special Investigation and
Examination Cell so as to create the conditions to
prosecute all those alleged to have committed serious
abuses and violations of human rights, regardless of
their political affiliation.

I note the growing participation ofwomen in public
forums and seminars, whether as representatives of
their political parties or in order to voice their concerns
on matters of national interest. This trend augurs well
for the increased participation of women in future
elections and ultimately in decision-making positions.
I note the Government's intention to make women's
empowerment a priority during the President's second
term. A great deal of effort has gone into the prevention
of sexual- and gender-based violence and support for
victims, but the prosecution of alleged perpetrators
remains hesitant. The strengthening of the judicial
system to properly address such cases in a timely
manner is critical if such behaviour is to be curbed for
good.

Ensuring security throughout the national territory
during the electoral process was a test for the Ivorian
security forces. Despite some shortcomings, the national
police, endarmerie and armed forces met the challenge.
To maintain this momentum, it is important that the
law on the organization of the defence sector and the
armed forces of Cote d'Ivoire, adopted by the National
Assembly on 9 March, be promulgated. This legislation
is an important step towards the transformation of the
security sector, in particular the professionalization
and accountability of the army. Furthermore, efforts
to gradually reduce the gender gap and to restore the
confidence of the population must be maintained.

The Government of C6te d'Ivoire has completed
its disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, as it had planned. However, the continued
support of C6te d'Ivoire's bilateral and multilateral
partners will be necessary to support reinsertion
programmes for the residual caseload of combatants,
with a view to translating reinsertion into long-term
reintegration.

The security situation in Cote d'Ivoire remains
stable, with violent crimes still on the downward trend
since the Secretary-General issued his last report
(S/2015/320). During the electoral period, no serious
security incidents were reported by the population or
the candidates. However, armed robberies and banditry,
as well as threats ofterrorist attacks, remain a challenge.
An attack claimed by the terrorist group Ansar Dine in
southern Mali, close to the border with Cote D'Ivoire,
prompted the Government to deploy its security forces
along the border with Mali. In that regard, UNOCI
deployed its quick-reaction force in June and July to
support the military operation undertaken by the Forces
republicaines de C6te d'Ivoire (FRCI) along the border.

Threats of cross-border attacks remain, particularly
along the Liberian border, where the most recent attack
on two FRCI posts on 2 December resulted in the deaths
of seven FRCI soldiers and injuries to four assailants,
and along the Ghanaian border, where an attack on a
FRCI post on 27 December resulted in two arrests but
no casualties. The Ivorian Government is increasingly
capable of addressing immediate and latent security
threats, domestic and external alike. Its effectiveness,
however, hinges on the adequate equipping and
resourcing of the police, the security forces and the
army.

The land border between Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia
remains closed as a precaution against the Ebola virus
disease, but information-sharing between the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and UNOCI has
continued. Humanitarian corridors were also opened
on 18 and 22 December 2015 to allow for the voluntary
repatriation of Ivorian refugees from Liberia, facilitated
by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Liberia, Mr. Zarif, and I witnessed the
departure and arrival of refugees on 18 December 2015.

Pursuant to resolution 2226 (2015), the authorized
strength of the UNOCI military component stands
at 5,437, and that of the police at 1,500. Taking into
account the successful conduct of the 2015 presidential
election, the improving security situation on the ground
and the growing capacity of the Government of Cete
d'Ivoire to ensure security in the country, UNOCI is
ready to implement the provisions of paragraph 65 of the
Secretary-General's report of 15 May 2014 (S/2014/342).
This will entail the further reduction of the UNOCI
force to slightly fewer than 4,000 troops by 31 March.
A strategic review team will deploy in February for the
purpose of developing recommendations on the further
downsizing of UNOCI military and police, and the
future of the mission, as requested by the Council.

Challenges remain in C6te d'Ivoire, notwithstanding
the successful holding of the presidential election and the
improving security situation on the ground. The ongoing
national reconciliation process; the strengthening of the
security sector, in particular the reform of the army and
the police; the sustainable reinsertion and reintegration
of former combatants; and improvements in the human
rights situation and in transitional justice are all key
challenges facing Cote d'Ivoire on the path to durable
stability, as is the holding of legislative elections
in December. The Ivorian institutions will have the
complex task of organizing and securing an electoral
process involving hundreds of candidates all over the
country. These elections are crucial, and should involve
the full political spectrum in Cote d'Ivoire, as they will
be an opportunity for the opposition to participate and
secure seats in the National Assembly in the context of
a vibrant democracy.

In all of these issues, the combined support of
the Security Council, Member States, international
and regional partners, and the United Nations system
remains essential to the Cote D'Ivoire's ability to
complete all these key processes without delay. I thank
the Security Council once again for its invaluable
support to the implementation of the UNOCI mandate.

