The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Egypt.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
for his comprehensive briefing to the Security Council
on his recent report (S/2016/841, annex) on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Egypt reiterates its full support for
Mr. Inzko's efforts.

Twenty years after the signing of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, which brought to an end one of the most
brutal conflicts in the world, Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to face a number ofcritical political challenges.
Egypt would like to express its concern that efforts to
deal with those challenges remain insufficiently backed
by a comprehensive consensus among the different
political stakeholders in the country. Egypt warns that
the failure to address those Challenges may undermine
some of the achievements made at the political level
since the signing of the Dayton Agreement.

In that respect, Egypt stresses that the Dayton
Agreement will remain the cornerstone for efforts to
bring peace to the region, which is the sole basis for
stability in the country.

In that respect, Egypt stresses that the divisive
rhetoric and calls by some stakeholders and political
parties that have called for the secession of Republika
Srpska from Bosnia and Herzegovina constitute serious
threats to the political process as a whole. It may also
have a spillover effect on the entire Balkan region.

We therefore call on all political leaders to put
the common interests of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina above narrow ethnic and political
interests, which undermine opportunities for progress
and stability. In that regard, Egypt emphasizes the
importance of all parties respecting the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and national Constitution of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as all decisions taken by its
judicial authorities and the mechanisms of international
justice, and to prevent any negative impact on the
political process in Bosnia and Herzegovina or its
regional relations.

Moreover, we cannot separate internal developments
in Bosnia and Herzegovina from the larger context of
the Balkan region as a whole. We therefore stress the
importance of building good-neighbourly relations,
mutual trust, positive and constructive dialogue, and
enhanced regional cooperation in order to establish
peace and stability in all countries of the region.
The economic challenges facing Bosnia and
Herzegovina require the international community
to mobilize its efforts to promote the achievement of
an economic leap forward that could contribute to
creating a domestic environment conducive to stability.
We stress once again the importance of regional
cooperation in attaining such progress, and call on the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to pursue their
efforts to overcome the political obstacles to economic
growth by enhancing the political participation of
all citizens without discrimination, encompassing
all national groups irrespective of their ethnic
background. We affirm Egypt's full support for the
efforts of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in fighting terrorism and its readiness to provide all
forms of assistance in countering extremist ideologies,
in particular violent, radical religious rhetoric, and in
correcting religious misconceptions.

In conclusion, we reiterate the importance, now
more than ever before, for all people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to strive to affirm the principles of social
coexistance and political agreement and to move ahead
on the path to peace. This enterprise must be undertaken
in parallel with genuine regional and international
support.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

