Mr. Christian (Ghana): I, too, would like to
thank Ambassador Verbeke for his statement at this
meeting and for his exemplary leadership of the
Security Council mission to Kosovo.

We also acknowledge the commendable role of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the staff of the Secretariat in
New York, which to a large measure contributed to the
success of the mission.

The meetings in Brussels, Belgrade and Pristina,
as well as the field trip undertaken to Kosovo at the
latter end of the mission's visit, brought home vividly
the issues involved in determining Kosovo's future,
including the prospects for a negotiated settlement and
the implementation of the agreed standards, especially
those relating to the protection of the rights of
minorities and the return of internally displaced
persons. We commend the Special Envoy for his efforts
aimed at resolving those issues by coming up with a
comprehensive proposal for the settlement of the future
status of Kosovo.
In Brussels, the Secretary General of NATO,
apart from expressing his support for Kosovo's
independence, asserted his organization's readiness to

respond to security challenges and to lead the
international military presence in Kosovo, as envisaged
in the settlement proposal. Further, he defined NATO's
responsibilities, which include the supervision and
training of the future Kosovo Security Force. The
Special Envoy of the European Union for Kosovo was
also unequivocal in his support for President
Ahtisaari's recommendations and settlement proposals.
The impression gathered at the end of the visit to
Brussels was of the readiness of the two institutions to
live up to their responsibilities if they were entrusted
with any functions in an independent Kosovo, should
the Security Council so decide.

It was apparent that, even though Serbia
recognized the need for a change in the status of
Kosovo, it was not in favour of President Ahtisaari's
proposals and would prefer direct talks between
Belgrade and Pristine. In the opinion of the Serbian
Government and the representatives of political parties
to the National Assembly, the problem can be resolved
through supervised autonomy.

The visit to Kosovo, among other things,
informed me further of what UNMIK had been able to
achieve in the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). As far as the security environment in Kosovo
was concerned, the Kosovo Force's effectiveness and
readiness to deal with any threat to the peace and
security of Kosovo were evident.

The leaders of Kosovo invariably asserted their
support for the settlement proposal and status
recommendation, and were enthusiastic about
independence. They stated in no uncertain terms that
any further delay in the status process would be
detrimental to Kosovo and that they were ready to
assume the responsibilities associated with
independence. On the other hand, Kosovo Serb
representatives indicated that the settlement plan was
generally unacceptable because the mechanisms
envisaged in the settlement proposal for the protection
and promotion of minority rights were insufficient and
would not be implemented. It is worth mentioning,
however, that the Turkish, Bosniak and Roma
communities supported the Special Envoy's proposal,
despite what they perceived as shortcomings, and
believed that it offered a good basis for Kosovo's
future.

It was obvious that the number of Kosovo Serb
returnees was much lower than expected - a situation
that can be attributed to mistrust, lack of reconciliation,
and the poor economic situation in the areas of return.
The return of internally displaced persons remains a
critical element in the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999), and only a safe and secure Kosovo would
facilitate the return process.

We recognize the need to resolve the issue of the
future status of Kosovo as soon as practicable, and
support in principle the adoption of a resolution
following the submission by the Special Envoy of the
comprehensive proposal on the Security Council
mission. We hope that the Security Council will work
assiduously towards the realization of that objective.

