Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the honour to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the 120
countries members of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM). I will start by thanking Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing to
the Council today.

The Non-Aligned Movement remains firm in its
conviction that the international community,
particularly the Security Council, must act urgently,
resolutely and collectively to fulfil its longstanding
commitment to, and responsibility for, the realization
of the two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and a just solution to the question of Palestine
in all its aspects on the basis of international law and
the well-established terms of reference of the peace
process, including the resolutions of the Security
Council. It is evident that the global consensus to
realize the independence of the State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, is long overdue, and that
its continued postponement will only put that noble
goal further out of reach. NAM. therefore reiterates that
serious international action in a timely manner is
required, as the window of opportunity for achieving
the two-State solution based on the 4 June 1967
borders is rapidly closing. Failure to seize this
opportunity will likely usher in yet another era of
uncertainty, instability and continuing conflict, which
must be averted at all costs.

NAM. regrets that all efforts exerted to date by
international and regional parties, including by the
Quartet during its 11 April meeting, as well as the
valuable efforts by Jordan to revive negotiations
between the two sides, have been unable to achieve any
progress. That is due to deliberate obstruction by
Israel, the occupying Power, and is rooted in that
country's refusal to respect and adhere to the well-
known parameters of the peace process, as well as its
insistence on continuing illegally and aggressively to
change facts on the ground, in total contradiction to the
objective and principles of the two-State solution.

Such actions prove the fallacy of Israel's claims
that it accepts the solution, that it accepts the Quartet
statement and the road map, and that it actually seeks
to end this conflict. Quite to the contrary, Israel's
illegal measures in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, in particular its massive
illegal settlement campaign, are entrenching its nearly
45-year military occupation and prolonging the conflict
as well as the injustice being endured by the
Palestinian people. In that regard, NAM. welcomes
Palestinian efforts to resume credible negotiations
based on the letter of 17 April addressed to the Israeli
Prime Minister by President Abbas, and calls on Israel
to respond positively to that effort.

The Non-Aligned Movement recalls that the final
status negotiations, which began with great hopes in
September 2010, under the auspices of President
Barack Obama, with the participation of the Quartet,
Egypt and Jordan. Those negotiations, which were
aimed at concluding an agreement within one year,
collapsed just a few weeks later due to Israel's refusal
to renew its moratorium on settlement activities, cease
its illegal settlement campaign and abide by the
internationally endorsed parameters for negotiations
based on relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
road map. Even while claiming to cooperate with the
Quartet, Israel has continued daily to grossly violate its
road map obligation to cease all settlement activities,
including those stemming from so-called natural
growth, and to dismantle all settlement outposts.

Israel's credibility as a peace partner thus remains
in serious doubt, as peace efforts continue to be
undermined. Even more dangerously, the two-State
solution based on the 4 June 1967 borders - the most
viable solution at the core of a comprehensive peace
settlement - is being gravely threatened, with
discussion of alternative solutions gaining prevalence.

NAM. condemns Israel's illegal settlement
activities in all their manifestations, along with all
other illegal practices that country continues to carry
out in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and calls for their full and immediate
cessation. NAM. stresses that all unlawful attempts to
alter the demographic composition, character and
status of the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, is rejected and unrecognized by the
international community. We call on the Security
Council to implement its relevant resolutions and for
serious efforts to hold Israel accountable for its
violations of international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law, as well as to compel it to end its
military occupation of the Palestinian territory and all
other Arab territories going back to 1967.

In the light of the very difficult conditions on the
ground, NAM. again calls for the implementation of the
recommendations made to the Council on 18 January
by Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, with regard to the humanitarian situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory. Specific measures
are necessary, in particular to address the grave impact
of Israel's settlement policies on the Palestinian people
and their land, including violent actions by Israeli
settlers against Palestinian civilians, including
children, and property. Israel's illegal colonization of
the occupied land, displacement of the Palestinian
civilian population and imposition of collective
punishment are deepening the humanitarian suffering
and despair of the Palestinian people, while further
fragmenting the territory and its contiguity. That
situation is dramatically raising tensions and instability
and must be a cause for concern to the Council in line
with its Charter duty for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

In that regard, recent provocative Israeli
announcements regarding the establishment of
thousands of new settlement units, particularly in and
around occupied East Jerusalem, along with the
continued demolition of Palestinian homes and devious
attempts by the Israeli Government to legitimize its
illegitimate settlement schemes, require an urgent
reaction by the international community, including the
Security Council, if the two-State solution is to be
salvaged.

The Non-Aligned Movement therefore reiterates
its call for the Security Council to act and demand that
Israel, the occupying Power, abide by its legal
obligations. Illogical pretexts for illegal actions,
arrogant disregard for the law, and blatant impunity
must not be tolerated. The clear conclusion is that the
occupying Power is deliberately obstructing the
attainment of regional, and consequently global, peace
and security. That therefore requires credible action by
the Council, consistent with its Charter duties.

Israel must not remain the exception to every rule
of international law, while at the same time posing as a
democratic and law-abiding Member of the United
Nations. It must be required and compelled to abide by
all of its obligations under the Fourth Geneva
Convention, relevant United Nations resolutions and
the road map. That is the true key to advancing the
resumption of direct negotiations towards an urgently
needed peaceful settlement based on the two-State
solution to the conflict.

NAM. remains concerned by the critical
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, and calls once
again for the full and immediate lifting of the illegal
Israeli blockade in compliance with international
humanitarian law, which prohibits collective
punishment of a civilian population under occupation,
as well with resolution 1860 (2009) and other relevant
United Nations resolutions.

NAM. also seizes this opportunity to express its
support for Palestinian reconciliation efforts, which
continue to be shepherded by Egypt, and hopes that
Palestinian unity will soon be restored in the interest of
the legitimate national aspirations of the Palestinian
people. NAM. looks forward to this achievement and to
the holding of Palestinian legislative and presidential
elections in the coming period.

NAM. is hopeful that 2012 will finally be the year
that brings peace and justice to the Palestinian people,
including refugees, and that finally brings an end to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict in all respects. The Council
must therefore demand that Israel, the occupying
Power, respect all its legal obligations. It must also
assist the parties by setting forth clear parameters, as
enshrined in its own resolutions, for peace negotiations
within a specified time frame that will actually bring to
fruition the two-State solution on the basis of the
4 June 1967 borders, thus achieving the independence
of the State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living side by side in peace and security with
Israel and all its neighbours.

The larger United Nations membership also has a
crucial role to play in upholding international law and
United Nations resolutions in order to promote a
peaceful settlement. NAM. continues to believe that
concrete efforts by the General Assembly, as well as by
the high contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention to ensure respect for the Convention in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, would be a vital contribution. Accordingly,
on 16 January, as mandated by the Movement, the
Chair of the Coordinating Bureau addressed another
letter to the Permanent Representative of Switzerland,
in that country's capacity as depositary of the Geneva
Conventions, requesting the undertaking of measures
to convene a conference of the high contracting parties
as soon as possible for this purpose, in conformity with

relevant United Nations resolutions. NAM. welcomes
the positive intentions expressed by Switzerland in its
letter of 22 March, and hopes that those efforts will be
translated into actions in that regard as soon as
possible.

At a time when the two-State solution is being
severely weakened, and should be strengthened, we
recall the application submitted by Palestine on
23 September 2011 for admission to membership of the
United Nations. We look forward to action by the
Security Council that recognizes the legitimate and
historical rights of the Palestinian people and
contributes to peace efforts. We are indeed at a critical
juncture and must collectively do all we can to prevent
further destabilization and the continuation of this
tragic, destructive conflict, promoting peace, justice
and security instead.

Turning to Lebanon, NAM. condemns Israel's
ongoing violations of that country's sovereignty and its
recurrent serious breaches of resolution 1701 (2006).
The Movement calls on all parties concerned to comply
fully with that resolution in order to end the current
instability and avoid a resurgence of hostilities.

Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions that Israel, the occupying Power, has taken
or may take to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, as
well as any measures to impose its jurisdiction and
administration there, are null and void and have no
legal effect. The Non-Aligned Movement demands that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
4 June 1967, in compliance with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

