Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate the German and French presidency
of the Council on the work done this month. I wish
also to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this important debate, which is being held against the
backdrop of increasing developments and challenges in
our region. I thank you also for allowing Member States
to participate in this open debate, which addresses
highly complex and sensitive Middle East issues.
I would also thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, for her valuable briefing.

Today more than ever the international community
must play a greater role in the implementation of its
resolutions in order to achieve peace and stability in
the Middle East and create positive conditions for
more opportunities for a political settlement. That
includes providing protection for the peoples affected
and putting an end to any interference in the domestic
affairs of States. In addition, it is vital to help States
to maintain their sovereignty, security, independence
and stability.

In that context, the Kingdom of Bahrain stresses
that in order to achieve a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the region, we must first settle the Palestinian
question. The brotherly Palestinian people must be
granted their legitimate right, as other peoples, to
establish an independent State, along the lines of4 June
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, on the basis of
the Arab Peace Initiative, the two-State solution and the
various relevant resolutions of international legitimacy.
We stress also the importance of maintaining the status
of Jerusalem and its historical character.

The Kingdom of Bahrain, as part of the coalition
to support legitimacy in Yemen under the auspices of
the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, is committed to
achieving a comprehensive peaceful solution in Yemen.
We are committed to achieving security and peace
in the sisterly Republic of Yemen and to meeting the
aspirations of the brotherly Yemeni people to security
and development, in keeping with the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its implementation mechanism,
the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference and
the resolutions of the Security Council, especially
resolution 2216 (2015). All forms of interference in the
internal affairs of Yemen that threaten its unity and
territorial integrity along with its neighbours in the
region must end.
One of the most serious challenges we are facing
in our region is the grave threats posed and excessive
damage caused by terrorism. This destructive scourge
leads to the loss of lives and the destruction of the
infrastructure and the security and stability of States.
Once again, we reiterate our firm position in condemning
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever
a terrorist act is committed, regardless of the identity of
the perpetrators or their motives.

We stress the importance of combating together
extremist ideologies and terrorist groups and of drying
up their sources of funding. We note that the eleventh
meeting of the Counter Da'esh Finance Group was
held on 16 and 17 April in the Kingdom of Bahrain.
At that meeting we discussed the tireless efforts of the
international community to combat the Da'esh terrorist
group. Those efforts made possible the defeat of that
terrorist group in a number of countries. In addition, its
ability to carry out and finance attacks has diminished.
However, we must remain cautious and continue our
efforts to overcome Da'esh and similar terrorist groups
once and for all and stop any financial flows to them.
The transfer of funds to terrorist groups outside of
the official financial system constitutes one of the
greatest challenges we are facing. Indeed, Da'esh, the
terrorist group Hizbullah and Al-Qaida, along with
other terrorist groups, rely on the receipt and transfer
of funds through illegitimate channels.

In conclusion, in order to achieve international peace
and security we must be united and devise innovative
mechanisms to overcome long-standing and emerging
challenges. The Kingdom of Bahrain will continue to
cooperate with the international community to settle
conflicts by peaceful means in order to achieve peace,
stability and security in the region and in the world.

