Mr. Lancry (Israel) (spoke in French): Mr.
President, I should like to thank you for the
opportunity to speak once again, at the end of this
meeting of the Security Council on the situation in our
region.

Israel has every reason to consider that this
dialogue with the Security Council was undertaken, in
particular by Mr. Shimon Peres, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, in a spirit of openness and as a constructive
and frank exchange of views leading to greater
understanding.

We have taken note of the satisfaction voiced by
the members of the Council regarding this more
intensive dialogue between Israel and the United
Nations. Indeed, our country, after acceding to the
regional Group of Western European and Other
States - thereby putting an end to 40 years of
exclusion - following its withdrawal from southern
Lebanon, in full conformity with Security Council
resolution 425 (1978), now finds itself much more in
step with the United Nations.

We have also noted an increased awareness
among members of the Security Council of the true
nature of the intifada, in particular of its terrorist
dimension, and of the need to condemn in no uncertain
terms - as we felt was the case for several members of
the Council - the unacceptable and murderous
practice of Palestinian terrorism.

Although this condemnation of the terrorist
practices of the Palestinians seems at times to be
slightly muted and is certainly voiced in a carefully
crafted type of rhetoric, it is still perceptible, and
although in some cases it is presented in a veiled or
understated manner, nevertheless it is healthy and
useful for a return to the logic of peace as well as for
the fundamental credibility of the Security Council.

We would hope, however, that those who support
the notion of Israel's excessive use of force - without
the slightest concern for a more serious and in-depth
consideration of the facts - might also be able to
denounce Palestinian terrorism as an incredibly
sacrilegious practice and an untenable setback that
undermines the very foundation of the peace process.

Several countries that are not members of the
Security Council have also taken part in this debate.
We were particularly sensitive to the reiterated appeals
for a return to negotiation and to the rhetoric and logic
of peace. Those notable appeals also were observed in
several statements by Permanent Representatives of
Arab countries. Here I am certainly not thinking of the
dubious contribution of the Permanent Representative
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. Every so often, here or
in the General Assembly, we are witness to Libya's
outrageously inaccurate rewriting of the history of the
Jewish people in both ancient and modern times. Nor
will the Iraqi or Iranian statements contribute to an
Israeli-Palestinian-Arab peace.

But, in all sincerity, the statement made by
Algeria - despite its highly partial nature - had
value, as its conclusion contained a most commendable
phrase: "a just and lasting solution to the Middle East
conflict". Coming from a country that itself is
experiencing a latent conflict and which has been
engaged in a desperate search for domestic peace,
which it fully deserves and which we very much wish
to see, that comment takes on emblematic significance.

Certain States Members of the United Nations,
headed by Egypt, have identified the Israeli occupation
as the cause of the current crisis and of the frustration
of the Palestinian people.

Let us recall, first of all, that the driving force of
territorial compromise lies at the heart of the Oslo
accords. That principle has been put into practice since
the signing of the Oslo accords, with the result that 97
per cent of the Palestinian population and 42 per cent
of the Palestinian territories are under Palestinian
control. Since its adoption, that principle has never
been challenged by any Israeli Government, including
the Government of National Unity, which has just come
to power.

Having made that useful and necessary comment
in the interests of dispelling any ambiguity, I now find
myself obliged to take the Security Council back, as
briefly as possible, over the recent history of the
Israeli-Palestinian-Arab conflict.

The Israeli occupation of June 1967 did not come
as a bolt from the blue. It was the result of an attempt
by part of the Arab world - the immediate neighbours
of Israel, with Egypt, under Nasser, at the forefront a
to proceed to the prompt annihilation of Israel.

We should also recall, as Mr. Shimon Peres did a
few days ago, a further revealing and significant fact:
for 19 years, between 1948 - the time of its first
abortive attempt to eliminate Israel - and 1967,
Egypt, which today is engaged in denouncing the
Israeli occupation, was itself the occupying Power in
the Gaza Strip.

Similarly, between 1948 and 1967, the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan held the destiny of the West Bank
in its hands. During that period, it never occurred to
either Jordan or Egypt to establish in those territories a
Palestinian State, which could have been done at that
time.

We Israelis will certainly never forget the rare
and dazzling appearance of the far-sighted genius of
President Anwar Al-Sadat, who, with his exceptional
generosity of deed and word and through his unique
vision contributed to setting our region on the road to
peace and enabling it to dream of reconciliation.
Following in his wake, the noble presence of His
Majesty King Hussein of Jordan also strengthened the
establishment of peace in our region.

The initial peace agreements with Egypt and
Jordan were achievements through which Israel was
able to show its historical commitment to compromise,
peace and reconciliation. Egypt and Jordan certainly
remain essential driving forces for the expansion of
peace in our region.

However, an inevitable question arises. I must
raise this question even though it concerns the
statement made by an ambassador whom I consider to
be a personal friend - one who, furthermore,
addressed me directly at the end of his statement. I am
sure that the Council understands that I am referring to
the Permanent Representative of Egypt, Ambassador
Ahmed Aboulgheit.

I asked myself what could be the reason for the
deliberately virulent nature of his statement - a
speech whose accusatory tone was firmly in line with
the anti-Israeli attitude that is favoured by certain
Egyptian journalists from the institutionalized or
private press. I believe that I would not be exaggerating
if I were to say that Ambassador Ahmed Aboulgheit's
statement is completely interchangeable with the
relentlessly racist anti-Israeli columns that the
Egyptian press continues to dispense with careless
frenzy on a daily basis.

Furthermore, in considering Ambassador
Aboulgheit's lengthy discourse - his insidious
insinuations about the superiority of Israeli blood over
that of the Palestinians - I believe that his statement,
which at the very least was inappropriate, represents
some of the worst demagoguery ever heard in the
Council.

But above and beyond the polemics between the
representatives of two countries linked by a peace
agreement, we must also wonder about some of the
underlying motives of Egyptian society regarding
Israeli-Palestinian relationships. The idea is to
understand the reasons, whether manifest or latent, that
are leading a considerable part of the intelligentsia and
opinion-makers in Egypt to advocate a rejection of
Israel, to the point of sometimes appearing more
Palestinian than the Palestinians themselves.

It is not difficult to see that that intelligentsia,
through a painful and growing awareness, is struggling
with an enormous guilt complex - one that is rooted
in the perception of the flagrant historical
responsibility of its country, Egypt, for the disasters
that were visited on the Palestinians in 1948 and 1967.
It is precisely here that we find the essence of the
problem of the relationship with Israel for an
intelligentsia that is all too ready to demonize the
Israeli people in order to satisfy its urgent need to give
expression to these feelings and to alleviate, even to a
small degree, its enormous burden of guilt.

All of this would be of secondary importance if it
were not for the adverse influence that such attitudes
and speeches can have on the development of peace
between Israel and a large part of the Arab world.

In his statement, the Permanent Representative of
Tunisia, Ambassador Said Ben Mustapha, asked "What
does Israel expect?" (S/PV4295, p. 12) given that the
Palestinian request amounts to 22 per cent of the
territories.

My answer is very simple: Israel expects to be
able to survive after the final Israeli-Palestinian
agreement. Israel expects its territory, as delimited
within secure and recognized borders in the aftermath
of the final agreement, not to be the object of a
demographic reworking, as stipulated by the
Palestinians with regard to the right of return of
refugees.

Everyone understands that the right of return of
the Palestinian refugees, if it were to be carried out in
accordance with Yasser Arafat's ideas - that is, the
potential establishment of 4 million Palestinian
refugees in Israeli territory, which goes far beyond the
establishment of a Palestinian State that would result
from a final agreement - would effectively amount to
the programmed death of Israel as a State. Israel does
not, therefore, expect to die for the sake of an
agreement accompanied by demographic inundation. It
is such denial - which, for the sake of convenience, I
will refer to as "demographic denial" - compounded
by spiritual denial and denial of the very identity of the
holy Jewish sites in Jerusalem, that characterizes the
Palestinian position.

Furthermore, that double denial is the underlying
reason for Yasser Arafat's refusal to sign a final
agreement with the Barak Government. That double
denial, as we know all too well, is the true reason for
the Palestinian uprising fuelled by violence and
terrorism.

To be sure, the word "occupation" as applied to
the territories of 1967 seems, a priori, to be the easiest
explanation for Palestinian frustration. But we also
need to ensure that Israel's right to exist is also fixed in
the Palestinian consciousness in particular and, more
generally, in that of several countries - Arab or
Muslim - such as Libya, Iran and Iraq, which
continue to preach daily the eradication of the State of
Israel.

That lengthy digression was required not only as
a response to questions and to the comments of some of
my colleagues with regard to the roots of the present
Israeli-Palestinian crisis, but also as a means of
shedding necessary light on the issue and recalling a
reality that is far more complex than the simplistic
dichotomy of occupier and occupied.

As we have repeatedly said, Israel is resolute in
its quest to see peace and security extended to our
entire region. With a view to doing so, we would like
to resume dialogue and negotiation with our Palestinian
partners. In order to resume that dialogue there is a
crucial need to break the cycle of violence and to
rebuild confidence. It is up to the Palestinians and the
Israelis, linked by their agreements and their mutual
recognition, to decide to do this as soon as possible.
Any diversionary tactics, such as calling for an
international protection force, will only serve to
hamper a return to a bilateral process.

It goes without saying that sending an
international protection force while the intifada and
terrorism are raging - and against the wishes of one of
the parties, namely, Israel - is tantamount to
sanctioning the Palestinian strategic choice of trying to
achieve political objectives through terrorism. Such an
endorsement by the Security Council would strip the
Oslo accords of their substance and remove one of the
main pillars on which they are built.

This is the reason why Israel is firmly opposed to
a resolution sending an international protection force,
and why it hopes to convince the Security Council of
its own logic regarding the establishment of an
international mission. That logic would more likely
lead to the endorsement of a peace agreement -
whether an interim one, as was the case with Hebron,
or a final one, as was the case with Egypt - in order to
ensure its proper implementation, than to a premature
intervention in a situation in which violence and
terrorism are improperly seeking the cover of
international legitimacy.

