Mr. Dehgani (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me
first offer my heartfelt condolences to the people and
the Government of Pakistan for the appalling terrorist
attack by the Taliban on a school in Peshawar, which
has resulted in the killing of scores of innocent people,
most of them children. We condemn that terrorist act
in the strongest terms and reiterate our belief that those
who try to create fear and kill innocent people must not
be allowed to have their way.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). I would first like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on Chad's assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council this month,
and to express our appreciation to you for holding this
open debate. I also express thanks for the briefings
provided this morning.

The Non-Aligned Movement welcomes the
determination of the United Nations to enhance
its relationship and cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, in particular the African
Union, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations.

Before addressing the topic of today's meeting, I
would like to reiterate NAM's main principles regarding
peacekeeping by saying that the establishment of
any peacekeeping operation, or the extension of the
mandates of existing ones, should strictly observe
the purposes and principles of the Charter and those
principles that have evolved to govern such operations
and have become basic principles thereof - that is,
the consent of the parties, the non-use of force except
in self-defence, and impartiality. NAM. stresses that
respect for the principles of the sovereign equality,
political independence and territorial integrity of all
States, and of non-intervention in matters that are
essentially within States' domestic jurisdiction, should
also be upheld in that regard.

NAM. supports the continuing efforts to strengthen
African peacekeeping capabilities and emphasizes the
importance of implementing the Ten-Year Capacity-
Building Programme for the African Union and the joint
action plan for United Nations support to the African
Union in peacekeeping in the short, medium and long
terms in all relevant areas. NAM. has also recommended
enhancing the effective partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union in order to improve
the planning, deployment and management of African
peacekeeping operations.

NAM. has always commended the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and the Group of Friends of IGAD for their
indispensable role and efforts in achieving the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement for the Sudan and in
sustaining peace and stability in the Darfur region. The
Movement has always supported the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement for the Sudan, signed in January 2005,
which ended one of the longest-running wars on the
African continent and thereby contributed to regional
peace and security. NAM. encourages the political
process as a priority and emphasizes the need to focus
on development assistance in regions affected by war,
since peace and development mutually reinforce each
other.

NAM. noted with satisfaction the sustained efforts
made by the relevant Governments, the African Union,
the United Nations and other interested parties that
led to a lasting peace in Darfur, and we expressed
our support for the Doha peace process for Darfur. It
is NAM's conviction that no action should be taken
that could jeopardize the delicate nature of the process
under way in the Sudan. We commend the initiatives
and steps taken by the Governments of the Sudan
and South Sudan to resolve their differences through
peaceful means, and we urge that all pending issues
between the two countries continue to be resolved in
line with the agreements signed under the auspices of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel,
with priority given to resolving security issues and
agreeing on border delineation in accordance with the
January 1956 borders.

NAM. has also welcomed the adoption of the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, as
well as international efforts to mobilize resources and
assistance in support of the efforts by States in the
region to address the complex security, political and
humanitarian situation. We stress that the strategy
should be implemented in close cooperation with the
States of the Sahel, West Africa and the Maghreb, as
well as the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States, the Community of Sahel-Saharan
States and the Arab Maghreb Union.

NAM. also commends the contribution of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to lasting
peace and stability there, expresses its appreciation for
the continued commitment of troops to AMISOM. by
troop- and police-countries, and calls on members and
the international community to provide the resources it
needs to better fulfil its mandate.

The Non-Aligned Movement commends the
important role played in the region by the active
leadership of the Economic Community of Central
African States, as well as by the African Union and
the international community, in promoting lasting
peace and stability in the Central African Republic.
NAM. welcomes the positive impact that the action of
the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic has had on the ground in
protecting civilians and restoring stability and security
in the country. We also look forward to the outcome
of the ongoing assessment by the Secretariat of the
two related processes in Mali and the Central African
Republic.

Finally, NAM. also commends the continued
efforts of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the Southern African Development
Community to ensure durable peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and welcomes the
positive developments in the situation in the eastern
part of that country following the end of the Mouvement
du 23 mars.

