Mr. Brammertz: I thank Council members for
the opportunity to again address them on the work
of the Office of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.

I will first address the work of the Office of the
Prosecutor of the ICTY.

In this reporting period, judgements were issued in
three cases, bringing the ICTY closer to completing its
mandate at the end of next year. Last December, the
ICTY Appeals Chamber granted my Office's appeal
in the Stanisvic' and Simatovie case, revoked the Trial
Chamber's judgement and ordered a retrial. In March
this year, the ICTY Trial Chamber unanimously
convicted Radovan Karadzie of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. He was sentenced
to 40 years of imprisonment. Also in March this year,
the ICTY Trial Chamber by majority acquitted Vojislav
Seselj of the charges against him. The Mechanism has
appealed the acquittal. Further proceedings in all three
of those cases will be conducted by the Mechanism,
in accordance with resolution 1966 (2010) and the
transitional arrangements.

My Office looks forward to the delivery of the
appeal judgment in the Stanisie and Zupljanin case at
the end of this month. In relation to the Prlie appeal, we
are continuing our preparations for the appeal hearing,
which is anticipated next spring. We also continued our
work in our two final trials, those of Ratko Mladie and
Goran Hadzic'. In the Mladie trial, the defence is in the
final phase of presenting its evidence. It is anticipated
that the final defence witness will be heard this month,
and that closing arguments by both parties will be
presented this fall. In the Hadeie trial, three weeks
ago my Office filed a motion for termination of the
proceedings. At this time, we see no alternative but to
take that step.

In this final phase of the Tribunal's work,
State cooperation remains essential to enabling the
completion of our mandate. That includes my Office's
access to documents, archives and witnesses in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia. My Office
regrets that Serbia has turned away from the path of
full cooperation with the Tribunal. As the President
reported this morning, for a year and a half Serbia has
failed to execute the Tribunal's arrest warrants and
transfer three indictees to the Tribunal's custody. It
should be noted that in the past, Serbia executed arrest
warrants in similar contempt cases without problem or
significant delay.

Unfortunately, that is unfortunately not the only
reason for concern. It is troubling that Serbia has not
yet appointed a new Chief War Crimes Prosecutor,
despite having had at least a year to do so. It is difficult
to understand why that crucial position remains vacant.
And Serbia has not yet executed the sentence imposed
by the Bosnian State Court in the Djakic' case, which
is widely recognized as an important test of Serbia's
commitment to regional cooperation.
While my Office welcomed before the Council
the adoption of National Strategy for the Prosecution
of War Crimes for the Period 2016-2020, the overall
situation raises legitimate doubts that Serbia has a real
commitment to the goal of impartial accountability for
war crimes. The continued glorification of convicted
war criminals in that country compounds those doubts.
It is now up to Serbia to demonstrate that it will honour
its pledges to cooperate with the Tribunal, support
accountability for war crimes and promote effective
regional cooperation.

In regard to the Category 11 cases transferred
by my Office to national prosecutors in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, prosecutorial decisions have been taken
in all but one case. Indictments have been confirmed
and trial proceedings are now under way. For some
Category II cases, Bosnian prosecutors have sought
cooperation from Croatia. A number of delays
and miscommunications have, however, prevented
meaningful progress so far. My Office calls upon the
Croatian Government to review its policy in relation to
regional cooperation and to facilitate the processing of
war crimes cases in the region. We will continue to liaise
with our counterparts and to monitor developments.

As my Office has reported, in recent years there
have been many positive developments in national war
crimes justice and regional cooperation. Unfortunately,
the political situation throughout the region is moving in
the opposite direction. Too many politicians and public
figures are denying well-established truths, inflaming
ethnic tensions and repeating nationalistic slogans of
the past. What would have been difficult to imagine
just a few years ago is sadly commonplace today. As a
result, the positive trend in regional cooperation in war
crimes justice appears to be reversing.

Turning to the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, this reporting period marked the beginning
oftrial and appeal activities in The Hague. As discussed
in more detail in my written report (S/2016/453, annex II), appeal proceedings have commenced in two
Mechanism cases, Karadeic' and Seselj, and pretrial
proceedings have commenced in the Stanisie and
Simatovie case.

Consistent with the Security Council's directions,
the Mechanism's Office of the Prosecutor has utilized
double-batting and roster arrangements in order to
ensure that the transition of responsibilities from the
ICTY is smooth and cost-efficient. While respecting the
different mandates of the two institutions, the one-office
approach that has been put in place now allows staffto be
flexibly deployed across both institutions, without the
need to conduct time-consuming recruitment exercises.
These measures have permitted the Mechanism's Office
of the Prosecutor to carry out its ad hoc activities while
remaining a small, temporary and efficient structure.

With regard to activities in Arusha, my Office has
continued to monitor the cases referred and transferred
to the national courts of France and Rwanda. In one
case referred to Rwanda, the trial judgement was
delivered in December 2015, convicting the accused
and sentencing him to life imprisonment. My Office
commends the Rwandan National Public Prosecution
Authority for its work on this case. We now look forward
to the expeditious completion of the appeal, as well as
the trials in the two other referred cases. With respect
to the two cases referred to France, I received updates
on the status of those cases during my mission to Paris
a few weeks ago. My Office will continue to liaise
with French authorities and encourage the expeditious
completion of those cases.

The Mechanism's Office of the Prosecutor is also
firmly focused on locating and securing the arrests
of the remaining eight fugitives indicted by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
including the arrest warrants against Kabuga, Mpiranya
and Bizimana. Beginning in March, we reviewed
our tracking efforts and strategy, as part of which we
redeployed resources from within existing capacity to
provide further support. We also identified new avenues
to pursue. My Office notes that State cooperation and
the Council's support remain essential to locating and
arresting fugitives.

The truth of what happened during the Rwandan
genocide has been repeatedly established in the ICTR's
judgments. Yet, today, genocide denial continues. To
safeguard future generations, it is essential that there be
education about the dangers of genocide ideology and
discrimination. My Office urges all States to actively
promote the truth and to stand against revisionism in
all its forms.

In conclusion, the transition of responsibilities
from the ICTY to the Mechanism continues, as foreseen
in Security Council resolutions. My Office will
also continue, within existing resources, to monitor
and support national courts prosecuting war crimes
committed in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. In
accordance with the completion strategies, greater
accountability now depends on the ability of national
criminal courts to continue the work of the ICTY and
ICTR.

Finally, to support national justice efforts, it is
important that we disseminate our experiences and
lessons learned in the prosecution of these crimes. In
that regard, my Office hopes that our publication on
prosecuting conflict-related sexual violence, which was
launched yesterday, is a helpful tool.

