Mr. Ebner (Austria): My delegation would like
to thank the Belgian presidency for convening today's
open debate on the working methods of the Security
Council and for preparing an excellent concept paper
(S/2008/528, annex) to guide our discussion. We
welcome the opportunity to discuss the implementation
of the measures contained in presidential note
S/2006/507 of 19 July 2006 in the Security Council in
this open format and are grateful to Costa Rica, Jordan,
Liechtenstein, Singapore and Switzerland for this
initiative.
The very fact of the holding this open debate is in
itself an important contribution to enhancing
transparency and interaction between the Council and
the United Nations membership at large. Austria has
supported these efforts from the very start and was one
of the 10 non-members of the Council that participated
in the last open debate of the Security Council on its
working methods and procedure, in 1994 (see S/PV.3483). We are pleased to see that today's list of
speakers is much longer, and we hope that open
debates on this issue will be convened on a regular
basis.

As has been outlined in the concept paper, since
the issuance of the 2006 presidential note considerable
progress has been made to increase the Council's
transparency and efficiency, as well as its interaction
with non-members of the Council. We wish to express
our appreciation for the efforts of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. However, we believe there is
room for further progress.

In addition to transparency, interaction and
efficiency, the issue of improving the working methods
of the Security Council is central to the functioning of
the Council in general, the effectiveness of its
decisions and the strengthening of the rule of law.
Since the effectiveness of the implementation of
Council decisions depends on compliance by Member
States, their involvement will increase the
understanding, acceptance and implementation of
Council decisions.

As is well known, Austria is a long-time advocate
of the rule of law. In our View, it is imperative to
strengthen the rule of law in all its dimensions: at the
national, international and institutional levels. We
would therefore like to add a few comments to today's
discussion from the broader perspective of the
strengthening of the rule of law.

In the autumn of 2004, Austria launched a panel
series on the role of the Security Council in
strengthening a rules-based international system. A
final report entitled "The United Nations Security
Council and the Rule of Law" was presented in New
York in April this year and issued as a United Nations
document (S/2008/270, annex). The report contains 17
recommendations on how the Security Council could
strengthen the rule of law in its various fields of
activity, many of which are pertinent for today's
debate. I would like to highlight the following three
areas.

First, as the Security Council plays a central role
in promoting the rule of law, the report analyses the
question of how the rule of law might apply to the
Council itself as a creature of law. The report
recommends that the Council should use its
extraordinary powers for extraordinary purposes. The
exercise of such powers should be limited in time, and
it should be subject to periodic review. As a rule, the
Council should allow for representations by affected
States and, where possible, individuals.

Secondly, the report discusses the tension
between effectiveness and legitimacy of Security
Council actions in the context of quasi-legislative
resolutions adopted under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter. As the effectiveness of the
implementation of Council decisions depends on
participation by Member States, the legitimacy of those
decisions may depend on participation by Member
States through their involvement in the decision-
making process. The report therefore recommends that
when the Security Council adopts a resolution of a
legislative character that is general rather than
particular in its effect, the legitimacy of and respect for
that resolution will be enhanced by a process that
ensures transparency, participation and accountability,
which should include the holding of open debates on
any such proposals, wide consultation with the
membership of the United Nations and other specially
affected parties and a procedure to review the
resolution within an appropriate time frame.

And thirdly, with regard to targeted Security
Council sanctions and the protection of individual
rights, the report addresses the question of reviewing
listing and de-listing decisions of the Council. While a
number of Security Council resolutions have marked
significant progress in this field, it has still been
questioned whether these measures have satisfied the
2005 World Summit call for "fair and clear procedures"
(General Assembly resolution 60/1, para. 109). The
report thus recommends that the Council should be
proactive in further improving fair and clear
procedures to protect the rights of individuals affected
by its decisions, which should include, as a minimum
standard, the four basic elements listed in the 2006
non-paper of the Secretary-General, annexed to a letter
addressed to the President of the Security Council (see S/PV.5474). The Council should invite the Secretary-
General to present it with options to further strengthen
the legitimacy and effectiveness of sanctions regimes.
We hope that the report and its recommendations
will provide valuable input for the current debate on
improving the working methods of the Security
Council. We understand that some suggestions may
require further discussion. However, we also believe
that a number of concrete steps to further these goals
could easily be agreed. These could include a renewed
commitment to paragraph 3 of the annex to the 2006
presidential note, on briefings after informal
consultations and private debates; improving access to
Security Council meetings for affected non-members of
the Council, including informal consultations; and
enhancing the consultation process with troop-
contributing countries prior to the establishment or
renewal of the mandate of a mission.

The Council's working methods have developed
over the years, and we believe that they will always
remain a work in progress. As the work of the Security
Council changes and adapts to changed circumstance,
so should the Council's working methods. Involvement
of the wider membership will remain key in order to
serve the whole Organization.

As the representative of Austria stated at the open
debate in 1994, it remains

"imperative to find a balance between the need
for swift and effective decision-making and the
need to give all Member States concerned the
opportunity to make themselves heard at an
appropriate time, thus ensuring that their opinions
are taken into account by the Security Council
when decisions are formulated and taken".
(S/PV3483, p. 19)

Today, those remarks remain as valid as ever, as we are
still on a quest to find that balance.

