Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by warmly thanking the Federative
Republic of Brazil for having organized this open
debate on the item "Maintenance of international peace
and security: the interdependence between security and
development". This timely initiative demonstrates the
remarkable work that your country, Madame President,
is doing within the Security Council.
Senegal aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-
Aligned Movement.

The severity and the number of armed conflicts
across the world, in particular in Africa, despite the
tireless efforts that we have made to date, remain a
source of great concern and raise increasing questions
about the long-term effectiveness of the strategies to
resolve crises. Indeed, given the growing complexity of
conflict situations, it seems essential to rethink our
strategies to prevent and manage crises in the light of
the new demands and challenges by promoting
comprehensive and integrated approaches based on
lessons learned.

In his report entitled "In larger freedom", former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan stated that "we will not
enjoy development without security, we will not enjoy
security without development". (A/59/2005, para. 17)
That statement is all the more true given the experience
gained in peacekeeping and peacebuilding in several
areas of the world, especially in the African continent,
which amply demonstrates that security and
development are two mutually reinforcing goals.

Moreover, in the absence of peace and security, it
proves difficult to create the conditions conducive to
establishing good economic and political governance,
likely to put an end to the causes of underdevelopment,
which inevitably leads to political and social
instability. Such vulnerability linked to
underdevelopment is even greater given the economic
and financial crises affecting the world and the adverse
effects of climate change increasing tensions related to
access to vital resources. The food riots that we have
witnessed these past years are sufficient proof in that
regard. Therefore, if we wish to establish viable and
lasting peace, more consistent global strategies must be
considered in which activities to promote security are
accompanied by development efforts.

As you rightly recalled in your concept paper
(S/2011/50), Madame President, the purpose of this
debate is not to establish scenarios that could lead to
the Security Council infringing on the powers of other
organs of the Organization, the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council in particular. Rather,
I believe, it involves, beyond defining an integrated
comprehensive response, promoting synergies and
close interaction between the Security Council, which
has the primary responsibility for maintaining

international peace and security, and the other United
Nations organs, funds and programmes, so that
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities
can lead to viable and lasting peace. That requires us to
reorient our approach in order to better take into
account of the dual need to integrate into our strategies
to maintain international peace and security the
dimension of development and striving to strengthen
cooperation among the various United Nations bodies.

In that regard, it could be timely to underscore
certain priority actions in order to comprehensively
address the deep-seated causes of conflict. Those
include the following. We must ensure that prevention
efforts also cover development activities, in addition to
political decisions and humanitarian action. We must
take into account the priorities laid out by the countries
in question with respect to programmes to strengthen
and build peace. We must create the conditions for
effective cooperation between all stakeholders and
establish strategic frameworks for reconstruction and
development after conflicts. We must combat all
threats to international peace and security that could
undermine the foundations of the State, such as drug
trafficking, the proliferation and illicit trafficking of
small arms and light weapons and, of course, terrorism.
And we must strengthen the cooperation between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission so
that the latter can fulfill its role as a consultative entity.

In short, these combined measures would serve a
double purpose: they would better prevent and contain
crises by finding lasting solutions to them.

