Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): On behalf of my delegation, may I
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We are
convinced that under your leadership the work of the
Council will be successful.

I also wish to express our appreciation to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of China,
Ambassador Li Zhaoxing for having conducted the work
of the Security Council in March with skill and
effectiveness.

My delegation would like first of all to say that it
agrees with the comments made by the Permanent
Representative of Indonesia on behalf of States parties to
the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) that belong to the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

 

Avoiding nuclear war and preventing the proliferation
of nuclear weapons have been, and should remain, priorities
of the international community in the maintenance of
international peace and security. None the less, achieving
these objectives is now more difficult than in the recent
past because political and economic circumstances
following the cold war have opened up different paths to
proliferation for those States with the financial and
technical capacity to design, acquire or produce nuclear
weapons. Their acquisition by such States, and their
possible acquisition by groups within States, and then the
use or threat of use of these weapons, is a danger to
international peace and security. It is therefore today more
necessary than ever before to make every effort and
commitment against nuclear proliferation. All peace-loving
States must commit themselves to these efforts.

My delegation considers that in the attainment of these
objectives, as well as in international cooperation for the
peaceful uses of nuclear technology, the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is of undeniable
importance, and that therefore there should be universal
adherence to it. None the less, we believe that the support
that the non-nuclear-weapon States give to these initiatives,
through their adherence to them or through their
participation in regional arrangements or systems, such as
the Treaty of Tlatelolco, should not be considered as a gift
to the nuclear-weapon States. The fact that States parties to
the Treaty renounce the production or acquisition of nuclear
weapons has implications for their own security, since they
give up their right to deter an attack or the threat of an
attack by nuclear-weapon-States.

That is why, until the ultimate goal of the total
elimination of these weapons is achieved, the non-nuclear-
weapon States parties to the Treaty have the legitimate right
to be given assurances that the weapons will not be used
against them. In order to obtain recognition of this right, a
matter of vital interest to their security, the non-nuclear-
weapon States have been endeavouring since the very
negotiation of the NPT, and through the Conference on
Disarmament in Geneva, to obtain security assurances that
are internationally acceptable - in other words,
commitments that are legally binding. Thus far, there have
only been negative security assurances, in the form of
unilateral statements that do not have the binding force of
an international instrument, or positive security assurances
through a resolution of the Council. One example was the
adoption of resolution 255 (1968) of 19 June 1968, which
did not specify what action should be taken in the case of
nuclear aggression, and which did not specify whether the
Security Council needed to obtain prior consent from the
non-nuclear State which had been attacked. For this
reason, these security assurances were of limited value.

My delegation understands that the draft resolution
now before the Council attempts to make the positive
security assurances more credible and more universally
acceptable by broadening them, in that it defines the
assistance to be provided to a non-nuclear State party to
the NPT subjected to aggression involving nuclear
weapons; establishes the intention to take appropriate
measures to compensate it for damage caused by the
aggression; and contemplates possible immediate
collective action by the nuclear-weapon States members
of the Council, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter.

My delegation recognizes that the present draft
resolution and the unilateral statements recently made by
the members of the Security Council that are nuclear-
weapon States on new security assurances could
contribute to strengthening the international nuclear non-
proliferation regime and to dispelling the fears engendered
by the ambiguous and undeclared nuclear policies of
certain States against their regional neighbours. In this
respect, my delegation hopes that the adoption of this
draft resolution will help resolve the differences in the
Conference on Disarmament that have so far prevented
the conclusion of effective international instruments on
negative security assurances for non-nuclear-weapon
States, something that has been advocated since 1968 by
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Lastly, my delegation feels that the most effective
guarantee that can be provided against the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons is nuclear disarmament itself,
under effective international control. In the meantime, the
security assurances being offered to non-nuclear-weapon
countries, be they positive or negative, can be understood
only as temporary measures towards the attainment of that
objective.

