Mr. Davis: I join my colleagues in thanking the
presidency very much indeed for the invitation to
attend this meeting.

I should like to group my remarks under five
headings: first, the general relationship between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe; secondly,
the work of the Council of Europe on conflict
prevention; thirdly, the work of the Council of Europe
in post-conflict situations; fourthly, our work with the
United Nations; and, lastly, what the Council of Europe
can offer the United Nations in terms of future work
and in the context of the concept paper which was
issued a week ago.

Turning, therefore, to our general relationship
with the United Nations, we at the Council of Europe
believe that it is the responsibility of the United
Nations to maintain world peace, and we support it in
its work to that end. We believe that there is a link
between global security and regional security, and we
believe also that there is a link between security,
democracy, human rights and the rule of law. Of
course, democracy, human rights and the rule of law
are the core business of the Council of Europe. Those
are the reasons why we at the Council of Europe are
strong believers in multilateralism and in the world
summit pledge to support a stronger relationship
between the United Nations and regional organizations.

The Council of Europe has a wide range of
activities, but most of it could be covered by the
generic description of conflict prevention. One good
example would be our activities under the Framework
Convention for the Protection of National Minorities.
That is a legal instrument which was developed and
adopted by the Council of Europe after the changes in
Europe in the early 1990s.

Much is known about ethnic conflict and ethnic
cleansing in Europe during that period; much less is
known about potential ethnic conflict which did not
materialize. I choose an example from your own
country, Mr. President. In the early 1990s, there was
considerable tension on ethnic minority issues and
ethnic minority grounds between Romania and
Hungary. Contrary to the former Yugoslavia, Romania
and Hungary chose the Council of Europe way. Both
countries signed and ratified the Framework
Convention in 1995. The conflict remained potential,
not real, and therefore largely unknown.

That example illustrates a trend that I, as
Secretary-General of the organization, intend to
encourage, namely not only to maintain high standards
in human rights, democracy and the rule of law, but
also to give a direct and robust response to new and
specific challenges on our continent.

As everyone sitting on the Security Council
Counter-Terrorism Committee knows, the Council of
Europe has a threefold approach to fighting terrorism.
Better legal cooperation, exemplified by our
conventions on the suppression of terrorism,
cybercrime and money-laundering, respect for human
rights and the promotion of intercultural and inter-
religious dialogue are some of the ways to address the
root causes of terrorism.

We pay special attention to the balance between
vigorous measures to combat terrorism on the one hand
and strict protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms on the other. It is our firm view that the
absolute prohibition on torture, inhuman and degrading
treatment must be upheld. Today a State cannot be a
member of the Council of Europe without agreeing to
be monitored by a committee on the prevention of
torture.

As for intercultural dialogue, for some years we
have had dialogue with other continents through our
North-South Centre, based in Lisbon. This has
included Africa. In coming months and years, we
intend to increase and intensify that dialogue,
especially on the southern shores of the Mediterranean,
in the Middle East, and in Central Asian republics.

Turning now to our other experience of dealing
with post-conflict situations in Europe, we have been
much involved in multilateral action and individual
actions in the Balkans and the South Caucasus in
particular.

There are two misunderstandings about the work
of the Council of Europe. We give a very broad
interpretation of democracy, human rights and the rule
of law, and we regard our work as properly including
work on good governance, which includes local and
regional government, work on education, culture,
cultural heritage, youth and social cohesion issues.

The second misunderstanding is that we are a
Strasbourg organization. It is true that we are based in
Strasbourg, but we are not restricted to Strasbourg. In
recent years our activity has increased in our member
States, inside our member States, often in partnership
with other regional organizations such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the European Union, and with the United
Nations - the Balkans being a case in point; there has
already been some reference to Kosovo.

Turning to our work with the United Nations, let
me say that it is not restricted to Kosovo. We have a lot
of cooperation already with some United Nations
agencies. I think that in some cases, it could be better.
That is why I would welcome the idea put forward by
my colleague from the OSCE of a framework
agreement with the United Nations. We would certainly
like to be part of that. I also look forward very much to
working with the Peacebuilding Commission in future.

We offer certain assets and resources to the
United Nations. We have not only our own expertise;
we also have intergovernmental experts: the experts
working for our member States - the 46 member
countries of the Council of Europe. We offer the
Parliamentary Assembly, which has representatives
from the parliaments of our 46 member countries. We
have a Congress of Local and Regional Authorities
which is very similar, with representatives of local
government. We have the European Commission
against Racism and Intolerance dealing with issues of
intolerance, racism, anti-Semitism and Islamophobia.
We have the Court for the protection of human rights,
which applies to all our member States and whose
rulings must be obeyed in our member States.

We have, of course, a very strong relationship -
indeed, a special statutory relationship - with non-
governmental organizations, which gives a grassroots
link to civil society in Europe. We also have the
networks created by expertise, training and other
assistance activities in our member States.

The United Nations Security Council has the
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
security in all parts of the world, including Europe. My
invitation to you, Mr. President, is for the Security
Council to make best use of what the Council of
Europe has to offer.

I look forward to our cooperation during the
Romanian presidency of the Council of Europe, which
is going to start in November. The presidency of our
Committee of Ministers, a decision-making body, will
last from November until May of next year, and
Romania will be followed by the Russian Federation. I
am sure that they, too, will wish to encourage this
work, in alliance and cooperation with the United
Nations.

