Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile's position vis-a-vis the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, has been
expressed by my country in this and other international
forums, and is widely known. We support negotiations
between the parties and a solution that would allow
both States to live in peace and security, within safe
and internationally recognized borders. Two decades
into the peace process that was launched in Oslo, we
believe that the time has come to implement the two-
State solution. The Security Council has a role to play
in that matter, and can contribute to the resumption
of dialogue in the context of its responsibility in the
maintenance of peace and security.

Assuming its international responsibility, and
consistent and conscious of its role in this organ, Chile
voted in favour of draft resolution S/2014/916. We are
not pleased with the exercise as it has unfolded, with
scant space for negotiation and dialogue among Council
members and the stakeholders. As we see it, negotiation
is essential to achieving the necessary consensus that
makes the collective action of the Council effective in
its search for viable solutions. However, as we see it,
we have given priority to the urgent need to address
the situation on the ground and to the conviction that it
is possible to achieve a political outcome allowing for
renewed momentum in the negotiations. The conflict
in Gaza in July and August and the events of recent
months in the West Bank and East Jerusalem have
shown that the status quo is unsustainable. After 46
years of occupation, the Palestinian people hold fast to
the hope of full sovereignty and independence. Chile
supports those legitimate aspirations.

We are aware that there are different visions in
the Council, and that some delegations believe that
the time for action is not ripe politically. It is such a
complex matter that it will never be easy to determine
when the right time has come to act. Chile, however,
will continue to contribute to the process because we
are convinced that the solution to the conflict requires
the inclusive and realistic resolve of many actors
who, directly or indirectly, can pave the way towards
dialogue and peace.

