Ms. Rodriguez de Ortiz (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, upon your skilful
presidency of the Security Council during March, and
would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this open
debate on the threats to international peace and security
caused by terrorist acts. My delegation aligns itself
with the statement made by the Ambassador of Mexico,
speaking on behalf of the Rio Group.

The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela repeats its total condemnation of all acts of
terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable acts, and
reaffirms its commitment to combat terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations in strict observance of
international law, international norms for the protection
of human rights and of international humanitarian law.
Our country has reaffirmed this commitment at all
relevant international forums. The fundamental
expression of this policy has been the strengthening of
our body of law geared towards the prevention of
terrorist acts and the adoption of measures to
strengthen models for regional and global cooperation
in the fight against this scourge.
In keeping with this struggle, our country also
reaffirms its commitment to the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. We believe that, in the fight against
terrorism, actions must be in compliance with the
Charter of the United Nations. All States must ensure
that the measures adopted in this area comply with the
obligations that they are under in accordance with
international law, in particular international human
rights norms, international refugee law and
international humanitarian law. The fight against
terrorism cannot be an excuse to justify violations of
international law.

Moreover, in the fight against terrorism, as is the
case with other problems that affect and concern the
international community, we reject unilateral practices
and assessments based on subjective criteria that are
not in keeping with the global and universal approach
that they should follow. The elaboration of unilateral
reports lacking substance does not contribute to
resolving the problem. We reaffirm our belief that
multilateral cooperation under the auspices of the
United Nations is the most effective method by which
to combat international terrorism.

What must be achieved now, in the short term, is
consensus on the definition of the term "terrorism", a
definition that must be balanced in all its parameters.
In that regard, terrorism should not be equated with the
legitimate struggle of peoples under colonial or foreign
domination or under foreign occupation for their self-
determination and their national liberation.

It is crucial that we deny opportunities to those
individuals who commit terrorist acts. All States must
cooperate fully in accordance with international law to
locate, capture, deny safe haven to and bring to justice,
on the basis of the principle of prosecution or
extradition and in keeping with their own national
legislation, those who support or facilitate the
financing, planning, preparation or commission of
terrorist acts or the provision of safe haven, or who
participate in or plan to participate in such acts.

In that context, our delegation wishes to recall
once again before this Council the extradition request
that the Venezuelan Government submitted to the
Government of the United States concerning Luis
Posada Carriles, a known international criminal and
terrorist, a fugitive from Venezuelan justice responsible
for carrying out numerous terrorist plans, the most well
known of which was the bombing of a Cubana de
Aviacion airplane over Barbados in 1976, claiming 73
innocent lives. The United States has ignored the
extradition request submitted by the Venezuelan
Government nearly three years ago, in full compliance
with all the necessary requirements, and Luis Posada
Carriles is still free on United States territory. The
authorities of this country have taken only technical
legal manoeuvres regarding charges of migration fraud
against Posada Carriles, while ignoring the extradition
request from Venezuela.

In addition to Council resolution 1373 (2001) and
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the United
States should comply with the extradition treaty signed
by our two countries in 1922. It is also bound by the
provisions of the International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings and the Convention
for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the
Safety of Civil Aviation - conventions to which it is a
State party. It is obliged to extradite Luis Posada
Carriles or to submit his case to its competent
authorities for purposes of prosecution, without any
exception and regardless of whether or not the crime
was committed on United States territory.

The extradition request submitted by Venezuela
for the terrorist Luis Posada Carriles has been endorsed
by various international forums, including the
Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement,
the heads of State and Government of the Bolivarian
Alternative for the Peoples of Latin America -
ALBA- the States parties of MERCOSUR, and the
heads of State and Government of the Ibero-American
States.

The case of the terrorist Luis Posada Carriles is
an example that demonstrates and affirms the double
standards of a Government that claims to fight
terrorism while approving terrorist methods through its
conduct. Unfortunately, terrorism will not be defeated
if we continue to act in a selective manner and apply
double-standard policies.

Once again we repeat our request that the
Counter-Terrorism Committee examine and verify the
United States compliance with its obligations in the
fight against terrorism in accordance with resolution
1373 (2001) and the previously mentioned legal
instruments in the specific case of our extradition
request concerning the terrorist Posada Carriles.

