Mr. Bivero (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish):
Mr. President, allow me first to congratulate you on the
way in which you have discharged your duties at the helm
of the Security Council during the month of April.

The issue now before the Council is, unlike so many
others, a source of particular satisfaction for our
Organization. As everyone has recognized, the work of the
United Nations in El Salvador has been instrumental in
achieving peace in that country. The new phase that is now
beginning as the United Nations Observer Mission in
El Salvador (ONUSAL) concludes its mandate is, in our
View, just as important.

Our Organization has perhaps less experience in
consolidating peace. Nevertheless, its parameters for future
action in El Salvador are essentially determined by the
scope of the peace accords and by the degree of progress
made thus far in implementing them. The parties agree on
that point, and our Organization is right today to adopt
the measures necessary to keep intact its verification and
good-offices capacity for a reasonable additional period.

This new phase is just as important as the ones that
preceded it. It requires the same level of commitment
from the parties, placing on them a greater responsibility
than ever in meeting all the aspirations that the peace
accords signify for the Salvadoran nation.

Venezuela is pleased to have been able to contribute
to these achievements as a country that is a Friend of the
Secretary-General and a friend of El Salvador. Our efforts
and our commitment, whatever may have been their
merits or their flaws, were always guided by the hope of
seeing El Salvador reconciled and its people ready to
build, hand in hand, a better future for themselves.

Allow me on this occasion to pay tribute to all those,
within and outside the United Nations, who gave their
selfless support to overcoming one of the most serious
crises in our part of the world, and to express the hope
that these events will never be repeated in the Americas.

I should like to conclude by recalling words that I
consider particularly relevant in the context of the United
Nations new phase in El Salvador. The President of
Venezuela, Mr. Rafael Caldera, in his statement to the
forty-ninth session of the General Assembly, said that
Venezuela desired

"to see the United Nations displaying unflinching
determination that the search for justice must play
a key role in the building of peace.

"If peace is our goal let us strive to make
justice its foundation." (Ofiicial Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session, Plenary Meetings, 12th meeting, p. 10)

Social justice, in its broadest sense, is in essence the
challenge that is involved in a full implementation of the
peace accords, and support for it is the challenge facing
the international community as a whole, and particularly
the United Nations system.

