Mr. Kusljugie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has often been the focus
of Security Council debates over the past decade with
regard to a number of extremely important and difficult
issues. We are participating in this discussion today as
the host country to the United Nations Mission the
extension of whose mandate is being considered. We
would therefore like to participate constructively in
finding a solution to the important issue before the
Council.

I speak on behalf of the country that has
experienced genocide and war crimes during the past
decade, and for which the Security Council, this very
body, has established an ad hoc tribunal in order to
prosecute those suspected of perpetrating the most
horrendous of crimes committed on the territory of the
former Yugoslavia. Consequently, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has signed and ratified the Statue of the
permanent Court, the International Criminal Court, as
it well understands the consequences of war crimes and
the need for justice and for the prevention of future
atrocities.

We are faced today with concerns regarding
potential misuse of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) as regards the participation of peacekeepers in
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), as well as in other peace missions of the
United Nations. In the specific situation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the United Nations Mission, we find
it very difficult to conceive of a situation in the next
six months that would bring the Statute of the
International Criminal Court into play. We are also of
the opinion that there are sufficient safeguards in the
Statute itself.

Nonetheless, for any country concerned about the
possible extradition of its nationals participating in
UNMIBH, we hereby state our readiness to consider
during the next six months, and bearing in mind the
Rome Statute, modalities for the transfer, surrender or
extradition of their nationals suspected of committing
crimes under the jurisdiction of the Rome Statute, in
order to reach mutually acceptable agreement on this
issue. We would also like to mention that we already
have bilateral extradition agreements in place with
some of the countries concerned. We are doing so out
of the deep conviction that the continued presence of
UNMBIH at full capacity during the next six months is
essential to completing its core mandate. It will also
enable the European Union to take over the next phase
of this important job smoothly and according to plan.

Allow me to remind the Council that after the
signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina was one of
the key players in building a self-sustaining and
peaceful country. The United Nations Mission has
made tireless efforts, with visible and measurable
results, towards reconciliation and reconstruction in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Multi-ethnic police forces
and a functioning State Border Service are just two of
the great achievements made with the leadership,
expertise and the support of the United Nations.

The existing level of stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a source of hope, and provides a
framework for the steady development of democratic
institutions, the rule of law and respect for human
rights. Those efforts have recently been crowned by
our accession to the Council of Europe. In this context,
the extension of the United Nations Mission's mandate
is important to making further progress in the areas of
security and an independent judiciary. While thanking
the United Nations Mission for its contribution, we are
also grateful to the European Union for its readiness to
take over.

We strongly believe that it would be very
unfortunate if the final steps to be taken by this
successful Mission - to which, among others, the
United States has made a particularly important
contribution - were to come to an abrupt end. That is
why we would like to believe in the wisdom and reason
of those who are carrying out the responsible duty of
preserving peace in our world. We are therefore
hopeful that an acceptable solution will be found and
that the solidarity and common interests of the
international community in peacekeeping will be
preserved.

