Mr. Guehenno: I would first like to thank the
members of the Council and the representatives of
Spain, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Ukraine
for paying tribute to the achievements of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) under the leadership of Hans Haekkerup.
Their words of appreciation will be conveyed to him.

Indeed, the work that was accomplished in 2001
helped build the foundations on which we now have to
work. The provisional institutions of self-government
give a framework within which the various
communities of Kosovo can learn to work together and
to live with each other. The specific results of the
election impose a compromise and that is a good thing
because it is a basis for any sustainable Kosovo. The
Common Document, as the Ambassador of Yugoslavia
pointed out, offers a good framework for relations not
only between the United Nations and Yugoslavia, but
also between the Kosovars and the authorities in
Belgrade. All that now needs to be implemented and to
be developed.

I was briefly in Kosovo at the beginning of this
month, and I made clear to the leaders of Kosovo that
they now have to live up to the expectations of the
international community and that their own people
would not understand if the institutions that have been
developed were to remain empty shells. That is really
the challenge at hand now. It will require a continued
and sustained effort on the part of the international
community, which I think will see the participation of
Kosovars in those institutions as a test. How can one
envisage any final status if the Kosovars cannot agree
to make provisional institutions work? It is therefore
very important that they deliver on that. No scheme
devised in an international conference will work if the
people on the ground do not have the right mindset to
implement whatever scheme is agreed. In that respect,
the top-down approach has to be complemented by a
bottom-up approach.

For UNMIK and for Mr. Steiner it means that the
programme of work will indeed be quite heavy in the
month to come. It is necessary to engage the leaders of
Kosovo and the communities at all levels so that they
address the practicalities of the future of Kosovo.
There is the need to build capacities in Kosovo. Some
members of the Council have stressed the importance
of education in that respect. I would like to say that
significant efforts have been made for the transfer of
authority to the future Ministry of Education, Science
and Technology. The present transitional Education
Department is recruiting staff from all communities for
the future Ministry. We understand that it is important
that all communities - including, of course, Kosovo
Serb students - have access to higher education, and I
think an understanding has been reached in that respect
with the authorities in Belgrade. At the same time, we
do not believe that a parallel education system should
be developed. This has to be an integrated policy. I
would also like to inform the Council that the
transitional Education Department is working on the
development of a multilingual curriculum, which will
have to be finalized with the Kosovo Assembly.

There is the need to build capacities, but there is
also the need for the Mission to focus on some key
priorities that are of the essence for the success of the
political strategy. In that respect I would like to say a
few words on another item that was raised by several
delegations, namely, the issue of security. Indeed,
security in Kosovo remains a concern. We are not
satisfied with incidents like the one reported in
paragraph 23 of the report, when individuals are
arrested in possession of weapons, for instance.
Unfortunately, that is still a regular occurrence in
Kosovo.

The Mission is working hard to address the
security issues. It is working hard to address politically
motivated crime, as well as organized crime. I would
like to stress the five priorities in the fight against
organized crime that have been defined by the Mission:
fighting against prostitution and trafficking, against
money-laundering and economic crimes, against
racketeering and extortion, against terrorism, and
against the illegal possession of weapons and
trafficking in weapons and ammunition. This fight
against organized crime is a key priority for pillar I of
the mission. It will include the further development of
further legislative and institutional tools, in addition to
what has already been developed. The anti-economic
crime unit in the economic reconstruction pillar will
work closely with pillar I to address the economic
crime issues, which are very much linked to the
sustainability, so to speak, of crime activities.

Another area that is a key concern of the Mission
in the field of security is, of course, the security of
Assembly members. The Kosovo Police Service (KPS)
has already trained 96 officers to provide close
protection to Assembly members. That division of the
Kosovo Police Service will be expanded in 2002 to
provide security service to all the ministries of the
provisional institutions. The first KPS close protection
teams will be operational next month, with a target of
180 close protection officers by the middle of this year.
There is an urgent need to incorporate at least 20
international close protection officers into the UNMIK
Close Protection Unit to strengthen the effectiveness of
that Unit and to provide for the freedom of movement
of Kosovo Serb Assembly members.

Another important area in the provision of
security is of course the control of borders, to which
the Russian representative referred. It is indeed close to
impossible to hermetically seal any border, but I want
to report to the Council that UNMIK and KFOR are
making every effort to control Kosovo's borders and
boundaries. Search operations continue along the
borders and boundaries, targeting extremists, organized
crime and weapon-smuggling. In that respect, I would
like to mention a major operation that took place on 1
December 2001, when KFOR and UNMIK police
launched the largest simultaneous weapons-search
operation thus far. That operation involved 3,000
soldiers from all the multinational brigades. The
operation resulted in some arrests and the seizure of an
assorted range of weaponry. In close cooperation with
KFOR, we will continue to develop the effort to
reassure the people of Kosovo that law-abiding
persons, who are the vast majority of the people of
Kosovo, feel secure in Kosovo.

Beyond the issue of security, as UNMIK focuses
on its key functions and some key targets to provide for
a good political environment, in the course of the next
12 months UNMIK will have to address the issue of its
reshaping. Already we see that pillar II, the civil
administration pillar, has witnessed a significant
reduction in its personnel while pillar I is being
strengthened precisely to strengthen the rule of law and
the provision of security and a functioning judiciary,
which is a key political concern.

We expect the new Special Representative to
focus a lot on the reshaping of UNMIK in a number of
areas from an executive role to an advisory role, thus
rebalancing the various pillars to address the remaining
priorities of the Mission. The restructuring will
certainly affect pillar III and, eventually, pillar IV, as it
has affected pillar II. So I see the internal organization
of the Mission as certainly being one of the important
tasks of the new Special Representative.

I think, given the lateness of the hour, that I will
end by emphasizing that a lot has been accomplished,
but that a lot remains to be done. At the moment, the
strategy is really to test the will of the Kosovar people
by engaging them, so that the provisional institutions
organized last year can function. That will provide a
sound basis for future discussion on the status of
Kosovo.

