Mr. Omaar (Somalia): I am pleased to have this
opportunity to report recent developments and the
significant progress made by the Government of
President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed and Prime
Minister Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke. First,
however, I wish to thank the Council, the Member
States, the Governments, the Secretary-General and the
United Nations as a whole for the aid and assistance
that they have given to Somalia and the Somali people
over the past 18 years. Their support and that of the
international community has been crucial for the past
efforts for peace in Somalia. We acknowledge and
appreciate that, and we now wish to take that forward
in partnership with them to re-establish the institutions
of the State and to implement the rule of law.

As the Council is aware, the Djibouti peace
process delivered a firm platform for a Government of
national unity, with the election of our new President
on 30 January and his appointment of the Prime
Minister on 13 February. One month ago to this day,
the Prime Minister announced the new Cabinet, which
was sworn into office on 21 February and given an
almost unanimous mandate by parliament on the same
day. Within a week, the President, the Prime Minister,
the Cabinet and parliament all returned to Somalia and
assumed the seat of government on a permanent basis
with the required quorum, and the first Cabinet
meeting took place on 28 February. This assumption of
09-27495
the seat of government is permanent and irreversible,
and the business of government is now fully under way
from Mogadishu.

Our first and foremost policy is and will remain
the establishment of peace and security in Somalia.
That can be achieved only through dialogue,
negotiation, the will for compromise and
reconciliation. The people of Somalia and the
international community have paid a high price to
reach this point, and we see it as the moment of truth.
We, as the Government, and our partners, the
international community, now have the responsibility
and the opportunity to realize what has eluded us all
for 18 years.

Over the past four weeks of its operation, the
Government has taken five essential actions to lay the
foundations for its programme of peace and
reconciliation.

The first was its immediate and irreversible
assumption of the seat of government in the capital,
Mogadishu.

The second was the integration of the forces of
the Transitional Federal Government and of the
Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia into the Joint
Security Force. That has been successful and effective
in the rebuilding of national security forces, which are
essential to the establishment of peace and security
within the country and are the means for reconciliation
within the priority sector of State institutions.

The third has been the developing mobilization of
the Somali people in support of the peace process. This
mobilization and motivation among the major
stakeholders - including merchants and businessmen,
clan elders, religious leaders, women and young
people - has gathered such momentum that the peace
process is now, in reality, a common property that is
being both championed and defended by the Somali
people and by communities themselves.

Our fourth initiative has been to re-estainsh the
authority of the State and the rule of law in the
economy. That has started with the assumption of full
authority over Mogadishu port and airport, which are,
respectively, the principal seaport and airport in
Somalia. Both have been restructured with new
administrations and internationally acceptable
operational procedures. They are two new sources of
09-27495
internal revenue for the Government, which we aim to
develop and strengthen.

Our fifth and most recent initiative has been the
re-establishment of our dialogue with the international
community through the International Contact Group on
Somalia, the Arab League and the African Union and
through bilateral discussions in the subregion with
Kenya, Burundi, Uganda and Rwanda, undertaken
through presidential Visits to those countries over the
past 10 days.

The need for peace and the will for liberty to
achieve it have shown that, in the end, the voice and
the will of the people must prevail. That has been no
less inevitable in Somalia than it has been in the
history of the world. Today in Somalia there are no
warlords; there are no clan wars; there are no political
factions holding the country hostage. Some, however,
still refuse the offer of peace and dialogue, even when
we reconfirm that the Sharia is the source of the law, as
it is under the Charter of the Transitional Federal
Government, and that it will remain so under the
proposed constitution now under preparation. Yet we
remain ready to negotiate with them, but we will do so
only across the table. The gun must be put away.

We have focused and set our targets on the first
100 days. The Somali people have shown their will for
peace, and our responsibility as a Government is to
provide credibility, coherence and competence in
governance. That can be built only in partnership and
collaboration with the international community. The
society of States that is represented by the United
Nations must put the past and its disappointments
behind it. We are at a landmark moment, and we cannot
afford to fail. We therefore ask you, the member
Governments, and other multilateral institutions to
support the Government with urgent and immediate
action in the following areas.

The first is security stabilization. The
Government's security and peacekeeping strategy is
based on the twin pillars of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Joint Security Force of
the Government. With regard to AMISOM, we have
requested from the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the Governments of Burundi and Uganda
that three additional battalions be sent to Somalia on an
urgent basis. That needs to be undertaken immediately,
with improved equipment, logistics and medical
facilities.

With regard to the Joint Security Force, it has not
been adequately funded, resourced or equipped thus
far, yet it is AMISOM'S essential partner for
peacekeeping. Without an operational Joint Security
Force on the Somali side, AMISOM. and the
peacekeeping mission will be hampered for lack of a
national partner force that will, in time, take on the
responsibility for security and stability.

As for the United Nations peacekeeping force, we
welcome and support the commitment to establish such
a force for Somalia, and we confirm that a significant
number of the benchmarks detailed in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/132) are already in place.

With respect to the pledging conference set for
22 April, it is most crucial to resource the security
sector as a whole, as detailed earlier. Without such
resources, visible and effective demonstration of the
authority of the State and the rule of law will not be
achieved and peace will not be secured.

Finally, with regard to the arms embargo in the
security sector, if the Joint Security Force is to be
equipped by the international community, to partner
with AMISOM. and to secure peace, the embargo on the
Government must be readdressed.

The second area concerns, in terms of our
requirements, cooperation with the Government and
capacity-building. The peace process and the
achievements so far have been undertaken in
partnership with the international community. Our
common objectives, and the investments made, have
been to assist the Somali people to establish effective
institutions of State and the rule of law. The
Government of national unity that is now in place has
been recognized by the international community. Yet
the need to work with the organs of the Government -
however fragile - and to respect its dignity and
sovereignty must be highlighted. We all need to make
adjustments in attitudes and in operational habits and
procedures.

Those adjustments must be telescoped into the
resourcing of capacity-building for Government
institutions. Personnel in the ministries and
departments of the Government need training and
provision of expertise to re-establish effective
operations for the delivery of public services and
administrative governance at both the federal and local
levels.
With regard to humanitarian aid, as confirmed by
the Secretary-General in his report (S/2009/ 132), more
than 3 million people will need humanitarian assistance
due to both displacement and drought. Of that total,
580,000 are internally displaced people in the vicinity
of Mogadishu. This is a danger to human life that can
be averted. It is also a danger to the peace and stability
that we all seek. The fruits of peace must show in the
lives of the displaced and the victims of drought. They
need the Council to act, as they deserve its assistance.

With regard to piracy, as stated by the Secretary-
General, defeating piracy in Somalia requires the
restoration of the rule of law. As the origin and base of
piracy is on land, defeating piracy can only be done in
partnership with the Government. In 2008, 111 piracy
attacks occurred, and in 2009, seven attacks have
occurred already. For our part, we are ready, willing
and able to integrate the required actions against piracy
into the twin pillars of our security development and
stabilization programme, as detailed earlier. We look to
the international community for an immediate, agreed
plan for implementation.

In Somalia, the momentum for peace has created
a new momentum. Somalia is no longer caught in the
stalemate of conflict between factions of
approximately equal weight. This momentum is led by
the Government. We have gained credibility with the
Somali people. We are establishing coherence through
the State institutions, which we need to be empowered.
Most of all, however, we need the resources for the
competence needed for governance.

I thank the Security Council for this opportunity
to address the Council.

