Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the representatives of
Germany and Switzerland for introducing the studies
that they had carried out within the context of the
Bonn-Berlin and Interlaken processes. We are also
grateful to the representative of Sweden for the
willingness of his country to continue studying the
application of sanctions.

The issue of sanctions has taken up a great deal of
the Security Council's work in the last decade.
Sanctions constitute a powerful tool for bringing an
impact to bear on people. Their effectiveness depends
directly, however, on the correctness of the Council's
assessment of the level of the threat to international
peace and security. This is why the question of
principles and the way in which they are applied
deserves the most serious attention.

Before resorting to an embargo regime, the
Council must estimate any possible negative effect of
the restrictive measures on the population, who are not
directly politically responsible for the actions of
official authorities, and any potential harm to the
interests of third countries.

This is why the introduction of sanctions is an
extreme measure to be applied only where all other
methods of bringing political impact to bear have been
exhausted, and when the Security Council determines
that there is a real threat to the international
community. Sanctions must be introduced strictly in
accordance with the provisions of the United Nations
Charter and the norms of international law. They must
seek clearly stated objectives; they must be carefully
targeted; they must be subject to regular review; and
they must set forth clearly the conditions for lifting
them. It is impermissible to introduce measures that
have no set time period.

We welcome the trend for the Council to take
decisions with a prescribed time frame for sanctions.
Examples of successful action by the Council in this
connection are, we believe, the resolutions on sanctions
against the Taliban and sanctions on Liberia.

We will carefully study the booklets on focused
sanctions. We are sure that these reports will be much
in demand among many States within the United
Nations and outside. We believe that the reports will
help States in their work on the finer points of
resolutions on the application of sanctions and will also
be helpful with regard to existing practical regimes for
implementing decisions at the national level. This latter
issue will be of particular interest to States, because it
falls within the competence and responsibility of States
that have an obligation to report to the Security
Council on measures that they have taken to comply
with the sanctions.

