Mr. Delattre (France) (Spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Ursula Mueller for her
very useful briefing, which once again shows that the
humanitarian situation in Syria is steadily deteriorating
and that we are witnessing another humanitarian
disaster in the north-west of the country. I would also
like to welcome the presence of Mr. Vershinin, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Russia.

We must focus our efforts on three priorities - the
need to preserve the ceasefire in Idlib, respect for
international humanitarian law, which is non-negotiable,
and the need for a lasting political solution, which is the
only possible solution to the Syrian crisis.

First, preserving the ceasefire in Idlib must be an
absolute priority for us all. Today's top priority is to
prevent Idlib from becoming a new Aleppo. The lives
of more than 3 million civilians, including 1 million
children, are at stake. A large-scale offensive would
not only result in tragic humanitarian consequences
but also represent a security threat and a migration risk
for us all. We call on the signatories of the ceasefire
agreement to honour their commitments to maintaining
it. I recall that those commitments were reiterated
by the Astana guarantors on 26 April. Russia, in
particular, must exert all pressure necessary on the
regime. Iran must also contribute by translating into
action in Syria the commitment it made to the Council
in a recent letter concerning its assistance on the issue
of regional stability.

Despite all the positive rhetoric, the offensive
against Idlib is taking place right before our eyes.
Behind the pretext of combating terrorism, the new
offensive of the regime and its allies are part ofa desire
to forcibly reclaim areas that remain outside of their
control, as was the case for Aleppo and Ghouta. The
threat of terrorism could become even greater due to
the spread of elements that the regime is claiming to
fight. With more than 40 civilian infrastructure sites
hit, the targets and objectives of the offensive leave no
room for doubt that the fight against terrorism can never
justify such actions. Furthermore, I repeat, France will
be extremely firm if chemical weapons are used again
and stands ready to act.

Secondly, respect for international humanitarian
law is binding on all and non-negotiable. I am thinking
here of two absolute priorities. The first is the need to
protect civilians, including humanitarian and medical
personnel. It is completely unacceptable for hospitals,
including those that have been deconflicted, and schools
to remain the target of attacks in the north-west of the
country. The Council's silence on the issue, for reasons
we all know, is as deafening as it is intolerable. I would
like to firmly reiterate that attacks on hospitals and
health workers constitute war crimes and perpetrators
will be held accountable.

The second priority is to guarantee immediate,
safe, comprehensive, sustainable and unhindered
humanitarian access to all Syrian territory, in
accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and international humanitarian law. A new
aid convoy must be urgently deployed to the Rukban
camp. That is an immediate and vital priority. It is
also essential that the United Nations have access to
people who have left the camp. We call on those who
have the means to exert the pressure necessary on the
regime to ensure that it complies with its obligations
under international humanitarian law by authorizing
the deployment of the convoy and, more broadly, by
guaranteeing unimpeded humanitarian access to all
areas under its control, in particular in the territories it
has recently reclaimed in the south-west and in eastern
Ghouta. Lastly, I am thinking of Al-Hol camp, where
it is crucial that the United Nations have sustainable
access, through the most direct and effective channels,
to provide assistance to the more than 70,000 people in
the camp.

Lastly, only a lasting political solution can end the
Syrian tragedy. That is our third major priority and
inextricably linked to the first two. Only a political
solution based on resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522,annex) can end the suffering
of Syrians and lead to the stabilization of Syria and
the region in the long term. The Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Geir Pedersen, has our
full support in implementing all aspects of resolution
2254 (2015). The Special Envoy has made many efforts
and it appears that a new agreement may now be within
reach. It is the responsibility of the regime's sponsors
to encourage it to engage in good faith in the process.

However, the political solution cannot be reduced
to the constitutional committee alone. It must
include three elements: a nationwide ceasefire, the
implementation of confidence-building measures
to create a secure and neutral environment and the
organization of free and transparent elections in which
all Syrians can participate. Only concrete progress in
the areas I have just mentioned will enable refugees
and displaced persons to consider returning home. At
the moment, the political and security conditions are
not in place to allow a voluntary return in safe and
dignified conditions under the auspices of the United
Nations. That is reflected in the voluntary return flows
documented by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, which remain very low
to date.

Lastly, it is unimaginable to consider financing the
reconstruction of the country, normalizing relations
with the Damascus regime or lifting sanctions until
irreversible and credible progress towards a political
solution has been made. It would be not only a grave
error in judgment but also a serious political mistake
to believe that the Syrian tragedy is behind us. Given
the new tragedy looming in Idlib - according to a very
familiar script - no one will be able to claim to have
been surprised. We call on each member ofthe Security
Council to assume its responsibilities in order to
prevent such a tragedy and allow for the establishment
of a credible political process, under the supervision of
the United Nations, to enable the country to embark on
the path to stabilization and peace.

