We have witnessed that, despite our efforts, the terrorist threat changes but does not disappear. Terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida and their affiliates have adapted to their military defeat in Iraq and Syria. Similarly, they are learning to adjust, and even exploit, the current global coronavirus disease pandemic. We express our concern in particular regarding the growth of terrorism and violent extremism in conflict zones, which exacerbates and prolongs those conflicts while rendering them bloodier and more complicated to resolve. As Member States, our duty is to always be one step ahead. Our approaches need to respond to the volatile and challenging circumstances, and our mechanisms need to keep up with new and emerging trends, all while fully respecting our international human rights obligations and commitments. Terrorism has always been a top priority for Tunisia, both domestically and throughout its first year as an elected member of the Security Council. We have worked extensively, with the support of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and alongside the other members, to ensure continuity, transparency and efficiency. We managed, despite the restrictions, to make considerable progress on key issues and to continue monitoring, facilitating and promoting the full implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions. It is essential to maintain vigilance and unity in our collective response to terrorism both during and after the pandemic. In that regard, we welcome the efforts deployed by CTED, the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team and the Group of Experts of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to maintain constructive dialogue with Member States and interagency coordination with the relevant United Nations entities. I also seize this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador Djani and his team on their successful chairmanship of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and the 1540 Committee during Indonesia's term in the Security Council. Together with the Counter-Terrorism Committee, those committees constitute the foundation of the Council's counter-terrorism work and are a vital tool for dialogue with Member States and other relevant stakeholders. It is therefore crucial to continue the coordinated and concerted efforts of these three subsidiary bodies in the implementation of our respective mandates. We remain committed to a multilateral and multi-stakeholder action as an essential prerequisite for our common objective of a world free of terrorism.
