Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): We thank the Danish
presidency for convening this important debate. The
presence here today of the Danish Minister for Foreign
Affairs is an indication of the importance that Denmark
attaches to international law issues. In the same vein,
we also thank Judge Higgins, President of the
International Court of Justice, and
Mr. Michel, the United Nations Legal Counsel, for
their eloquent contributions to the debate.

My country, Sierra Leone, attaches great
importance to international law, the rule of law and
justice; hence the request made in June 2000 by my
President, Alhaji Ahmad Tejan Kabbah, for the
establishment of the Special Court for Sierra Leone.
The restoration of the rule of law in a society that has
experienced conflict over a period of time is essential
for the sustainable resolution of conflict and rebuilding
a just society. In recent times, the international
community has realized that if we are to prevent
conflict or relapse into conflict, the promotion of the
rule of law is a top priority.

The Security Council is the principal organ
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security, and that role is intrinsically connected to
the promotion of international law and the rule of law
in international relations. The nexus between justice
and the rule of law is the very foundation for the
strengthening of international law and the maintenance
of international peace and security.

In the past several years, the Council has
established ad hoc tribunals to deal with serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. Those ad hoc tribunals have sent a loud and
clear message to those who bear the greatest
responsibility for heinous crimes that prick the
conscience of humankind: impunity can no longer be
tolerated. The ad hoc tribunals have been encumbered
2

by a variety of problems that are the direct
consequence of their ad hoc character. Nevertheless,
they too have contributed in their own way to the
enhancement of international peace, regional stability
and reconciliation.

The experience of the ad hoc tribunals has made
it essentially clear that a permanent international
tribunal can enhance the cause of international law, the
rule of law and justice. The international community
now has a permanent International Criminal Court, and
cases are now on its dockets. That, in effect, means that
the international community has an effective and
independent means of strengthening international law
and putting an end to the culture of impunity. The
perpetrators of heinous crimes can run, but they cannot
hide.

My delegation calls on all those States that have
not done so to become parties to the Statute of the
International Criminal Court. We believe the Court has
sufficient safeguards to convince them to become
parties to the 1998 Rome Statute.

While the Security Council has primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, strengthening international law is
not the exclusive domain of this organ; the General
Assembly and its organs have an important role to play
in that regard. Indeed, the corpus of opinio iuris sive
necessitas of the Assembly has played a significant
role in strengthening international law and contributing
to its progressive development and codification. The
Assembly has initiated and adopted a number of
conventions that have greatly contributed to the
strengthening of international law, the rule of law and
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Assembly has also enhanced the rule of law in
international relations by adopting important
resolutions in that regard.

Let me digress a bit and make a plea for the
Special Court for Sierra Leone. The Court now has
Charles Taylor in its custody. The Court requires
financial resources to complete its mandate. I call on
the international community to respond positively to
the clarion call of the Secretary-General for financial
contributions to the Special Court.

The experience of Sierra Leone and other
countries emerging from conflict clearly indicates that
there is a gap in the international community's
response to impunity, especially within a relatively
06-4010]
short time. The Justice Rapid Response initiative is one
mechanism proposed by like-minded States -
including my country, Sierra Leone - to fill the gaps
in the international community's ability to address
accountability for genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity and to ensure that international law,
the rule of law and justice play an integral part in post-
conflict peacebuilding.

The development and reinforcement of the
principles of international law, especially in the realm
of transitional justice, have not been accompanied in
equal measure by practical assistance to help States or
international organizations meet their responsibilities.
Indeed, the principle of complementarity, enshrined in
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
provides for prosecution by States of crimes covered
by the Statute, except where they are unwilling or
unable to carry out such prosecutions. I can say that
there are States that are indeed willing to prosecute
heinous crimes but that do not have the capacity to do
so. The Justice Rapid Response mechanism can fill that
gap by providing the requisite assistance to such States.

Even though much has been achieved with regard
to strengthening international law and the rule of law
within and across States, much more remains to be
done. The rule of law in international relations calls for
respect for the Charter of the United Nations and
respect for conventions to which States are parties, and
even the resolutions of the Security Council under
Chapter VII require compliance.

In conclusion, my delegation calls on the
international community, especially the newly
established Peacebuilding Commission, to embrace the
Justice Rapid Response mechanism as one means of
strengthening international law, the rule of law and the
maintenance of international peace and security.

