Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav Jenca for his
comprehensive briefing on the latest developments
in the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.

We are meeting today only a few days after
the signing of the intra-Palestinian agreement, an
encouraging development that we believe may be able
to promote Palestinian unity and reconciliation. We
appreciate Egypt's role in facilitating the signing of
the agreement and are grateful for its noble efforts.
We hope that the agreement's timely and effective
implementation will be instrumental in enabling
the Palestinian Authority to return to Gaza and help
to improve the livelihoods of Palestinians there by
addressing the humanitarian situation, which continues
to be a source of major concern. In that regard, we take
note of the discussions between the Secretary-General
and the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process with the Palestinian leadership. There can be
no question that the continued support and engagement
of the international community, particularly the United
Nations, will be crucial to the agreement's success.

As Mr. Jenca said, the implementation of the Cairo
agreement will also be critical to the efforts to find a
negotiated solution to the Israeli-Palestinian dispute.
We take note of the high-level engagements made
recently to facilitate a resumption of direct negotiations
between the two parties. Needless to say, there are
serious difficulties to be tackled in order to facilitate a
credible political process aimed at a two-State solution,
which is the only viable option for ending the long-
standing Israeli-Palestinian dispute, and also the only
viable way to ensure that security and justice for all
can become a reality. But that is not impossible if the
necessary political will is there. The same well-known
obstacles to ending the impasse and achieving peace
persist, with no movement forward to speak of, in a
situation that is hardly conducive to sustainable peace
and security for both countries. In the meantime, the
quest for justice keeps being postponed, with all that
that implies. Without genuine efforts to remove those
obstacles, there can be no meaningful progress towards
realizing a two-State solution.

We are also meeting at a time when the fight against
terrorism in the region is making progress, with Da'esh
losing a lot of ground in both Syria and Iraq. That has
come at an enormous price, and everything should
be done to preserve the recent gains that have been
made, which is why it is important for the international
community to remain focused on fighting terrorism in
the region and to coordinate its efforts so as to further
consolidate the gains and achieve lasting stability.

What is becoming increasingly self-evident is the
degree to which the various challenges that we face in
the Middle East, while seeming self-contained, are in
fact interrelated, thereby demanding a peacemaking
approach that is sensitive to their complexity so that
security andjustice for all can be assured. The Security
Council must play an important role in all of that or
recognize its failure to discharge its responsibilities.

