Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Let me
first join in the condolences expressed with regard to
the terrorist attack in Grozny which took the life of
President of the Chechen Republic of the Russian
Federation, Akhmad Kadyrov, and a number of other
victims. We are prepared to work on a presidential
statement to be made by the Council.

We welcome the briefing on Timor-Leste and the
outstanding work done by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, and
his team. We welcome also the presence here of the
Senior Minister and Minister in the Presidency of the
Council of Ministers of Timor-Leste, Ms. Ana Pessoa
Pinto.

Chile supports the Secretary-General's proposal
to extend the present United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) for an additional
12 months in a consolidation phase, and we believe
that the proposed mandate is appropriate.

Regarding the first element referred to in the
report, we fully agree that the provision of assistance
with respect to the justice system and administrative
structures is essential for political viability and
stability. We are concerned by the extensive delays in
the area of the administration of justice and by the
shortcomings noted in the area of human rights and
related proceedings, and we agree that there is a need
to promote capacity in that area.

As to the second aspect, namely strengthening
law enforcement in the country, in particular through
police training, we agree that there is a need for
UNMISET and the international community to
continue contributing to and supporting the training
process for the national police of Timor-Leste. We
welcome in particular the fact that its 3,021 staff
members are already carrying out their tasks in all
districts of the country. We reiterate the vital function
of the Rapid Intervention Unit, and we welcome the
fact that an adequate level of capability has been
achieved. We deem it crucial also to continue to
provide training for the Border Patrol Unit. Despite the
progress achieved, we believe that the national police
must continue with its training.

With respect to the third element, namely the
maintenance of security, we agree that this is a key
element for achieving stability in Timor-Leste, While it
is true that - fortunately - the situation in the
country has been rather peaceful, we need to bear in
mind all factors and not ignore possible sources of
instability. We believe, therefore, that the Secretary-
General's proposal is appropriate and reasonable.

Another essential element for achieving progress
and true stability in Timor-Leste is sustainable
economic development. In that respect, we hope that
greater progress will be made in the exploitation of the
country's mineral resources. We would also highlight
the programmes financed by the World Bank and the
Asian Development Bank for the creation of rural
power stations, the construction of schools, road
improvements, and the rehabilitation of marketplaces
and health services.

We are pleased with the excellent cooperation and
political agreements between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia. We hope that they will soon arrive at an
agreement on land borders and find a solution to the
problem of refugees, in particular regarding those
responsible for serious crimes, so that they may be
brought to trial.

We also recognize the outstanding work and
efforts of other regional actors and of donors from the
international community with respect to this young
country.

In the area of human rights, we value the
assistance provided by UNMISET in efforts to shed
light on the crimes committed in 1999, and we
recognize the need to continue decisively supporting
the process for an additional year. In that connection,
we particularly welcome the work carried out by the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation.
We look forward with interest to the publication of its
final report and recommendations in October of this
yean

Finally, we reiterate the need for a one-year
extension of UNMISET, in a reduced size and with a
modified mandate. We hope that the members of the
Council will reach an agreement in that regard to
support development and stability in Timor-Leste,

