Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The American representative said that Russia
spends its resources to support what she calls the
regime in Syria. My question to her is: What does the
United States spend its resources on in Syria? Does
it spend its resources providing milk and medicine
to Syrian children, or on providing weapons and
munitions to its terrorist groups, which have committed
the most heinous crimes against the Syrian people? Or
is it spending resources on the its alliance's aircraft,
which have wreaked destruction in many places in
Syria, particularly in the city of Raqqa? What about the
continuous threats that are made against my country at
nearly every meeting of the Security Council on this
issue? Does she acknowledge that her Administration
has no respect for the Security Council, this international
Organization or the principles of international law?

Let us test the credibility of what my colleague the
United States Ambassador said. I ask members to note
that I do not refer to the American Administration as
the "American regime" because that would be legally
shameful in this Chamber. Let us test the credibility
of what my colleague the American Ambassador said
when she asked the Security Council to act in order to
achieve justice in Syria. Well, my test is to request that
her Administration and her country allow the disclosure
of the results of the United Nations Special Commission
that investigated the presence of weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq for 18 years. The Commission was
headed for some time by a Swede, Mr. Hans Blix.

As Council members know, after 18 years of
investigation the Commission found no chemical
weapons in Iraq. Nor did they find Coca-Cola or Pepsi
Cola. Nevertheless, in a semi-confidential meeting
towards the end of 2008, the Security Council decided
to end the Commission's work and bury its archives in
iron boxes. I repeat - it decided to bury its archives
in iron boxes. Only the Secretary-General knows the
code that opens those boxes. There was one condition,
which was that the boxes could not be opened for
60 years. What is so shameful in those archives? Why
did they have to be buried in boxes that cannot be
opened for 60 years? That question is directed to the
American Ambassador.

The Government of my country condemns in
the strongest terms the ruthless Israeli aggression
that took place this morning on the T-4 airbase in
Homs governorate, in which a number of civilians
were killed and injured. It was a flagrant violation of
Security Council resolution 350 (1974) and of various
Security Council resolutions on counter-terrorism, and
would not have occurred were it not for the American
Administration's unlimited and consistent support for
Israel. The American Administration guarantees Israel
immunity so that it will not be held accountable in
the Council. That allows Israel to continue to practice
State terrorism and to threaten peace and security in
the region and beyond. Of course, Western countries
did not even mention the Israeli aggression in their
statements today, which shows that the Governments of
their countries are complicit in it and are covering for
it. Unfortunately, my dear friend Mr. De Mistura did
not hear Netanyahu say this morning that it was Israel
that launched the attack. That is why I was surprised
when he said that the United Nations has not been able
to verify the identity of its perpetrators. If Netanyahu
himself says that he launched this aggression, Why does
Mr. De Mistura not refer to Israel as the aggressor?

This Israeli aggression is an indirect response to the
successes of the Syrian Arab Army in expelling armed
terrorist groups from the suburbs of Damascus, its rural
area and other Syrian territory. Those groups have
been killing the Syrian people, kidnapping civilians,
detaining them and using them as human shields.
They targeted Damascus alone with 3,000 missiles
over the course of three months, killing 155 martyrs
and injuring 865 civilians, most of them women and
children. The Syrian Government underscores that the
repeated Israeli aggression did not and will not protect
Israeli agents operating within terrorist groups, nor
will it divert the attention of the Syrian Army from its
decisive military achievements in combating terrorism.

The American anti-racism activist Martin Luther
King Jr. said that "a lie is like a snowball: the further
you roll it the bigger it becomes". It would seem that
this wise saying holds true at any time and at any place.
The Governments of some countries lie incessantly.
Fortunately, though, they have not quite perfected the
details of their web oflies, much like the famous Baron
Munchausen of German literature. How many roosters
truly believe that sunrise is the result of crowing?

Some permanent members have become professional
liars, and that in itself is a weapon of mass destruction.
Through their lies, Palestine was stolen. The lies of
these countries fuelled the war in the Korean peninsula.
Through their lies, they invaded Viet Nam. Through
their lies, they invaded Grenada. Through their lies,
they destroyed Yugoslavia. Through their lies, they
occupied Iraq. Through their lies, they destroyed Libya.
Through their lies, they created takfiri terrorist groups,
such as Al-Qaida, the Taliban, Da'esh, Al-Nusra Front,
Jaysh Al-Islam - and the list goes on and on. Through
their lies, the same countries are trying to defeat Syria
and prepare the ground for an assault today.

It is worth noting that the today's negative statement
of the United States representative is in absolute
contradiction with a statement made by United States
Secretary of Defence General Mattis in an interview
with Newsweek two days ago with journalist Ian Wilkie.
