Allow me at the outset to welcome Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations, and Mr. Pierre Buyoya, High Representative of the African Union for the Sahel and Mali, for their excellent briefings and for their personal efforts aimed at stabilizing Mali in particular and the Sahel in general. I would most sincerely like to thank Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, for having chosen to organize today's session on United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) during his country's presidency of the Security Council this month. I would also like to welcome the participation of my ministerial counterparts at this very important meeting for the Sahel. Their presence is testimony of their interest in MINUSMA. It is undeniable that MINUSMA's efforts have made a major contribution to the gradual stabilization of Mali. Unfortunately, however, they have been made at the high cost of the loss in human lives of its personnel, mostly because of cowardly attacks by armed terrorist groups, which have not observed the international humanitarian truce called by the Secretary-General in response to the coronavirus disease pandemic. Accordingly, I would like both to pay a heartfelt tribute to the troop-contributing countries for their generosity and offer my deepest condolences to the grieving families for their losses. Despite the violence resulting from the ongoing attacks by terrorist armed groups and from the intercommunal conflicts, tangible progress has been made in the peace process in Mali, in particular since the holding of the inclusive national dialogue in December 2019, which was a milestone for the people of Mali in establishing a national consensus on the main political and institutional reforms. Moreover, the holding of legislative elections on 29 March, against the backdrop of rising threats, has clearly shown the world the Malian people's dedication to democratic values and their desire to return to peace and stability in the country. Progress was also achieved in the promotion of gender equity, with 30 per cent of the legislative seats being won by women. Among the further examples of progress made, we welcome the transfer to local authorities, albeit gradual, of responsibility for delivery of services. However, we notice that other crucial reforms are lagging, for example, the setting up of local police, administrative and territorial restructuring, and the redeployment of the reconstituted army units to the north. These reforms, the delay of which constitutes an important obstacle in the implementation of the 2015 peace agreement, should be given the required attention. The Niger welcomes the determined support provided by MINUSMA in the context of stabilizing and gradually restoring State authority in central Mali. We are also encouraged by the MINUSMA adaptation plan for central Mali, pursuant to resolution 2480 (2019). However, we note with concern the lack of adequate resources for the implementation of the plan. In this regard, we urge the Council to favourably consider the allocation of additional financial resources, which is indispensable for the effective implementation of the plan. At the subregional level, we commend the continued efforts deployed by the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) in collaboration with international forces, including the forces of Operation Barkhane. We are pleased to note, as recognized by the Security Council last week, that the pace of Joint Force operations has improved, with important victories against terrorists. Since its creation, in 2017, the Joint Force has conducted several major operations in accordance with its mandate. That is recognition of the need for adequate, predictable and sustained support to the Joint Force so that it may fulfil its important mission. The Niger welcomes the Joint Force's change in position and its current format. The harmonization of actions through the joint command mechanism for operations in the Sahel, based in Niamey, is undoubtedly an excellent option. It will support the forthcoming deployment by the African Union of 3,000 troops to support the Sahel countries in their fight against terrorism. The situation in the Sahel, in particular in Mali, is an argument in favour of continuing the work of MINUSMA. In that regard, the Niger would like to see consensus among Council members on MINUSMA's mandate, budget, size and operational capacity. The Niger continues to believe that the force should be stronger and more robust in the face of terrorist attacks of rare cruelty, which spare neither our defence and security forces nor the forces of our partners in Operation Barkhane, and even less the civilian population, including women and children. The Niger calls on all Member States to provide the required capacity and to mobilize adequate resources for MINUSMA, in accordance with their commitments under the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Furthermore, we believe that the creation of a rapid intervention brigade under MINUSMA, similar to the one created under the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, could increase its effectiveness. In the Niger's view, it is necessary for all to mobilize in order to ensure the survival of the G-5 Sahel States and of the region's 80 million inhabitants. Equally necessary is for MINUSMA to continue providing critical support to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. We believe that, with the commitment of the international community, more can be achieved and better in the name of the global public good that is peace. At this stage of my remarks, allow me to reiterate our request, which has been made many times, to see the G-5 Sahel Joint Force established under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. This would give it more legitimacy and ensure predictable funding. On the eve of the renewal of MINUSMA's mandate, we thank the Secretary- General for submitting to the Council options for strengthening its support to the G5-Sahel Joint Force. In my delegation's view, the best option would be one that, while protecting current achievements, would allow for predictable financing, multifaceted support as close as possible to the battalions and the development of local capacities in the area of service delivery, among other things. The Sahel region today faces many challenges that entail risks that could jeopardize international peace and security. It is therefore the appropriate time for the Security Council, through the renewal of MINUSMA's mandate, to send a strong signal of solidarity with the people of the Sahel and to issue a firm warning to terrorists that the world will not fail to act in the face of their criminal designs.
