Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for having convened this debate, for your presence
here today and for Azerbaijan's strong leadership of the
Council this month.

I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing. I also
thank Mr. Ihsanoglu and welcome him to the Council,
not for the first time, but as the first Secretary-General
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) to
brief us under this important agenda item. The OIC
makes a valued contribution to fostering international
peace and security, as its own Charter mandates.
Today's presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/16)
rightly encourages the benefits of deeper cooperation
between the Council and the OIC.
Australia recognizes the OIC's particular role in
adopting with the Organization last year a cooperation
agreement to underpin our own closer engagement,
including on political and humanitarian issues. As we
know, the partnership between the United Nations and
international and regional organizations is a crucial
instrument in our collective efforts to maintain peace
and security, and, as Mr. Ihsanoglu notes, many of the
issues on the Council's agenda relate to the Muslim
world.

The OIC has unique strengths and distinct
comparative advantages in different regions, born of
its deep knowledge of context, cultural understanding
and moral authority. The United Nations can and should
draw upon those to help shape responses to threats to
peace and security. We see those strengths manifestly
through the very substantial contribution of OIC member
States to United Nations peacekeeping operations.
It is also evident in the OIC's invaluable mediation
efforts in Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia, the Philippines
and Thailand. The OIC's newly established peace,
security and mediation unit offers new opportunities
for cooperation on the peaceful settlement of disputes,
the prevention of relapse into conflict and on conflict-
resolution initiatives, which we should fully embrace.

We acknowledge and welcome the OIC's growing
role in responding to humanitarian crises, from drought
in the Horn of Africa to floods in South Asia. The
OIC's humanitarian work is also demonstrated by its
rehabilitation programmes in the Palestinian territories
and reconstruction efforts in Darfur. In Somalia
and Yemen, the OIC has negotiated better access for
humanitarian actors. We also welcome the forthcoming
visit by the OIC to Myanmar to examine ways to help
meet humanitarian needs and Muslim community
needs there.

The joint needs assessment conducted by the OIC
and Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) in Syria, which culminated in a
comprehensive humanitarian response plan, was
important, and Australia was pleased to support
OCHA's provision of technical training to the
OIC's department of humanitarian affairs and its
non-governmental organization partners to participate
in coordinated international humanitarian efforts.
I note Mr. Ihsanoglu's comment this morning on the
OIC's concerted campaign against polio and I have to
note that polio has now resurfaced in Syria for the first
time in 14 years.

My own country shares the OIC's deep concern
about the conflict in Syria, which has precipitated
an enormous humanitarian crisis and is destabilizing
neighbouring countries in the Middle East region. We
agree that the Council could and should do more to
protect civilians caught up in the fighting and to ensure
humanitarian access and assistance.

Australia fully supports the OIC's call for an
immediate cessation of violence and a process of
peaceful transition through the "Geneva II" process.
We also agree with the OIC that the current peace
negotiations between the Palestinians and Israel are an
opportunity to achieve the two-State solution that we
must not miss.

Australia welcomes the OIC's efforts along with
the United Nations to foster a global dialogue for the
promotion of tolerance and peace, and we were pleased
to sponsor the OIC-supported General Assembly
resolution 67/ 178, on combatting intolerance due
to religion or belief. We strongly support enhanced
cooperation to improve understanding across countries
and cultures, as evidenced by Australia's role in
co-chairing over the past decade the regional interfaith
dialogue in Southeast Asia with our close partner and
OIC member Indonesia.

We look forward to examining the practical
recommendations to enhance cooperation between the
United Nations and the OIC in the next report of the
Secretary-General. Our focus should be in areas where
the United Nations and the OIC share common objectives
and complementarities: mediation, conflict-prevention
and -resolution and post-conflict rehabilitation.

In conclusion, I would like to congratulate the
incoming Secretary-General, Mr. Madani, and to pay
tribute in particular to Mr. Ihsanoglu for his vision
in leading the OIC over the past nine years and for
enhancing the partnership with the United Nations. He
leaves behind an important legacy for us to build on.

