The President (spoke in Russian): After
consultations among the members of the Security
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council stressed the urgency
of reaching comprehensive peace in the Middle
East. Vigorous diplomatic action is needed to
attain the goal set by the international
community - lasting peace in the region, based
on an enduring commitment to mutual
recognition, freedom from violence, incitement
and terror, and the two-State solution, building
upon previous agreements and obligations.

"In this context, the Security Council recalls
all its previous resolutions on the Middle East, in
particular resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002), 1515 (2003), 1850 (2008), 1860
(2009), and the Madrid principles, and the
Council notes the importance of the 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative.

"The Security Council encourages the
Quartet's ongoing work to support the parties in
their efforts to achieve a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East.

"The Security Council reiterates its
commitment to the irreversibility of the bilateral
negotiations built upon previous agreements and
24

obligations. The Council reiterates its call for
renewed and urgent efforts by the parties and the
international community to achieve a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East, based on the vision of a region
where two democratic States, Israel and Palestine,
live side by side in peace within secure and
recognized borders.

"The Security Council further calls upon the
parties to fulfil their obligations under the
Performance-Based Road Map, refraining from
any steps that could undermine confidence or
prejudice the outcome of negotiations on all core
issues.

"The Security Council calls on all States
and international organizations to support the
Palestinian Government that is committed to the
Quartet principles and the Arab Peace Initiative
and respects the commitments of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, and the Council
encourages tangible steps towards intra-
Palestinian reconciliation, including in support of
Egypt's efforts, on this basis. It calls for
assistance to help develop the Palestinian
economy, to maximize the resources available to
the Palestinian Authority and to build Palestinian
institutions.

"The Security Council supports the proposal
of the Russian Federation to convene, in
consultation with the Quartet and the parties, an
international conference on the Middle East peace
process in Moscow in 2009."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/ 14.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.55 pm.
