Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif, for briefing us on the Secretary-General's
quarterly report (S/2013/444) on the United Nations
Interim Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK). We also
welcome to New York Mr. Ivan Mrkie and Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj.

In June, at a debate on the same agenda item (see S/PV.6979), Rwanda welcomed the document signed
between the two parties. I wish to acknowledge that
it is encouraging to see the progress that Serbia and
Kosovo are making. The high degree of commitment,
flexibility, vision and creativity demonstrated by all
parties, both in Pristina and Belgrade, for the steadfast
implementation of the agreement should be commended.
There is no doubt that the full implementation of the
agreement on the ground is not far from realization.

We commend the positive spirit of both parties
and call on them to continue to engage in a substantial
discussion on matters of mutual interest, including
the transformation of the existing structures in
the north and a self-governing region that fits into
Kosovo's jurisdiction, based on flexible application
of the provisions of the Ahtisaari plan. We call on
the international community to provide unconditional
support and resources to sustain the positive momentum.

The greatest challenge ahead requiring attention
is the scepticism in northern Kosovo. The agreement
cannot be successfully implemented without
cooperation. Implementation should therefore be
carried out with the full participation of Kosovo Serbs,
because sustainable reconciliation cannot be achieved
in the presence of lingering mistrust. In that regard, the
international community should continue to focus on
the security situation in the north and prevent further
tension, as security is a key factor in lasting peace for
all.

Rwanda commends UNMIK's role in the
monitoring, mediation and facilitation of activities that
have contributed to the political process. The Mission
should continue to adapt to the evolving situation in
order to provide maximum support to the political
process, focusing in particular on issues related to
implementation of the agreement, and should play a role
in ensuring the coordination of all efforts. Furthermore,
UNMIK should actively help to promote reconciliation
and trust-building in Kosovo's communities with a view
to reaching a negotiated political solution. We therefore

call on the people of Kosovo and other stakeholders to
increase their trust-building efforts.

Rwanda commends the progress in Kosovo's
institutions that facilitate economic and political
stability, strengthen the rule of law and good
governance and improve the protection of human
rights and socioeconomic conditions. We hope that the
prevailing atmosphere will lead to the permanent peace
and stability that the people of region deserve.

Rwanda reiterates its support for the regional
perspective in resolving differences, and therefore
expresses full support for the continued guidance of
the European Union in bringing the two parties closer.
There is no doubt that the dialogue has marked progress
in terms of concluding the agreement. The credibility
of the entire dialogue process has been the cornerstone
of the achievements we see today.

We believe that it is through dialogue, rather than
threats or violence, that mutual issues can be solved.
Rwanda urges all to refrain from any action that could
undermine the achievements attained so far.

In conclusion, let me thank the European Union
for its instrumental role in the negotiations leading to
the tangible progress we witness today. I also express
my appreciation to UNMIK, the Kosovo Force, the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and all partner organizations that, in a difficult context,
continue to play a role in establishing security and the
rule of law and, above all, in bringing together the
different communities in Kosovo and strive to seek a
definitive settlement.

