Mr. Passy (Bulgaria): I should like first to
congratulate Germany on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
to thank France for its extraordinarily efficient
presidency in January.

Allow me also to express the deepest condolences
of the Bulgarian people with regard to the Columbia
space shuttle tragedy - to the families and the peoples
of the seven astronauts.

I should like to join previous speakers in
expressing my appreciation for the information that
Secretary of State Colin Powell has laid out before us.
Yesterday, Bulgaria also aligned itself with the position
of the European presidency, on behalf of the European
Union, regarding Iraq.

The very fact that the United States Government
has chosen to present this information to the Security
Council strengthens the centrality of the Council, and
we fully endorse that approach. The strong and
compelling evidence presented by Secretary Powell
sheds additional light on the realities in Iraq as far as
the implementation of resolution 1441 (2002) and other
relevant Council resolutions is concerned. I hope that
the data that has been made public can still be used for
the effective accomplishment of the work of the
inspectors of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). I
would like to believe that what we heard today from
the United States Secretary of State will have the same
mobilizing effect on the international community as the
adoption of resolution 1441 (2002).
Three months ago, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1441 (2002) as a last
chance for the disarmament of Iraq by peaceful means.
I am confident that today's meeting of the Council -
the body which bears the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security - will
carry a compelling message to the international
community.

Today's ministerial discussion in the Security
Council comes in the wake of the reports of the
UNMOVIC and IAEA inspectors submitted on 27
January and of the discussion that followed on 29
January. The active cooperation of the Iraqi authorities
is a prerequisite for the full implementation of
resolution 1441 (2002). Unfortunately, Iraq's
cooperation has not been satisfactory on the
substantive issues identified by the inspectors. We
insist that Iraq provide additional and complete
information confirming the destruction of any weapons
of mass destruction available to it and duly address the
specific questions already raised by the international
community about the Iraqi weapons programme.

It is of paramount importance that Iraq give,
unconditionally and immediately, clear evidence that it
has fully changed its attitude to one of proactive
cooperation with the inspectors. That is the only way in
which the disarmament of Iraq can be brought to a
successful end in a peaceful manner. So far, Iraq has
been in material breach of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 1441 (2002),
and the Secretary of State has just provided new
evidence proving that.

By the time of the next briefing, scheduled for 14
February, we expect Iraq to have complied fully with
its disarmament obligations, and we look forward to
another objective, impartial and professional report
from the inspectors.

Bulgaria's position has always been that all
means should be used for the peaceful settlement of the
present crisis. My country believes that the effective
and peaceful disarmament of Iraq is still possible
through the implementation of resolution 1441 (2002).
At the same time, the international community should
assume its responsibilities for ensuring the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, thus strengthening the role and the
authority of the United Nations in international
relations. In the event that, in the near future, the
inspectors do not report to the Council that Iraq has
changed its attitude with regard to its obligations, the
Security Council will have to take the appropriate
action for the implementation of the relevant
resolutions adopted since 1990.

Hopefully, today's meeting will represent a
further step towards the unity of the Council on the
issue of Iraq, reinforcing the efforts of the international
community to fight the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.

We hope that the Council will face its great
responsibilities with unanimity and will reaffirm its
primary role in dealing with the crisis. The Iraqi people
deserve a better destiny and a peaceful future, and
Bulgaria is ready to contribute towards achieving that
goal.

