Ms. Young (Belize): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting of the Security Council
to receive a briefing on the latest developments in the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. Belize also thanks
the Foreign Minister of Venezuela for his participation
in this briefing and for helping to provide balance to
the discussion.

Belize, as a country of the Latin American and
Caribbean region and a member of the Caribbean
Community, as well as of the Community of Latin
America and the Caribbean (CELAC), is desirous that
the international community shall ensure that peace
remains the only option for the people of Venezuela.

Less than five years ago in 2014, at the second
summit of CELAC, the leaders of Latin America and
the Caribbean proclaimed our region as a zone of
peace, based on respect for the principles and rules of
international law, including the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. I wish to recall
that in that proclamation, the leaders pledged their
permanent commitment to the peaceful settlement of
disputes with the aim of forever uprooting the threat
or use of force in our region, and reiterated their
pithy commitment to, first, non-interference in the
internal affairs of any State, the principles of national
sovereignty, equal rights and the self-determination
of peoples; secondly, foster cooperation and friendly
relations among themselves and other nations; and
thirdly, fully respect the inalienable right of every
State to choose its political, economic, social and
cultural system as an essential condition to ensure the
peaceful coexistence of nations. Notwithstanding our
differences in the region, that proclamation stands as
ever more relevant today than it was in 2014.

Belize urges the Security Council, which holds the
mandate for the maintenance of international peace and
security, to likewise respect our leaders' commitment to
maintaining Latin America and the Caribbean as a zone
of peace and so, directly and clearly, to dissuade any
actions that would lead to any military conflagration
in Venezuela.

In recent weeks, the humanitarian plight of the
Venezuelan people has gained worldwide visibility and
many good intentions have been mobilized to render
humanitarian assistance. At the same time, there are
real concerns that such good intentions may in fact
be a mask for nefarious political objectives. It is for
that reason that any humanitarian assistance, when
requested or welcomed, should be channelled through
institutions such as the United Nations agencies set up
for that purpose, or otherwise through other traditional
modes for providing assistance, such as the International
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement.

The situation in Venezuela is, in plain view, unwell.
Belize, like others in the Latin American and Caribbean
region, feels duty bound to encourage the earliest
steps for dialogue towards a peaceful resolution. We
recall in that regard the Montevideo Mechanism of
11 February, to which the Government of Venezuela
has given favourable consideration. It is Belize's
considered view that dialogue leading to compromise
and accommodation of political plurality must take
place between the Government and the opposition and,
above all, that it must be done entirely unaccompanied
by the threat or use of force.

