Mr. Mikayilli (Azerbaijan): We would like to thank
the Swedish presidency for convening this open debate.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his annual
report (S/2018/465), as well as Ms. Virginia Gamba and
the other briefers for their valuable contributions.

Azerbaijan reiterates its strong support for
the children and armed conflict agenda and views
the adoption of resolution 2427 (2018) as the
Council's continued commitment to the cause of
protecting children.

As the Secretary-General's report states, in 2017
there was a large increase in the number of violations
compared with the number reported for 2016. We
are deeply alarmed by the extent and gravity of the
violations committed against children in armed conflict,
particularly killing and maiming, recruitment, sexual
violence and attacks on schools and hospitals. The
prevailing disrespect for international humanitarian
law, increasing involvement of non-State armed groups
and the rise of violent extremism bring more misery to
children. The use of the internet and social media to
recruit children is highly disturbing.

We strongly condemn all violations committed
against children in situations of armed conflict. All
parties should comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law to
protect children. Resolute steps should be taken to
address accountability and put an end to impunity for
such violations. Since this problem is multidimensional,
greater emphasis should also be placed on the
rehabilitation and reintegration of children formerly
associated with armed forces or armed groups. We share
the Secretary-General's assessment that predictable
and sustained funding for the reintegration of children
affected by armed conflict is essential to put in place
viable alternatives to military life and prevent their
re-recruitment.

As the groundbreaking report of Graca Machel
underlined, "the most effective way to protect children
is to prevent the outbreak of armed conflicts" (A/51/306, para. 253). The international community should
therefore redouble its efforts in relation to conflict
prevention and conflict resolution to save children from
the horrors of war.

Regrettably, Azerbaijan is no stranger to this
problem, owing to the continued aggression by Armenia.
Azerbaijan continues to suffer from having one of the
highest numbers of refugees and displaced persons in
the world, many of whom are children. Despite the
formal ceasefire, direct and deliberate attacks by the
armed forces of Armenia against civilians and civilian
objects in Azerbaijan continue. The assessment report
of the Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, following its mission to the affected areas
of Azerbaijan in May 2016, made it abundantly clear
that, due to the use of new and heavier types of military
hardware and intense fighting during the escalation in
April 2016, many schools were damaged and closed
in the areas near the front line in several districts
of Azerbaijan.

To conclude, although the vast majority of atrocities
against children worldwide are attributed to non-State
armed groups, the wrongs of the recent past and the
targeting of civilians in ongoing inter-State conflicts
must not be neglected. Therefore, we once again
reiterate our call on the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to
pay attention to the plight of children in all situations
of armed conflict.

We also call on the Special Representative to give
due attention to the protection of internally displaced
children in her work, as internally displaced persons
represent two-thirds of those displaced worldwide.
Furthermore, in line with the provisions of the very
important resolution on the release of women and
children taken hostage, including those subsequently
imprisoned, in armed conflicts, adopted by the
Commission on the Status of Women in March, we
invite the Special Representative to address this
complex issue as well.

