Mr. Jelavic (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in Croatian; interpretation provided by the delegation): It is
my pleasure and an honour to address this noble body, in
particular at a time when we mark the fourth anniversary
of the Dayton/Paris Agreement. We are grateful for the
invitation to speak before the Council and extend warm
greetings to you, Sir, who as Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Slovenia travelled to New York
especially to preside over this meeting. We would also
like to extend greetings to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan. We offer our sympathies to him and to
the many families around the world who recently lost
their loved ones in Kosovo.

I believe this discussion will be fruitful. After all, we
did not come here solely to mark an anniversary, but also
to advance the implementation of the Agreement. This is
evidenced by the New York Declaration, which was
adopted by the Presidency last night and which has been
distributed to the Council members. I would like to note
that we reached an agreement on establishing the State
border service. Further, in the context of strengthening
inter-entity cooperation, we agreed to form joint units that
would take part in the future United Nations peacekeeping
operations. In this way we would like to show that we
can play a constructive role in international affairs and, to
some degree, repay a debt to international community and
to all of those who in the uniforms of the United Nations
Protection Force, the Implementation Force and the
Stabilization Force have contributed to establishing peace
in our country.

 

The Declaration also addresses the question of return
of refugees, first of all, to the urban centres. We will
provide information about this process every three months.
With the goal of strengthening the common institutions, the
Declaration foresees the formation of a Presidency
secretariat, as well as the improvement of consistency in the
work of all State ministries, especially in the context of
their timely functioning. We also gave support to activities
in the fight against corruption and in promoting
transparency, as well as establishing a central database for
passports. Common travel documents are also envisioned.

We expect today's debate to proceed within the
framework of the recent statements to the Council by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Klein,
and the High Representative, Mr. Petritsch. Their reports
have, among other things, noted the publication over the
past year of a number of independent studies that began to
question the successes, as well as the very future, of the
1995 Agreement.

We believe it is appropriate to debate frankly the
criticisms that have been directed at the Agreement, as well
as at those directed at us. Nevertheless, it is inappropriate
to dramatize the situation, failing to take into account the
starting point - from which, it could be said, we have only
recently commenced. We are all aware of the despair that
we are moving away from, and in this context we see
notable improvement. There is real progress in the
stabilization of peace, the freedom of movement, the
rebuilding of infrastructure - hospitals, schools, houses,
bridges, roads - the fully functioning common currency,
common documents, passports, licence plates and symbols.
The return of refugees and displaced persons should be
noted in particular. All of this was accomplished due to the
unselfish support and the notable assistance of the
international community.

Furthermore, I would like to underscore the situation
of real peace that reigns in the spirits of the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina - a lasting and self-sustaining
peace. I am convinced that the events of our recent past are
simply not repeatable, as Dayton gives us a moral
responsibility, military equilibrium and a political
framework that ensures the stability and prospects of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The visible and important progress notwithstanding,
there are many more tasks ahead of us, of which one of the
most important is the issue of the functioning of the joint
institutions, and especially the reorganization of the Council
of Ministers in accordance with the decision by the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is
important to accomplish this while maintaining the
principle of consensus in the decision-making of the
Council. The Council of Ministers should also take on a
greater share of responsibilities in the resolution of
ongoing issues of vital importance for Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
The issue of implementing serious economic and
social reforms is also an enormous task and one of the
most important priorities. We are aware that failure on the
economic front could call into question the entire process.
Respect for human rights and, especially in our case, the
right to ownership are also top priorities. In this light, the
implementation of the property laws promulgated by the
High Representative is of crucial importance in promoting
the process of the return of refugees and displaced
persons. Consistent and effective work by the
International Tribunal at The Hague and, especially, the
apprehension of the most-wanted individuals are also
crucial.

Fighting terrorism, organized crime and corruption
is another of the most important tasks that we are
confronted with. Hence, it is important to implement the
reform of the legal system and the police, to harmonize
the laws on the whole territory of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to pass a consistent law on the border
services of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Of all the priorities, I emphasize the issue of the
return of refugees and displaced persons. A large number
of refugees have returned to the country, mostly from
Europe. The same cannot be said for so-called minority
returns, which have amounted to only 80,000 individuals.
Nevertheless, I think that I, at least, can speak of a
success here; more than half of these returnees have
returned to the majority areas of the people that I
primarily represent in the Presidency. More than 50 per
cent of the pre-war minority residents have returned to the
Croat majority areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is
more than anywhere else in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
more than in Croatia, more than in the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and more than in Kosovo. In fact, this is
more than is typical historically after such conflicts.

For example, about 40 per cent of pre-war non-
Croats in the western municipalities of Mostar have never
left or reside there again. It is difficult to find such a
percentage in others of the larger cities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I believe these elements should be noted.
Allow me to repeat, about 40 percent of pre-war non-

 

Croats in the western municipalities of Mostar never left or
reside there again.

The issue of the return of minorities should not be
overlooked now that a significant number of refugees have
returned. Instead, the focus should be directed to the areas
where the return has been minimal.
We in Bosnia and Herzegovina are aware that
problems exist. In June, at the outset of my eight-month
mandate as Chair of the Presidency, we outlined the crisis
issues that must be resolved. These are issues related to the
economic regeneration of the country. We are aware that
without creating a climate suitable for economic growth and
foreign investment, there will be little progress in the
implementation of the Peace Accords, that failure on the
economic front calls into question the stability of the State.

Economic reform must be directed at such issues as
privatization, the rule of law, overcoming corruption and
the social and retirement systems - in other words, at the
creation of institutions that form the foundation of a market
economy. We must focus our attention on creating a unified
market in Bosnia and Herzegovina that will be open to our
neighbours and other States of the region. The joint
European Union/Bosnia and Herzegovina Consultative Task
Force has been assisting us on these issues for over a year.
The Stability Pact, which seeks to establish a new value
system for the States of the region in the areas of
governance, economic management and security is now
available as well.

Speaking specifically, I must stress that we have two
important laws before us in Bosnia and Herzegovina: the
permanent election law and the law on the border service.
The Presidency has discussed these important laws on a
number occasions. I believe that these two laws should be
linked to the policy proposed by the High Representative of
transferring the ownership of the process to us. These laws
are of key importance to the vitality of the country, perhaps
not so much for their own sake as for the type of country
that we are building.

For the success of the peace agreement and the future
of the country, the question of who builds the State - we
or the international community - is of paramount
importance. Such important elements as these laws must be
adopted only by the appropriate state institutions. I
therefore call upon the international community to accept
the principle of our responsibility for ourselves as the
cornerstone of building Bosnia and Herzegovina, and in this
context to allow sufficient time for debate in the process of
passing these laws, as opposed to insisting on
overambitious deadlines and on imposing solutions.

Haste and the frequent imposition of solutions
strengthen the culture of dependency and promote
exclusivity and extremism. If it is clear that the High
Representative intends to impose a solution on his own,
then it is in the interests of the parties to promote and
represent maximalist positions. In such a situation, the
belief in a common or collective interest is marginalized.
I feel that the best solutions for our country are
those that are acceptable to all three of its constituent
parts and that respect the dignity of each citizen. It is also
important that everything we propose be understandable
and acceptable to each individual, on whose behalf we are
here to solve complex issues. At the same time, the
solutions must be practical. Ideal solutions can be drawn
up on paper, but that does not mean that they are always
implementable.

At the Madrid Conference of the Peace
Implementation Council, I welcomed the establishment of
the border service as a state institution. I said that the
creation of this service should be linked to the contraction
of some other institutions that are now less important,
such as the military. I still ask for the Council's support
on this matter.

We are reviewing the election law carefully. Our re-
elections are focused on principles, such as the equality
of citizens and peoples and the standardization of these
rights. We are of the opinion that the dual goals of
respecting the principle of constituent peoples and of
building a civil society are well suited to the Serb
community and should be duplicated for the other two. In
Republika Srpska, the number of so-called crossover
voters is clearly defined and a distinct level of multi-
ethnicity is built into the electoral registers.

In the Federation, meanwhile, due to the numerical
majority of one community, the possibility of crossover
votes is unintentionally promoted for one community
alone: the smaller one. Conversely, the candidates from
the larger community are the only ones to be elected
exclusively along ethnic lines.

The issue of the election law is the most sensitive
question for the numerically smallest constituent
component of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The law must
secure the election of legitimate representatives of all
peoples into the common state institutions, in particular

 

the Presidency and the House of Peoples. We will soon
present proposals in this regard.

Multi-ethnicity and multiculturalism are not
contentious issues for the Croat component of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The best way to ensure these elements of the
State is through equal access to institutions for all three
components, consensus in decision-taking in respect of vital
national interests, and decentralized authority along the
lines of the European principle of subsidiarity.
Since the work of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia at the Hague is being considered
by the General Assembly and the Security Council, I should
like to focus particular attention on this question. We
consider the Tribunal to be an essential element on the path
to reconciliation in our country. I believe that it can still
succeed in this respect. However, this common goal will be
achievable only if the indictments before the Tribunal
conform to the real scope and breadth of the crimes that
were perpetrated. Among other things, this involves the
problem of the so-called "big fish" who remain out of the
reach of justice even to this day. The proportion of the
parties indicted to those imprisoned is also problematic.

I emphasize the fact that not a single indictment has
been brought against perpetrators of crimes in which Bosnia
and Herzegovina Croats were the primary victims, which
we find extremely worrisome. In this context, I draw
attention to the so-called "Uzdol four" indictment, which
has been set aside at the Hague for years now. At this time,
we do not support turning over cases to local courts in
Bosnia and Herzegovina because the present system does
not possess the capacity for this task. The former High
Representative, Mr. Westendorp, has spoken quite clearly
about the situation in our courts.

The work of the Tribunal should also be advanced in
regard to the rights of the accused. The defence must have
the same resources and access to international
documentation of the war as the prosecution. The selective
use of international evidence will not lead to justice.

To conclude, I am optimistic about Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Dayton/Paris framework. The Accords
should be harmonized with new situations and needs and
should be advanced. This is only to be expected, since the
solutions imposed immediately after the war represent
imbalances that were created by the war. Long-term
stability, however, demands a balance removed from
war - a balance of rights for the three constituent peoples.

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, we must strive towards
the goals of balancing and harmonizing the interests of
the three constituent peoples, on the one hand, and of
building a civil society on the other. Collective national
rights and the rights of individuals, distinct from the issue
of nationality, should supplement and not conflict with
each other. The exclusivity of one or the other does not
represent a just or viable solution. The structure of the
Peace Agreement should be balanced in favour of
consistency and the standardization of the rights of all
peoples and all citizens, which it is not at present. All
three peoples must have the same modalities to access
institutions of authority and each citizen must enjoy the
same rights throughout the State. Inequality leads to
dissatisfaction or instability.

Our young State is like all new institutions. It grows,
changes and gains in strength. This State is ours and we
must govern it responsibly, now also in partnership with
the Security Council and its irreplaceable assistance. This
State can advance, however, only if it is built in
accordance with our capabilities, views and agreements.

In this context, we urge the Council to insist on
direct communication between us in all institutions, as we
in the Presidency have recently started to practice, as
opposed to the former practice of communication through
the Council. If this message is clear and we all exercise
patience, I am convinced that, together, we will be able
to achieve the self-sustaining, multicultural and multi-
ethnic Bosnia and Herzegovina that we seek.

