Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to welcome the presence
of the Foreign Minister of Pakistan during the morning
part of this meeting. We are grateful to the sisterly State
of Pakistan for the initiative to convene and preside over
this important debate devoted to a discussion of the issue
of counter-terrorism efforts Terrorism is a scourge that
all Member States have pledged to eliminate. I would
also like to thank the Permanent Mission of Pakistan
for the concept note circulated in connection with this
meeting (S/2012/3, annex).

I take this opportunity to express the deepest
condolences of my Government to the Government
and people of Pakistan in connection with the act of
terrorism carried out in Quetta, which claimed dozens
of innocent lives. We extend our sympathy to Pakistan's
Government and people based on a principled belief in
the need to combat all aspects of terrorism collectively
and comprehensively and from the painful reality that
just today struck the University of Aleppo, where a
cowardly terrorist attack targeting university students
as they sat for their mid-term examinations killed 82
and wounded 162 others.

We have always said that the terrorist armed groups
in my country are taking advantage of Security Council
meetings to perpetrate acts of terrorism inside Syria.
That is exactly what happened today, perhaps for the
tenth or twentieth time since the crisis in my country
began.

The President quite rightly chose "Comprehensive
approach to counter-terrorism" as the theme for our
meeting. We fully share and endorse the merit of that
choice, as today we are in greater need than ever of such a
comprehensive approach to combating terrorism. There
are broad similarities between the tools and techniques
that continue to be used by terrorists in many Member
States and those seen today in Syria. The question is
one of how many of the trans-border foreign terrorists
currently active in Syria played a role earlier in the
killing and injuring of civilians in other countries. How
many of the terrorists at work in Syria today will move

on to other areas in the future, just as happened in the
recent past and, indeed, as is happening today?

Anyone who believes that they are able to let the
terrorism genie out of the bottle and then manipulate it
in such a way as to make it go back in is misguided and
deluded. Those who toy with terrorism will one day fall
victim to it.

Despite the late international recognition of the
existence of armed terrorist groups, some of which are
affiliated with Al-Qaida and are committing the most
horrific crimes in Syria, some States still continue
to pursue policies of public support for such terrorist
organizations by providing financing, weapons,
training and safe haven and by issuing fatwahs and
offering them political and media support. Today, I will
give a practical example of such media coverage.

Armed terrorist groups attacked the homes and
dormitories of Syrian army units in the southern Syrian
city of Dar'a, where only women and children were
present. Those armed groups perpetrated a terrorist
attack, killing, wounding and humiliating whomever
they could. In that connection, it is important to note the
ironic fact that the Arabiya television network, which is
considered the operations room directing such terrorist
actions, actually broadcast news of the terrorist act
before it had even been carried out, considering it as
a blow by the terrorist groups inside Syria against the
regime. That is what we mean by media coverage and
support to terrorist and armed groups within Syria.

Al-Qaida-affiliated terrorist organizations
publicly claimed responsibility for the terrorist attacks
perpetrated in Syria in response to orders issued by
leaders of the Al-Qaida organization. Among those
organizations affiliated with Al-Qaida is Jebhat
Al-Nusra, which has claimed responsibility for
numerous terrorist attacks in Syria. The American
news channel CNN - not Syrian television - recently
confirmed, in cooperation with many specialized
Western think-tanks, that Jebhat Al-Nusra was solely
responsible for more than 600 terrorist attacks in Syria
over the past two years.

We have repeatedly warned the Council and called
on it to apply a greater measure oflogic and wisdom. We
have issued warnings through hundreds of statements,
meetings and official communications to the United
Nations and its agencies throughout the crisis in Syria.
We have warned of the dangers of terrorists flowing
into Syria under subversive slogans such as "doctrinal

and sectarian Jihad" and "holy war" against the diverse
social fabric that characterizes the Syrian people. We
have demanded that the countries supporting those
terrorist groups stop doing so. We also called upon
the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
various counter-terrorism committees to assume their
responsibilities in that regard.

However, countries with influence have prevented
any concrete action to combat the acts of terrorism
being carried out in Syria. Those influential countries
in the Security Council have even prevented the Council
from issuing seven statements to the press condemning
terrorist attacks that claimed the lives of hundreds of
innocent Syrians. Moreover, influential countries have
blocked the issuing of a number of urgent letters that
I sent on behalf of my Government to the Security
Council and the Secretary-General, including a letter
dated 21 November 2012 that included the names of
143 foreign terrorists killed in Syria. That letter has not
yet been issued as an official document, although two
months have passed since we made such a request and
despite the fact that reports from the United Nations
itself have recently indicated the presence of foreign
fighters from more than 29 States inside Syria.

The terrorist activities being carried out by groups
in Syria have reached dangerous levels in terms of
both quantity and quality. Those groups have targeted
vital facilities and infrastructure in several areas in
order to bring about the comprehensive destruction of
society and to exhaust the resources and undermine
the livelihoods of citizens, including in terms of food,
medicine, energy resources, petroleum derivatives,
roads and transporation and means of communications.
Not one single Syrian is convinced that the actions of
these armed groups - supported by black petro-dollars,
huge amounts of hatred and a lack of patriotism, and
aimed at imposing hunger on the Citizens, depriving
them of their homes and security, leaving them in the
cold suffering from disease, and pushing them into
refugee camps - represent a Spring revolution aimed
at serving them and at establishing reform and freedom.
How can we explain why these terrorist groups
target international humanitarian aid provided by the
United Nations and other agencies, assassinate Syrian
volunteers of the Red Crescent Society, and make
threats against international workers and diplomatic
missions accredited in Syria? What is the humanitarian
significance of targeting civilian aircrafts? It is certain
that the goal of the blind, vindictive terrorism practiced
in Syria is to destroy the State and society, and not to
spread democracy, reform governance mechanisms,
protect and promote human rights or combat corruption,
all of which are popular demands in Syria and enjoy
consensus among the various sectors of Syrian society.

The suspect goals of some countries in supporting
terrorism and extremism in my country have started
to rise to the surface. We now see Israel pointing to
certain extremist terrorist groups as justification for
building a wall along the disengagement ceasefire line
that would be 42 kilometers long in the buffer zone
on the territories of the occupied Syrian Golan. Any
political novice would wonder about a party that has
supported the actions of these terrorists, enabling them
to reach that zone to begin with, and that has helped to
establish such a movement and is dictating conditions
for it. That is particularly true since high level officials
at the Department of Peacekeeping Operations have
ignored the documented information that we provided
on the facilities that Israel, the occupying Power in the
Golan, is offering to these terrorists.

Is not the first suspect in any crime usually the
person who stands to profit from the crime? We are
witnessing targeted terrorism wearing the mask
of those merchandising in religion and media, and
embodied in the takfiri jihadist extremist fatwas issued
by fake clerics on satellite television channels that
promote ignorance and terrorism. The mass incitement
of terrorism and so-calledjihad in Syria and other Arab
and Western countries that is rampant on the Internet,
and especially on online social networks, must lead us
to reflect carefully on the seriousness of United Nations
efforts to address the use by terrorists of the Internet
and its means of communication to spread their ideas
and mislead innocent youth.

One wonders for whose sake certain Western
nations have mounted the wave of demands for
legitimate reform in the Arab world, diverting them and
forging alliances with extremist Islamist organizations
that, having come to power, remove their masks and
start searching for bases in countries that have not
yet known such organizations. In whose interest are
prisoners and detainees from Al-Qaida smuggled from
prisons and sent to Syria with the funding and support
of well-known countries and parties such as Turkey,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and a specific political group in
Lebanon? Between the dreams of an Islamist caliphate
that some aspire to and the dreams of reviving the
Ottoman Sultanate entertained by others, as well as
the theory of creative chaos popular with a third party,
nations are suffering, monuments are destroyed and
wisdom is slaughtered on the altar of extremism.
The Turkish Government has exploited the suffering
of the Syrian people to practice piracy and economic
terrorism, in collusion with armed groups, represented
in the theft of nearly 1,500 pharmaceutical and industrial
facilities, their dismantlement and transhipment from
the city of Aleppo to Turkey. Such criminal acts
targeting Syrian livelihoods and means of development
should be condemned in the same way we condemn
acts of conventional terrorism that lead to immediate
death and destruction. Such behaviour calls for a firm
response from the Security Council, demanding that
the Turkish Government return all stolen property to
its Syrian owners and provide compensation to those
affected. Just as the Turkish Prime Minister a few days
ago called on what he described as "the imperialist
States" to return the fortunes looted from Africa, he
should call on his Government to return the material
it looted from Syria and to end practices that harm the
brotherly Turkish people and neighbourly relations
between our two countries.

This is only the tip of the iceberg. Regional and
international interference in our internal affairs has
become rampant and shameless, and overlooks the
violations committed by some States of the most basic
principles upon which so-called international legitimacy
is based. Furthermore, the exploitation of Syrian blood
to carry out destructive evil terrorist political agendas
has become flagrant. How can we move to combat
terrorism in Mali while some States encourage, sponsor
and arm the same brand of terrorism in my country,
Syria?

In closing, I would like to express my regards to
the representatives of the new members of the Security
Council, Australia, Argentina, the Republic of Korea,
Rwanda and Luxembourg. I congratulate them on their
membership in the Security Council and I wish them
success and good luck in pushing forward the way this
Council deals decisively with the issue of countering
terrorism throughout the world.

