The President: I will now make a statement in my
national capacity.

I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths for coming back to
brief us. We obviously share his frustration that the
Houthis did not show up in Geneva. He did everything
he could to get them there. The Houthis should know
that the members of the Security Council are not going
to tolerate attempts to undermine the efforts of the
United Nations. While Geneva did not work as we had
hoped, it is urgent to find a way to bring the parties
to the table. That is why we are here. We want to give
Mr. Griffiths the strongest possible backing so that
he can go back and tell everyone that they have got to
commit to peace in Yemen.
The stakes on all sides are so high. It would be a
mistake for the parties to dismiss the idea ofpeace talks
and resort to military options. The temperature is rising
across the region because of this war. Ballistic missile
attacks into Saudi territory continue. There are threats
to freedom of navigation in the Red Sea. Chaos in
Yemen is spilling across its borders. We are potentially
one missile strike away from a full-blown crisis. There
is an alternative.

As we heard today, there is a remarkable degree of
Security Council unity on Yemen. Everyone around the
table wants to see diplomacy succeed. The parties must
act to help the Yemeni people. They can do things right
now that will actually make the Yemeni people better off
instead of accelerating this humanitarian catastrophe.
They can help the Yemeni people by finding a way to
pay the salaries of teachers and allowing kids to go
back to school, which is a step that any parent in this
Chamber can immediately understand.

They can help by opening up access to medical
flights so that ordinary Yemenis who desperately need
medical treatment abroad for conditions like cancer or
dialysis can get help. They can help by doing everything
they can to avoid targeting civilians and civilian
objects, and by holding accountable those responsible
for civilian casualties. They can help by making sure
that humanitarian aid and life-saving commercial goods
reach Yemenis who need it through all of the country's
ports, including Al-Hudaydah.

We know that Mr. Griffiths is working on many of
those points, as well as others. We urge the parties to
make rapid progress on getting those things done before
convening for a new round of talks. There should be no
question of the confidence the Security Council has in
Martin Griffiths. We are losing time and patience. All
sides would be wise to work with Martin and reach out
to him immediately.

I now resume my functions as the President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

