The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Germany, Italy and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Calovski (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) took a seat
at the Council table; Mr. Henze (Germany) and
Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy) took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force pursuant to Security Council resolution
1110 (1997), contained in document 8/1997/911 and
addendum 1. Members of the Council also have before
them document 8/1997/948, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Costa Rica, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Portugal, the Russian Federation,
Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

1 should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1997/838 and corrigendum 1,

- 2
which contains the text of a letter dated 3 November
1997 from the Permanent Representative of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.
The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, to whom I give the floor.


