Mr. Fernandez (Antigua and Barbuda): I welcome
this opportunity to exchange views with all those
present on international security matters that are of
interest to small States and the larger, more powerful
States and members of the Security Council. At a time
when the Council's agenda is packed with a multitude
of crises, conflicts and issues that threaten peace and
security, and which are more headline-grabbing, the
chance to share the perspective of the security concerns
of small States is indeed welcome.

Small island developing States (SIDS) face a
multifaceted set of security challenges that require
a pre-emptive response. Ours are not the type of
challenges that easily grab headlines, yet they must be
tackled to safeguard our very existence.

The current international security structures and
mechanisms, in particular the Security Council, are not
set up to adequately address the security challenges of
small island developing States in concrete, actionable
ways. The types of threats we face today, such as climate
change, are not the same as those faced when such
structures were created. Additionally, the geopolitical
landscape has changed significantly, leading to changes
in the nature of threats to our peace and security. They
are not combative, not based on military considerations
and sanctions. The threats to our peace and security go
far beyond the military dimension; they are intricately
entwined in the social, economic and environmental
pillars of sustainability.
The threats to the borders of SIDS, the shorelines
of the Caribbean and the State of Antigua and Barbuda
are real and present threats. To the concerned citizens
of SIDS, these threats appear to be irreversible, but if
acted upon with determination and zeal by the Security
Council and regarded as high priority by the international
community, these peace and security challenges can be
curtailed, insulated and even reversed.

Climate change and sea level rise are unquestionably
the most urgent threat to the environment and the
sustainable development of SIDS. Climate change, if
not addressed, has the potential to threaten the peace
and security of all SIDS, including their socioeconomic
well-being, particularly since it could have negative
impacts on the tourism industry, the driver of most of
our economies. In the case of Antigua and Barbuda,
because tourism accounts for 70 per cent of our gross
domestic product, it is a matter of economic survival.

Within SIDS, infrastructures and human health
will be threatened by the effects of climate change.
This threat is further magnified by the relatively
small land masses of our countries and the fact
that our populations and economic activities are
concentrated in coastal areas. Our high dependence on
coastal ecosystems for food, livelihood, security and
protection from extreme events makes the threat of
climate change all the more challenging. Furthermore,
unresolved problems stemming from poverty, scarcity
of resources, constrained governance, increasing crime
and the demands of adaptation make SIDS even more
vulnerable to natural hazards.

The peace and security challenges to SIDS are
worsened by failure to build capacity and by insufficient
financing for the implementation of strong policies
and mitigation mechanisms. In addition, available
resources are channelled predominantly to post-disaster
operations instead of to disaster risk reduction. The
impact of the international drug trade and the prevalence
of small arms are also a significant security threat that
requires collective international collaboration if we are
to successfully tackle the problem.

SIDS economies are also highly exposed to
external shocks resulting from our heavy dependence
on a few markets and the erosion of trade preferences
within these markets. SIDS are inherently economically
vulnerable due to, among other factors, our remoteness,
our limited ability to diversify, our heavy dependence
on a narrow range of exports and the high costs of
importation; for the most part, prices for essential
goods such as food and fuel are highly volatile.
These challenges are best illustrated by some of the
major trade imbalances. For example, Caribbean SIDS
have witnessed the erosion of our trade preferences with
our traditional trading partners, which has resulted
in an increase in the global market share of our trade
competitors, while in some cases crippling some of the
industries within the Caribbean. Antigua and Barbuda
has been facing such a challenge for the past 10 to 12
years.

SIDS, and in particular Caribbean SIDS, are
regarded as some of the most indebted countries in
the world. This debt burden poses peace and security
challenges beyond our shores. A few years ago, the
global financial crisis decimated capital flows, savings
and investment in every small island State, resulting in
negative growth and economies that are now teetering
on the brink of bankruptcy. For example, Antigua and
Barbuda lost 25 per cent of its gross domestic product,
and many other small island States in the Caribbean
have also suffered from contracting economies. These
are examples of the peace and security challenges that
threaten the existence of small island developing States.

In conclusion, I would like to paraphrase the Prime
Minister of Antigua and Barbuda, the Honourable
Gaston Browne, who warns that not acting to address
these challenges, not acting and doing nothing, will
redound to the detriment of larger more secure States
as they will be forced to cope with the agony of
human displacement of determined refugees and the
consequences of the human misery of people flooding
their borders on a quest for peace and security. We
congratulate New Zealand for recognizing that there
ought to be a greater push at the highest level within
the United Nations to highlight the peace and security
challenges facing SIDS. Finally, as the saying goes,
"men argue, nature acts". Let us hope that after today's
debate the international community will join with SIDS
to act.

