Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the States members of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
which comprises Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Indonesia, the Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand and Viet Nam.

Allow me to express ASEAN's appreciation to the
Rwandan presidency for organizing today's open debate
and for its excellent concept note (S/2014/478, annex).
I also thank the Secretary-General, the representatives
of the European Union and the African Union for their
respective briefings.

In its open debate last month, the Council examined
new trends in United Nations peacekeeping (S/PV.7196).
As many speakers pointed out, partnership between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in peacekeeping is undoubtedly one
of the most discernible trends of modern day United
Nations peacekeeping. The participation of regional
and subregional organizations in United Nations
peacekeeping operations offers unique comparative
advantages. At the operational level, geographical
proximity means that regional partners can respond
faster than the United Nations. Quicker deployment of
peacekeepers often means more civilian lives caught in
an unfolding crisis can be saved.

In addition, the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations have become increasingly
multidimensional. In order to ensure a durable peace,
peacekeepers are now required to carry out early
peacebuilding tasks such as providing support for
national dialogue and reconciliation and national
institution-building. Regional engagement in
peacekeeping can bring in relevant experiences and
collaborations needed to address the root causes of
conflict, the solution to which is often a regional one.

Regional partnership in peacekeeping plays out
most prominently on the African continent. ASEAN
commends the invaluable contribution of the regional
and subregional organizations in Africa, inter alia,
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development. We also acknowledge the role of the
European Union in providing financial resources to a
number of peacekeeping missions in Africa.
For our part, almost 4,000 troops and police officers
from the States members of ASEAN are currently
serving in United Nations peacekeeping missions
around the world. Under the framework of the Joint
Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership between
ASEAN and the United Nations, we are constantly
looking for ways and means to foster closer cooperation
between ASEAN and the United Nations in the area of
peacekeeping. We also reiterate the need to implement
the Joint Declaration in a comprehensive manner.

In taking the discussion on this issue forward,
ASEAN wishes to highlight the following. First,
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
actors must be based on the relevant provisions of
the United Nations Charter, namely, Chapter VIII on
regional arrangements. Partnerships must also be guided
by the basic principles ofUnited Nations peacekeeping,
that is, consent of the parties, impartiality and non-use
of force except in self-defence and defence of the
mandate.

It must also be reiterated that important policy
discussions and decisions on this issue should be
conducted in a consensual manner. ASEAN stresses that
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C- 34), which includes the troop- and police-contributing
countries, host countries, Council members and other
interested countries, is the appropriate forum for those
discussions and decisions. ASEAN draws attention to
the policy decisions made by the C-34 in its report for
the 2014 substantive session (A/68/19).

Secondly, while rapid deployment maybe one of their
key strengths, regional and subregional organizations
taking part in a peacekeeping operation authorized by
the United Nations are frequently faced with a challenge
of securing adequate financial resources and logistical
support to maintain their participation in the long run.
Therefore, establishing a financing mechanism that can
provide predictable and flexible funding is crucial for
sustaining the partnership. In addition, ASEAN also
recommends that the United Nations and other partners
cooperate with regional and subregional organizations,
particularly in Africa, where most of the peacekeeping
operations are deployed, to enhance their logistical
capabilities.
Thirdly, modern peacekeeping is a complex
enterprise. Partnership in peacekeeping should thus be
comprehensive and responsive. Yet it has been observed
that there are gaps in mission planning and insufficient
information sharing between the United Nations and
regional partners. Therefore, ASEAN supports the idea
of further enhancing the information sharing and formal
consultation processes among the Security Council, the
regional partners, troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat at every stage of a peacekeeping operation,
especially at the mission planning and mandate review
stages.

In closing, on behalf of ASEAN member States,
I wish to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
men and women who have perished while serving in
peacekeeping missions. We acknowledge with immense
gratitude their sacrifice for the noble cause of peace.

