Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to express my congratulations to
you, Sir, and your entire delegation on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of June. The
experience of your previous presidencies tells us that
we are in very good hands. I would also like to thank
the Ambassador and delegation of Azerbaijan for the
serious and calm way in which they conducted our work
during the month of May.

I would like to welcome Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, to the
Council Chamber. This may well be the last time that he
addresses members of the Council in that capacity and
with regard to the issue of Darfur. That is why I would
like to reiterate something that I have said on various
occasions, namely, that the positive outcome of the first
decade of activities of the International Criminal Court
is very closely related to the responsible, diligent and
impartial manner in which Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo
has understood and carried out his functions as Chief
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court since the
beginning. His successes in leading that Office have
contributed to implementing the principle of individual
criminal responsibility for the most serious crimes of
undoubted significance to the international community
as a whole.

We know that under the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court the Court may only deal
with atrocious crimes that have been designated to
be international crimes and may only intervene when
the Court has ascertained that the domestic judicial
authorities are not in a position or do not have the
intention to carry out the prosecutions themselves.
That is exactly the situation that we see today when
we acknowledge the unavoidable fact that the criminal
proceedings begun by the Office of the Prosecutor, at
the express request of the Council, against four indictees
have not been implemented because those people have
not been handed over to the Court. We are referring here
to the acts of genocide, the crimes against humanity and
the war crimes that were committed in Darfur during the
period indicated in resolution 1593 (2005) and which
clearly correspond to the level of seriousness required
by the Rome Statute.

After an arduous investigation and careful evaluation
of the evidence, a chamber of the Court concluded that
there was sufficient basis to proceed with the prosecution
of the persons who bear the greatest responsibility for the
commission of such crimes. The situation is also one in
which the Office of the Prosecutor, after weighing all of
the pertinent information, has arrived at the conclusion
that, at this point in time, there are no credible criminal
proceedings in the Sudan that could call into question
the admissibility of the grounds adduced, nor is there
any other form of objection that could be raised to the
jurisdiction of the Court in this matter.

On the contrary, according to the report of the
Prosecutor, a deliberate policy has been adopted to
hide those crimes, grant effective immunity to those
who have been accused by the Court and distract the
attention of the international community. That situation
has opened the way for the Court to assume jurisdiction
based on the principle of complementarity.

One of the declared purposes of the Rome Statute
and for the creation of the International Criminal Court
is to provide a disincentive to potential perpetrators of
horrendous crimes in the context of generalized violence
or armed conflict. The importance of the creation of
the Court lies not only in the specific prosecutions it
carried out but also in the very strong message it sends
out to deter those who are in positions of leadership or
Government throughout the world and to warn them that
atrocities, which in the past have moved the conscious
of the international community, such as ethnic cleansing
or genocide, will not go unpunished and that the United
Nations and its Member States will spare no effort to
bring those responsible for such crimes to justice.

In that framework, we are sorry to see that, although
at the end of its first decade of operation the overall
assessment of the Court is positive, when it comes to
Darfur, international justice has not been served. The
arrest warrants against those accused have not been
carried out and the judicial and extrajudicial proceedings
cannot, therefore, move forward.

In its historic resolution 1593 (2005), the Security
Council, after determining that the situation in the Sudan
continued to represent a threat to international peace and
security, specifically invoked Chapter VII of the Charter
and decided to refer the situation in Darfur to the Court
and, furthermore, decided,

"that the Government of Sudan and all other parties
to the conflict in Darfur, shall cooperate fully with
and provide any necessary assistance to the Court
and the Prosecutor pursuant to this resolution".
(resolution 1593 (2005), para. 2)

In the opinion of my delegation, the obligation to
cooperate with the Court certainly includes a positive and
unavoidable duty to carry out the arrest warrants issued
on a regular basis by the Office of the Prosecutor. To do
otherwise, demonstrates an ignorance of the mandatory
nature of the decisions adopted by the Council under
Chapter VII of the Charter and of the Charter itself.

