Mr. Gumende (Mozambique): At the outset, I
would like to extend my warm congratulations to you,
Madam, on the accession of the Republic of Lithuania
to the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of May, and to thank you for inviting me to participate
in this important debate devoted to the human cost
of the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and
misuse of small arms and light weapons.

We take note of the report of the Secretary-
General on the theme of this open debate and the
recommendations contained therein (S/2015/289).

We share the View that the proliferation and misuse
of small arms and light weapons is one of the main
sources of the prolonged and exacerbated humanitarian
crises in Africa. Small arms and light weapons
continue to seriously undermine social and political
stability and economic development on the continent,
as they fuel conflicts by arming those that perpetrate
violence against innocent civilians and those charged
with the responsibility of protecting and upholding
law and order. Moreover, in an increasingly globalized
world, the geographical position of our continent leaves
it exposed to exploitation by transnational organized
crime, including trafficking in weapons, drugs and
persons.

The illicit proliferation of small arms and light
weapons represents one of the most serious challenges
to security and political stability in our countries, as
it affects critical areas of development. As a country
that overcame a devastating conflict 23 years ago, we
know only too well the dreadful consequences of the
unlawful access to and misuse of weapons of war on
human lives, security and development. Mozambique
therefore attaches great importance to forceful action
to prevent and combat the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons, with its impact on human life. As
such, Mozambique welcomes the Geneva Declaration
on Armed Violence and Development, particularly
its focus on the multidimensional nexus between
development, peace and security.

Recognizing that challenge, the Government
of Mozambique has enacted Decree No. 08/2007
on firearms and explosives, aimed at reducing the
circulation, possession and utilization of firearms and
ammunition by non-State actors. The law also creates
bureaucratic barriers that restrict access to firearms
and ammunition, as well as sets up control mechanisms
for firearms possessed by ordinary citizens for various
purposes.

Apart from the legal reforms, the Government of
Mozambique has been closely working with civil society
organizations in the framework of the Interministerial
Committee for the Prevention, Combat and Eradication
ofIllicit Trafficking in Small Arms and Light Weapons.
This governmental body has been playing a critical
role in reducing the circulation of firearms through
awareness campaigns aiming to identify, seize and
destroy obsolete firearms from the l6-year conflict that
ended in 1992.

The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
is one of the most serious transnational organized
crimes affecting various countries at the same time.
We strongly believe that the fight against this threat
requires a common and shared responsibility among all
Member States and international organizations whose
responsibility is to curb the usage of firearms and
their leakage into the hands that use them for criminal
purposes. In that regard, Mozambique continues to
be engaged in regional and international efforts to
mitigate the negative consequences of firearms in
global development. One such important instrument is
the implementation of the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects.

Furthermore, Mozambique has signed and started
the national process of ratification of the Arms Trade
Treaty. We strongly believe that this global regulatory
framework will complement the ongoing actions under
the Plan of Action, contributing to enhanced control of
the import, export, transit, transfer and use of arms.
We would therefore like to strongly recommend that all
Members do their best in order to continue ratifying
this important instrument for the benefit of global
security and the safe and lawful circulation of firearms.

In 2006, through the Geneva Declaration,
and inspired by the realization of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), we agreed to "strive to
achieve, by 2015, measurable reductions in the global
burden of armed violence and tangible improvements in
human security worldwide". As we are rushing towards
the finishing line of the MDGs and we are deeply
engaged in the preparation of the post-2015 development
agenda, we take this opportunity to recommend that the
elimination of armed violence and of small arms and
light weapons in the hands of non-State actors, among
other things, which aim to promote peace and security,
be consolidated as an integral cornerstone of the
sustainable economic development strategies within
the context of the noble goal of building and sustaining
peaceful societies.

I would like to conclude my remarks by reiterating
the commitment of Mozambique to the goals and
initiatives set out in the Geneva Declaration, as well as
in the Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons. Mozambique also reaffirms its commitment
to the South African Development Community
Protocol on the Control of Firearms, Ammunition and
Other Related Materials, in particular when dealing
with armed violence, to strengthen community and
individual voluntary participation in arms control and
destruction across our region.

