Mr. Bathily (spoke in French): I have the honour
to introduce the report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Central Africa and the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(S/2016/482). The report before the Council identifies
the principal threats to peace and security in Central
Africa and an update on the initiatives of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
over the past six months, in consultation with the States
of the subregion, entities of the United Nations system
and subregional organizations.

(spoke in English)

The successful holding of presidential and
legislative elections in the Central African Republic
has brought the transition to an end. I am pleased that
the country has reached that important milestone,
putting the Central African Republic back on the path
towards sustainable peace, development and long-term
peacebuilding. I commend the Governments, the United

Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and other
United Nations entities, as well as partners that have
worked tirelessly to end the crisis in the Central African
Republic. President Faustin Archange Touadera enjoys
widespread support, and the population wants and
needs change for the better.

At the same time, the challenges before the Central
African Republic remain immense, in the context of
ongoing, serious protection and humanitarian needs,
crushing poverty and urgent requirements in the
areas of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation, as well as on security-sector reform.
Armed groups still control large parts of the country,
and the Government is in need of the full political,
programmatic and financial support of the international
community to ensure the re-establishment of State
authority throughout the country.

Despite recent positive developments, it is critical
that partners remain engaged and redouble their
assistance to the country across all the thematic areas
of need, in order to take advantage of the window
of opportunity that is before us. I commend the
Governments of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) for their invaluable support to
the Central African Republic to date. I encourage them
to continue to support the Central African Republic in
its post-transition efforts.

As I already stated during my previous briefing
(see S/PV.7572), in December 2015, there are political
tensions of concern in other countries in Central
Africa that are linked to recent or upcoming electoral
processes. That undermines the ongoing work to
consolidate stability, development and democracy
in countries of the subregion, and also the necessary
work of integration across the area. I will continue to
use my good offices to engage with stakeholders in the
subregion to encourage the peaceful resolution of those
disputes. I also believe that it is crucial to redouble our
conflict-prevention efforts in countries where elections
are still due to take place this year, including through
the promotion of an inclusive political dialogue.

I am pleased to report that, since my previous
briefing to the Council, the collective efforts ofthe Lake
Chad Basin countries have reduced the capacity ofBoko
Haram to undertake frequent attacks, as it had in the
past. The cross-border operations by the Multi-National
Joint Task Force have captured Boko Haram fighters,

freed captives and reclaimed territory from the terrorist
group. However, the ability to conduct precise counter-
insurgency operations is often compromised due to
an assessment by security forces that Boko Haram
operatives live among the local population. Despite
the successes realized, Boko Haram continues to
pose a serious threat to regional stability. The group
persists in targeting civilians, including through
suicide attacks, often using young girls as bombers.
Additionally, the risk that Boko Haram could attract or
catalyse other terrorist threats in the subregion should
not be discounted. While humanitarian assistance has
been mobilized for the populations affected by Boko
Haram, the number of internally displaced persons and
refugees fleeing from Boko Haram violence continues
to increase, with limited funding received thus far to
address the growing humanitarian needs.

For those reasons, it is crucial that international
partners maintain their support to the region in order to
end the threat posed by the group and that they stress
the need for a holistic regional approach, as emphasized
during the second Regional Security Summit, held in
Abuja on 14 May. I urge the international community
to support the Multi-National Joint Task Force by
mobilizing the requisite political, logistical and
financial support in a flexible manner.

While assistance to the Multi-National Joint Task
Force is critical, however, so is the need to finance and
implement early-recovery and development activities in
the affected areas. In that regard, I will continue to work
in close cooperation with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel to
engage the Governments concerned and the relevant
subregional bodies - the Economic Community of
Central African States and the Economic Community
of West African States - to ensure their continued
support for the Task Force and the allocation of adequate
humanitarian and development assistance to the affected
populations. We will also continue to encourage them
to ensure that counter-terrorism operations are carried
out in full compliance with international humanitarian
law, human rights law and refugee law. The support and
assistance of the international community to reduce the
burden on the affected States will be crucial to winning
the fight against Boko Haram.

The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) continues
to threaten the security of the population in the area
where it operates, and notably increased its alleged
attacks in the Central African Republic during the
reporting period, reportedly extending into areas that
had previously seen little to no LRA movement. Group
elements have also persisted in attacking the civilian
population in the north-eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Overall, the LRA now appears
to be deviating from what for a certain period had
been a low-profile posture, with attacks against larger
and less isolated population areas being noted and an
increased number of children kidnapped and kept. We
must keep that in mind and continue our efforts until
the job is finally completed.

During the reporting period, UNOCA continued its
active engagement to fill coordination gaps on the LRA
issue and convened the biannual meeting of LRA focal
points in April. Together with the African Union and
other United Nations partners, UNOCA also organized
a workshop in March to identify more clearly the
respective roles and responsibilities of different actors
in LRA-affected countries that are assisting LRA
members who have defected or escaped from the group.
UNOCA also assisted in the organization of a meeting
of the African Union's Joint Coordination Mechanism
in May, which called for the mobilization of additional
resources for the Regional Task Force 4 a particularly
important issue given the decision of Uganda to
withdraw from the force in the near future. The United
Nations is concerned about the impact of Uganda's
potential withdrawal on the security situation in the
eastern part of the Central African Republic and calls
on all stakeholders, including the Governments of
Uganda and of the Central African Republic, as well
as partners, to ensure that any potential departure
of Ugandan troops is undertaken in an orderly and
coordinated manner.

I am pleased to report that progress has been made
in the operationalization of the regional strategy on
maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea, which includes
the adoption of a number of recommendations with
regard to the programme of activities, the budget and
the administration of the Interregional Coordination
Centre, which is based in Yaounde. I also welcome the
scheduling of the African Union summit on maritime
security and development in Lome in October 2016.

In all aspects of UNOCA's work, our principal
partner remains the Economic Community of Central
African States. During the reporting period we focused
on the further strengthening of the relationship between
the two institutions. That has included coordination with
the Secretary-General of ECCAS on the provision of
UNOCA support for the reform of ECCAS institutions
and the conclusion of a new cooperation framework
agreement to guide our joint efforts. In that context,
I welcome the briefing of Secretary-General Ahmad
Allam-Mi to the Council today.

We look forward to the continued engagement of
the Security Council in promoting peace and security in
Central Africa. UNOCA will continue to work closely
with Member States of the subregion in that important
endeavour.

