Mr. Tomka (Slovakia): Mr. President, I wish to
express the appreciation of my delegation for your
convening of this second open debate on children and
armed conflict taking place in the Security Council. The
fact that you, Sir, as the Foreign Minister of Namibia, are
presiding over this open debate attests to the importance of
the topic.
Slovakia has aligned itself with the statement of the
representative of Finland delivered on behalf of the
European Union. Allow me now to make some additional
comments.

The issue before us is a complex one and should be
dealt with as an integral part of a comprehensive approach.
It has ethical, political, military, legal, humanitarian and
socio-economic aspects, all of equal importance.

Experts estimate that children are suffering from the
effects of conflict and its aftermath in approximately 50
countries around the world. Today, up to 90 per cent of
conflict casualties are civilians, and increasingly large
numbers of these are children and women. Over the last
decade in particular, the nature of conflicts has changed
profoundly. Many of them have taken the form of intra-
State factional violence, civil strife and ethnic clashes that
have disastrous humanitarian implications. The involvement
of irregular armed groups, militia, foreign mercenaries,
criminals and other disparate groups that have little
knowledge of or respect for the rules of international law
makes the situation even more difficult. Moreover, there is
often a problem of political control over the groups, with
local commanders being answerable to no one but
themselves. The deliberate obstruction of humanitarian
assistance to civilians by the combatants is, in many cases,
a major element of their military strategy. Civilian
populations, and far too often children, are principal targets
of war, and even its instruments. According to estimates, up
to 300,000 children are directly involved in conflict around
the world - as soldiers, porters and frequently as all-
purpose slaves - in violation of international treaties.
Children are conscripted or tricked into volunteering and
sometimes sold to armies and guerrilla groups.

The international community must ensure that those
who target children cannot do so with impunity. A major
problem has been the failure of States to bring to justice
those who Violate international humanitarian law. The
result has been the development of a culture of impunity
in which flagrant Violations of human rights and
humanitarian law continually go unpunished. Importantly,
the Security Council has for some time recognized that
massive violations of humanitarian law can constitute a
threat to peace and security.

There are several international treaties that make a
very solid framework for the purpose of the protection of
children in armed conflict. These include the Geneva
Conventions and the Additional Protocols to them and the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. We welcome the
efforts to update the existing legal instruments and
strengthen human rights standards, such as the one to
raise the legal age for recruitment and participation in
hostilities to 18 years through the adoption of an optional
protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Furthermore, the setting up of ad hoc Tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda and last year's decision
to establish a permanent International Criminal Court
have been other significant developments aiming at
assuring the accountability of those who violate
international law. Slovakia, as one of a group of like-
minded countries, was advocating including in the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court a provision
making it a war crime to recruit children and involve
them in hostilities.

At this juncture, we find very timely the issuance of
the Secretary-General's guidelines for all personnel
associated with United Nations mandated peacekeeping
operations. The guidelines, which entered into force on
the fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions, 12
August 1999, are designed to ensure that all United
Nations peacekeepers observe the norms of international
humanitarian law. Paragraphs 7.4 and 8 (f) are especially
relevant to the subject before us.

A legal instrument without an efficient mechanism
of monitoring and enforcement gradually loses its
normative impact. We concur with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mrs. Mary
Robinson, who, in her statement issued on the occasion of
the recent fiftieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Geneva Conventions, underscored that, rather than writing
new laws, what is needed today is to implement those that
already exist. Indeed, a lot has to be done in this respect.
For example, although almost all States are parties to the

 

1949 Geneva Conventions, not all States have ratified or
acceded to the Additional Protocols or to the basic
international instruments on human rights and refugees.
Only four States have ratified the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court so far; another 56 ratifications
are needed before the Statute enters into force.

Governments should not only be encouraged to ratify
relevant international treaties and incorporate them into
national law, they should also ensure the full
implementation of commitments they have undertaken and
bring to justice persons responsible for unlawfully recruiting
children and for other serious breaches of the relevant laws.
There should be a concerted effort made by Governments
and relevant international and regional organizations, as
well as by non-governmental organizations, to coerce non-
State actors into compliance with international law, mainly
through the principle of individual criminal responsibility.
The crucial factor contributing to a worldwide culture
of violence and indiscriminate killing, as well as to putting
guns into the hands of children, is a booming trade in small
arms. The proliferation of these weapons has made it
possible for very young children to be perpetrators of
violence. Obviously, a number of conflicts in many places
on our planet could not be long sustained without a
continued flow of arms and ammunition. Governments,
local warlords and rebel groups are spending enormous
amounts of money for arms, thus impoverishing their own
countries and depriving civil populations, including
children, of basic needs. The Security Council should
explore all ways and means available to ensure that an arms
embargo, once established, is implemented effectively.

Since Africa is a continent suffering from far too
many conflicts fed by arms transfers and trafficking in
Violation of sanctions imposed by the Security Council, we
praise the efforts of the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993)
concerning the situation in Angola, Ambassador Fowler.
His determined approach and recent trips to a number of
African and European countries prove that sanctions
committees should be actively engaged in ensuring the
concerted efforts of all actors concerned - Governments,
international governmental and non-governmental
organizations, private companies and opinion leaders - in
order to identify the sources of arms flows into zones of
conflict and to cut off military forces and rebel groups from
their resources and thus eliminate their ability to wage a
war and violate international humanitarian law.

Moreover, economic sanctions should prevent war
criminals from enjoying the fruits of their evil without
harming innocent women and children. Well-targeted
sanctions can have a real impact without necessarily
leading to unbearable humanitarian consequences for the
most vulnerable group of the population, the children. The
ideas contained in the Secretary-General's report on
Africa - of using individual-targeted sanctions against
the perpetrators of abuses of human rights and
humanitarian law, and of holding these people financially
responsible to their victims - deserve full attention.

The issue before us has a very important socio-
economic aspect since poverty facilitates the recruitment
and participation of children in armed conflict. Children
are sometimes even sold to armies and guerrilla groups by
families thrown into poverty by ethnic conflicts. The
Security Council, in mandating peacekeeping missions
and designing peace-building programmes, should take
into account the fragile nature of the issue and
accommodate mandates to the specific circumstances of
individual conflicts. Special attention should be paid to
the programmes of demobilization and social reintegration
of child combatants, their psychological recovery, the
return of displaced and refugee children, and the
restoration of access to health care, food and education.
In this respect, I cannot but underline the role of relevant
agencies, programmes and funds of the United Nations
system, in coordination with activities of non-
governmental and humanitarian organizations involved in
this area.

