Mr. Quinlan (Australia): This month has been a
hard one. On 17 July, we learned of the downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 over Ukrainian territory
controlled by separatists, killing all 298 passengers and
crew. Eighty of the victims were children. The victims
were citizens of Australia, Belgium, Canada, Germany,
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
the Philippines and the United Kingdom. A number
were dual nationals of other countries.

That devastating incident reminds us that in an
increasingly globalized world, the individual stake of
each Member State in international peace and security
is greater than ever before. It reminds us that we all
have an interest in a Security Council that can respond
effectively.

On 18 July, the following day, the Council
unanimously condemned the downing of Flight MH-17
(see S/PV.7219). That was followed quickly, on 21 July,
by the decisive resolution 2166 (2014) to ensure a full,
thorough and independent international investigation,
to demand immediate and unrestricted access to the
site to allow for the recovery of the bodies and the work
of the investigation to proceed, to prohibit any actions
that would compromise the integrity of the crash site,
most notably by local armed groups, and to insist that
those responsible be held accountable. That was what
the international community expected of the Council.
That is what the Council agreed.

However, in itself, as we know, it is not enough.
We now need the full and urgent implementation of
resolution 2166 (2014). At the request of Ukraine, the
Netherlands has taken the lead in the investigation
with the assistance of the International Civil Aviation
Organization and other international partners. Dutch
and Australian unarmed personnel have been deployed
in numbers to provide protection to the investigators at
the crash site, to assist with the removal of the remaining
bodies and belongings and to secure the wreckage and
physical evidence.

In that, we, the Australian deployment, as well
as the Dutch deployment, and the Australian Special
Envoy Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston, who was just
mentioned by Ambassador Churkin, have meticulously
worked through the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe as the sole contact on our
behalf with the local armed separatists. Unfortunately,
the Australian and Dutch personnel have not yet been
able to access the site because of the local conditions.
However, urgent access remains imperative, while the
conditions at the site deteriorate. All that makes it clear
that the full and immediate implementation of resolution
2166 (2014) is a serious obligation. Certainly, my own
country is determined to bring home our 38 dead, to
identify those responsible and to pursue justice.

While the Council's progress in delivering resolution
2165 (2014) on humanitarian relief to the people of

Syria was measured in weeks rather than in days, as in
the case of Flight MH-l7 and the relevant resolution,
that humanitarian resolution again demonstrates, as
our Chilean colleague has just noted, that the Council
can break new ground in resolving even seemingly
intractable issues. Resolution 2165 (2014) authorizes
cross-border access by United Nations humanitarian
agencies and their partners to enable them to reach
an estimated 2.9 million people in need. As we were
informed by Under-Secretary-General Amos earlier
today, the first humanitarian convoy has crossed the
Turkish border under the new arrangements.

The adoption of resolutions such as those is a
primordial part of the Council's work. However,
it needs to constantly remind itself that securing
agreement on a text is of little use if it does not also
relentlessly pursue the implementation of its decisions.
The adoption in February of resolution 2139 (2014) on
humanitarian issues in Syria was a direct response to
the Syrian regime's failure to abide by the provisions of
the Council's earlier presidential statement of 2 October
of last year (S/PRST/2013/15).

The Council received reports systematically each
month from the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2139 (2014), which laid out starkly how
dramatically the humanitarian situation continued to
deteriorate. It was unchallengeable from those reports
that the parties were not implementing the obligations
under the resolution and that a stronger Council response
was therefore needed. We accomplished that through
the groundbreaking resolution 2165 (2014). As the
Council, we have the responsibility to ensure that that
resolution and its parent resolution 2139 (2014), which
remains fully in force, are implemented in full and to
take further measures if non-compliance continues.

In order to pursue implementation, the Council of
course needs the correct information at the right time.
It must not be hostage to routine reporting cycles.
Rather, it should increase its attention on threats to
international peace and security as they emerge and as
situations demand. The Council has recently increased
the pace of its consideration of Libya and used any
other business to consider a number of immediate
developments, including with regard to Yemen and
Iraq. That is how the Council should work consistently.

The Council also needs access to a broad range of
information, not only from the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General and the Department of
Political Affairs but also from other actors, including
the Special Envoys of the Secretary-General. As the
Rights up Front initiative has affirmed, understanding
the human rights dimensions of a situation is a crucial
element of the Council's work. That means that it should
look at what commissions of inquiry and the human
rights special mechanisms can provide to the Council.

In order to pursue implementation, the Council
needs to be ready to fully utilize the tools that are
available to it. The Council's willingness to establish
new sanctions regimes in Yemen and the Central
African Republic and to consider doing so in South
Sudan, which is overdue, has been welcome. However,
sanctions will work as a policy tool only if they are
properly implemented. That requires closer engagement
with the affected States, including assistance to meet
the conditions and to implement the obligations of
Council sanctions, and better coordination with the
other Council responses to the specific situation and
across sanctions regimes generally. Australia hopes
that the high-level review of United Nations sanctions,
which we are co-chairing, can help deliver that.

The Council also needs to support the
implementation of mandates that it gives to other
actors, such as the International Criminal Court (ICC).
The Council took the right decision in referring the
situations in Darfur and in Libya to the ICC but, like all
decisions of the Council, those referrals need follow-
up action by the Council in order to be effective. The
Council must shoulder its responsibility to support the
Court's efforts to fulfil the mandates that we, as the
Council, gave it. A good start would be to respond to
the Court's eight letters about the failure of some States
to cooperate with the ICC in relation to the Darfur
referral.

Finally, the Council must be ready to innovate so as
to ensure implementation. It must also cooperate with
regional organizations and other relevant institutions,
including the ICC, to achieve the Council's objectives.

The world is now experiencing more simultaneous
crises with regard to peace and security with a broader
impact across the globe than for decades. Major
humanitarian crises inevitably occur as a result and
themselves become the source of further instability.
The demand for peacekeeping is increasing. Civilians
face a greater threat in larger numbers than at any time
since the Second World War. Some 51 million people are
displaced. In such a world, the protection of civilians
becomes a even more central and compelling part of
the work of the Council and the Council's success in
protecting people has become the measure to which
we are held. Failure is always close by. Only through a
relentless focus on the implementation of the Council's
decisions will we be able to meet that measure.

I congratulate you, Sir, and your entire team on
a successful and helpful presidency and wish the
incoming United Kingdom presidency good luck for
another possible difficult month.

