Tunisia wishes to express its appreciation to the Russian Federation for its efforts to facilitate the negotiations on draft resolution S/2020/1054, on women and peace and security. Tunisia remains committed to the women and peace and security agenda and shares the view of Council members that the commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) provides a timely opportunity to recommit to its normative framework and to call for its full implementation. We believe that significant progress has been made in the past two decades and that commemorating the anniversary of the resolution 1325 (2000) needs a clear reaffirmation of commitment to those past achievements. We acknowledge the extensive efforts made by the delegation of the Russian Federation to reflect all the ideas expressed throughout the negotiation process. We specifically appreciate the reference to the need for a balanced geographical representation of women and the willingness to strengthen the language on the socioeconomic and development drivers of gender inequality and conflict. Language that has been previously agreed in recent Security Council resolutions is of the utmost importance, especially when it relates to issues pertaining to human rights, the implementation of international instruments, such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the role of civil society and the full, effective, equal and meaningful participation of women in decision-making processes. Such aspects were earned after extensive negotiations and tremendous compromise from all sides. It is also crucial to highlight the disproportionate impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic on women and girls, as reaffirmed in resolution 2532 (2020) and in several other United Nations resolutions and reports. From that perspective, Tunisia will continue to commit to the agenda's normative framework, while addressing remaining gaps identified mainly in the lack of implementation and funding. Tunisia stands ready to continue to engage constructively and in full cooperation with all Council members and all its partners to advance the women and peace and security agenda in the United Nations and on the ground.
