Mr. Kim In Ryong (Democratic People's Republic ofKorea): First of all, allow me tojoin previous speakers
in expressing our appreciation to Her Excellency
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden and His
Excellency the Secretary-General for organizing
this open debate of the Security Council on conflict
prevention and sustaining peace.

Today the role of the Security Council is important
in discharging the mission of the United Nations, which
is to maintain international peace and security. We
believe that the Security Council should be directed
towards ensuring impartiality and objectivity to
fulfil the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations with regard to the maintenance of
international peace and security. We cannot but take
this opportunity to point out the attitude of the Security
Council towards the issue of the Korean peninsula,
where an explosive situation prevails. The Korean
peninsula faces extremely aggravated tensions. Nobody
knows when a nuclear war will break out owing to the
manoeuvres of the United States and its followers to
stifle the Democratic People's Republic of Korea with
unprecedented politico-military and economic isolation
and pressure.

Every year the United States has continued to hold
large-scale joint military exercises, escalating military
threats against the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea and bringing into the Korean peninsula all
kinds of nuclear strategic assets on the pretext of the
exercises. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea
made a request on several occasions to the Security
Council to convene an emergency meeting with regard
to the aggressive and provocative large-scale joint
military exercises, which are undermining international
peace and security. Nevertheless, the Security Council
declined our request every time. On the other hand, it
takes issue with the righteous self-defence actions being
taken by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
safeguard its sovereignty, dignity and national security.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has
no other choice but to arm itself with nuclear weapons.
Nevertheless, the Security Council concluded that
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea ongoing
nuclear and ballistic-related activities are a clear threat
to international peace and security, including the so-
called resolution 2321 (2016), which was fabricated
most recently against the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea.

We sent letters to former Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, dated 23 May and 5 December
2016, respectively, questioning if there is any article in
international law that stipulates that nuclear tests and
satellite and ballistic missile launches constitute a threat
to international peace and security as legal grounds
for Security Council sanctions resolutions against the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. However, to
our regret, the Secretariat has only mentioned Article
39 of the Charter of the United Nations, without a single
word in response to our question in the letter dated
20 December 2016 addressed to Mr. Jeffery Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

Article 39 of the Charter cannot be legal grounds
for sanctions resolutions, as was already discussed
in the international law community. In 1966, when
former Rhodesia declared independence from the
British colonial regime, the Security Council adopted
a sanctions resolution invoking the Article 39 as its
legal grounds for the first time in the history of the
United Nations. In thit regard, the international law
community asserted that a declaration of independence
is not a threat to the peace or a breach of the peace and
labelled the adoption of the sanctions resolution as an
act of abuse of power. Even the writers of the Charter
of the United Nations clarified that they had drafted
Article 39 referring to an act of aggression, not to be
invoked for sanctions during times of peace.
The hydrogen bomb test, nuclear warhead test and
the test firing of various strikes, which the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea conducted, including the
preparation for intercontinental ballistic missiles and
other rocket launches, are fully in line with the exercise
of the legitimate right tipulated in the Charter of the
United Nations as a self-defence measure for deterrence
in case of encroachment upon our sovereignty and the
right to survival by hostile forces.

As long as the United States and its followers
continue their nuclear threats and blackmail, and
as long as they do not stop their war games at our
doorstep, disguising them as annual events, our self-
defence capability and our capability for pre-emptive
strikes with nuclear armed forces as their pivot will be
bolstered significantly.

Finally, I hope that the Security Council will
discharge its responsibility to the international
community by strictly observing impartiality
objectively to fulfil the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations with regard to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

