Mr. Ward (Jamaica): I thank Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Marie Guehenno for introducing this
excellent report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC). I also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for
his briefing on the state of children in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Ijoin others in welcoming the
presence here today of the Foreign Minister of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and I thank him for
his most important statement.
The Secretary-General's report supports the
observations we made and the conclusions we derived
during our recent mission to the Great Lakes region.
The Secretary-General also sets out for us a concept of
operations for MONUC that my delegation believes to
be appropriate to meet the challenges we face in the
Lusaka peace process. It is forward-looking in its
scope, and it sets the stage for a transition from
MONUC's phase II deployment to its phase III
deployment.

It is the view of my delegation that the Secretary-
General has told the Security Council what it needs to
know in order for us to make appropriate decisions to
move forward in facilitating the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in particular, and in
the Great Lakes region as a whole. The Security
Council is fully apprised of its responsibilities. It is
important that the parties to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement fully understand theirs.

There should be no doubt concerning the
commitment of the Security Council and the
international community to the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Security
Council further demonstrated its commitment to peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in sending its
mission to the Great Lakes region, and in the course of
the next few days it will extend the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) for one
year, which will allow for longer-term planning by the
Secretary-General.

While on the Security Council mission, the
members of the Council, united in their objectives,
emphasized to all the parties what is expected of each
individually and all collectively. That is, their
commitments to Lusaka and subsequent related
agreements must be unconditional.

It behoves us to remain focused on the way
forward. It is important that the parties understand
clearly their obligations to take appropriate action to
carry out the commitments they have made to
effectively implement the terms of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. My delegation understands fully
that while there are a number of important positive
developments, there remain a number of troubling,
unresolved issues. It is important that progress by made
in resolving these without delay, so that the movement
towards peace can be maintained.

I will highlight a few issues that we consider to
be of considerable importance in the peace process.
The Security Council - in its resolutions, in its
discussions with the Political Committee and in its
discussions with each party to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement - has repeatedly emphasized the
importance of the national political dialogue for the
success of the peace process. The facilitator of the
dialogue, Sir Ketumile Masire has announced the start
of a preparatory meeting on 16 July. I take this
opportunity to once again challenge all parties to rise to
the occasion and take full advantage of this opportunity
to build a lasting peace in the Congo. At the same time,
I also urge President Kabila to engage his
counterparts - his neighbours in Rwanda, Burundi and
Uganda - in meaningful discussions to resolve the
security concerns of all States in the region, and I call
on his neighbours to reciprocate. Beyond a doubt a
security threat to any one of these countries is a threat
to peace for all of them. I commend those leaders in
southern Africa who are encouraging and facilitating
dialogue between and among the leaders of the region.
I reiterate the importance of each party acting in a
positive manner and taking appropriate steps to
advance the peace process.

This includes, first, ceasing all hostile activities
against each other, which means refraining from
belligerency in words as well as deeds, including
refraining from making false accusations against each
other.

Secondly, there must be an end to all support for
groups within the Congo by outside forces. Countries
in the region that continue to provide such support will
have to answer to the international community for
obstructing the peace and perpetuating the suffering of
the Congolese people.

Thirdly, the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration of all armed groups
within the Congo must proceed effectively and without
delay. There must be an immediate cessation of support
for the negative forces, in particular, the former
members of the Rwandan Armed Forces (ex-FAR) and
the Interahamwe, and the disarmament and
demobilization of these forces must be verified by
MONUC.

Fourthly, human rights and humanitarian law
must be respected, and the protection of civilian
populations - both those under the control of armed
groups and those in areas evacuated pursuant to the
disengagement and withdrawal plans - must be
guaranteed. The Secretary-General's report draws
attention to the gross violations that are taking place in
areas under the control of all armed forces in the
Congo, including areas under the control of
Government forces. No amount of denial can disguise
these facts. In this regard, it should be understood by
all perpetrators that the international community will
not ignore atrocities carried out against the civilian
population. There will be no impunity.

Fifthly, an immediate end must be brought to the
recruitment and retention of child soldiers. Child
combatants must be demobilized and reintegrated into
society without further delay, and such action, to be
credible, must be verifiable by MONUC. I urge the
international community to provide the necessary
resources to carry out an effective disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement
programme for child soldiers and all armed groups in
the Congo.

I must direct a few comments to the Mouvement
pour la liberation du Congo (MLC) and
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratie-Goma
(RCD-Goma). These groups must act in accord with
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and with the
disengagement plans, and must abide by Security
Council resolutions. The MLC must adhere to the
disengagement plan and withdraw its forces to the
designated lines in Equateur Province without further
delay. The RCD must comply with resolution 1304
(2000) and remove its forces from Kisangani. The RCD
must understand that cooperation with MONUC and
the demilitarization of Kisangani are integral to the
peace process, and must understand the implications of
failing to comply.

My delegation objects to the position taken by the
RCD with respect to the MONUC fuel convoy on its
way to Kisangani. We urge it to reverse its position and
cooperate fully with MONUC, unconditionally.

The international community's patience is not
inexhaustible. The MLC and RCD, as well as their
supporters, would be well advised to realize that such
intransigence on their part cannot be tolerated
indefinitely by the international community. At the
same time, others should not construe these words
directed at the MLC, the RCD and their supporters to
mean that any party has a lesser obligation to fully
cooperate with the peace process and with MONUC.

The Secretary-General has highlighted in his
report the dire humanitarian situation of the Congolese
people. The problems faced by women and children are
of particular severity and require our immediate
attention. Jamaica fully supports the strengthening of
MONUC to deal with the humanitarian conditions
inflicted on the children by the war. We look forward to
working with the Special Representative on the plan of
action for war-affected children. I urge the
international community to look favourably on
supporting humanitarian agencies that seek to bring
relief to the people of the Congo.

As we move forward on this tenuous path to
peace, it is important that we construct a peace that will
last. In order to do so, we cannot wait until all the guns
are silenced, all the belligerents are disarmed or all
foreign forces have completely withdrawn from the
Congo. A political solution will not take hold unless
the political dialogue, the disarmament and the
withdrawal of foreign forces are accompanied and
supported by peace-building measures, including
economic sustenance and sustainable development.
There can be no pause between peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peace-building. For peace to be
sustained, these processes must overlap, be integrated
and be pursued simultaneously.

For this reason, it is imperative that the
international community - in particular the World
Bank, the International Monetary Fund and other
international and regional financial and developmental
institutionsf become fully engaged in the peace
process at this critical juncture.

In conclusion, allow me to pay tribute to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Morjane, for his exemplary leadership of MONUC, and
to the men and women of MONUC, both civilian and
military, for the extraordinary efforts they are making
under extremely difficult circumstances in the cause of
peace.

I also pay tribute to the countries that have
contributed troops and other personnel in the service of
MONUC and the United Nations, without which the
hope for peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo would be but a fleeting illusion.

