The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States.

We welcome the High Representative to the
Security Council today and take this opportunity to
thank him for his service.

I will focus the bulk of my remarks on the current
situation inside Bosnia and Herzegovina. We, like
others in the Council, are concerned that progress on
reforms needed for Euro-Atlantic integration has
stalled, due in part to irresponsible rhetoric from
leading nationalist politicians. We were disappointed
that Bosnia and Herzegovina was not in a position
where the Peace Implementation Council Steering
Board could decide to close the Office of the High
Representative this summer. We hope the situation in
Bosnia will allow the Office of the High
Representative to end in June 2008, and we will follow
the situation closely.

I compliment Chairman Spiric' on his efforts in
support of reform, and I hope that he will take the
following message back to his country: It is incumbent
on all of Bosnia's leaders to set aside destabilizing
rhetoric and focus on issues that matter for the welfare
of Bosnia's citizens. Unless reforms get back on track
soon, Bosnia risks falling behind its neighbours as they
move closer to the European Union (EU) and to NATO.
We urge Bosnian leaders to reach an agreement as soon
as possible on police reform that meets the EU's
criteria for concluding a Stabilization and Association
Agreement.

Bosnia's joining NATO's Partnership for Peace in
January was an important milestone. The Bosnian
Government needs to follow through on
implementation of defence reforms that will enable
further NATO integration. Bosnian leaders also need to
return to efforts to modernize the country's outmoded
Constitution.

An all-or-nothing approach is simply a recipe for
gridlock. Constitutional reform must be incremental
and consensus-based. The United States and the
international community are ready to help in those
endeavours, but Bosnians must lead the way. We call
on the Bosnian Government to move rapidly to
implement the conditions described in the Security
Council President's letter on police decertifications,
including the need to annul the December 2006
Council of Ministers decision to establish a Bosnian
Government review mechanism.

The United States welcomes the Peace
Implementation Council's decision to appoint Miroslav
Lajcak as the new High Representative and looks
forward to supporting him when he takes office.

Again, I want to thank Mr. Schwarz-Schilling for
his contributions to the consolidation of peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Germany.

