Mr. O'Brien: I thank Special Envoy Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed for his briefing, with which I fully
align myself.

Millions of Yemeni civilians - women, children
and men - continue to be exposed to unfathomable pain
and suffering. Cholera and the risk of famine remain
acute in all but one of the 23 governorates across the
country. In the midst ofthis, each day millions ofpeople
in Yemen are struggling to survive the conflict, the
poverty and the end-of-their-tether grind just to survive
one day at a time. Seven million people, including
2.3 million malnourished children, of whom 500,000
are severely malnourished, under the age of five, are on
the cusp of famine, vulnerable to disease and ultimately
at risk of a slow and painful death. Nearly 16 million
people do not have access to adequate water, sanitation
or hygiene, and more than 320,000 suspected cholera
cases have been reported in all of the country's districts
bar one. At least 1,740 people already are known to have
died from this entirely preventable disease, probably
many more in the many very remote areas of Yemen,
which we cannot reach.

Yemen is facing critical stoppages in hospitals
and a lack of doctors and nurses. The health system
has essentially collapsed, with an estimated 55 per
cent of facilities closed due to damage, destruction
or lack of funds. Approximately 30,000 health-
care workers have not been paid in nearly a year,
and no funding has been provided to keep basic
infrastructure, such as hospitals and water-pumping
and sanitation stations, operating. At what point will
the parties shoulder their responsibilities to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure - hospitals,
medical facilities and schools - and to provide basic
services for the population? At what point will those
supporting the parties to the conflict take the necessary
action e or, perhaps more important, desist from
their violent actions? This cholera scandal is entirely
man-made by the conflicting parties and those beyond
Yemen's borders who are leading, supplying, fighting
and perpetuating the fear and the fighting.

Over 120 humanitarian partners in Yemen
are delivering coordinated assistance out of five
hubs - in Aden, Hudaydah, Ibb, Saada and Sana'a.
From January to April, humanitarian partners reached
4.3 million people. However, at a time when the Yemen
humanitarian response plan is only 33 per cent funded,
that is $688 million out of the $2.1 billion required,
humanitarian workers have had to use resources
programmed for food security or malnutrition to
combat the unprecedented cholera outbreak, which has
surged beyond initial estimates. Funding to the appeal
is critical to ensure that lifesaving aid reaches all those
in need, wherever and whoever they are. Fresh funds
are needed to scale up further, pledges made in Geneva
at the April conference must be turned into cash now.
And the United Nations and its partners must be allowed
to use funds flexibly to tackle the multitude of crises
the conflict has created. The cholera response alone
now needs an additional $250 million, of which only
$47 million has been received and is being deployed
and used up as we speak.

I repeat my call made last time I briefed the Council
six weeks ago (see S/PV.7954). If only I did not have to
repeat it. There has been change since then, only, sadly,
for the dramatically worse.

First, notwithstanding the World Bank's commitment
of $866 million to assist Yemen and the United States
lifting of the freeze on access to Yemen's foreign
currency reserves, public servants need to be paid
immediately, and health facilities need to be reopened
and restarted. A failure to do so will result in further
preventable deaths. The United Nations and partners
cannot replace State functions. There is no time to lose
in ensuring that those payments are made.

Secondly, there is a need to ensure the protection
of the Yemeni people and critical infrastructure. For
as long as military actions continue, all parties must
comply with their responsibilities under international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and all States
must exert their influence to ensure the parties do so.
Today they are not doing so, and that must change.

Thirdly, there is a need to ensure that all ports
and land routes remain open for both humanitarian
and commercial imports in a predictable and stable
manner. That includes continuing efforts to avert an
attack on Hudaydah, to re-open Sana'a airport and for
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to release airspace and
getting the paid-for, desperately needed mobile cranes
to Hudaydah port, rather than leaving them sitting
useless and rotting on the Dubai quayside.

As I have said before, this is a man-made crisis.
The sheer scale of the humanitarian suffering of the
Yemeni people is a direct result of the conflict and
serious violations of international law. Humankind
simply cannot continue to lose out to politics. The
United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism
has all the necessary checks and balances to ensure the
flow of commercial goods into the country via Red Sea
ports, in particular into Hudaydah. It is, and will be,
inhumane and irresponsible for parties to impede the
delivery of food and fuel into the country.

The international community must do more -words
are insufficient-to ensure that the parties are upholding
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
The Council has a primary responsibility for this, as
well as its responsibility to maintain international
peace and security, which is, frankly, patently failing
in Yemen. Approximately 20 million people depend
on the Council's concrete action to end the conflict.
To do that, the Council will have to lean much more
heavily and effectively on the parties and those outside
Yemen who are leading this policy and action. Just for
the sake of reaching all the millions with the cholera
vaccines, which are so desperately needed, the people
of Yemen need stability so we can reach many of them
at all. A failure to do so will render their fate and
our - the Council's - ability to intervene useless and
hopeless. We should all feel deeply guilty about that.
The conflicting parties in Yemen especially should
do so, as should those who drive them from outside
Yemen. Our - the Council's - joint top common
priority should be always to save civilian lives and
to protect them - the Yemeni people deserve this as
equally as any other citizen of the world, just as any
representative around this table or someone cowering
in fear somewhere in Sana'a or Taiz in Yemen.

