Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I should like
to begin by thanking Ukraine for calling for this
debate and to welcome the Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs to our meeting. I also want to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun and Ambassadors Apakan
and Sajdik for their briefings.

In February 2015, the Council endorsed the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, which laid out a number of agreed steps
aimed at ending hostilities, alleviating humanitarian
suffering and establishing a path towards resolving the
conflict in eastern Ukraine. Yet more than a year later,
none of these measures has been implemented fully. Even
the first and most basic of the agreed measures - an
immediate and comprehensive ceasefire - is routinely
violated. Worryingly, these violations have increased
in intensity in recent weeks. The second agreed
measure - the withdrawal of heavy weapons - has
also not been fully implemented. Recent reports of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) highlight the use of artillery, mortars and
tanks, all of which were supposed to have been pulled
back from the contact line over year ago.

The situation is deeply troubling. Given the
abundance of arms in the separatist-controlled regions,
there is a real risk of further violent escalation. The
persistent violence has caused the deaths of thousands
ofpeople, with tens ofthousands more injured. Essential
civilian infrastructure has been damaged and cannot be
repaired amidst flying bullets and falling shells. More
than 1.5 million people are internally displaced.
Beyond the terrible human costs, the failure
to stabilize the security situation has also made
progressing other aspects of the Minsk agreements much
more difficult. We call on the parties to honour their
commitments and implement all aspects of the Minsk
agreements. This is the best path towards a stable and
lasting peace. As a matter of priority, all parties must
deliver on their commitment to a genuine ceasefire
and the withdrawal of heavy weapons, monitored and
verified by the OSCE. We reiterate our call on Russia to
use its influence over the separatists to ensure that they
implement commitments made in Minsk.

The OSCE has a critical role to play in verifying
implementation. It is therefore of real concern that
OSCE monitors continue to face significant constraints
on access and movement in areas under separatist
control, including along most of the Ukrainian border
that remains under separatist control. Again, we urge
Russia to use its influence over the separatists to ensure
that OSCE monitors can effectively and safely fulfil
their responsibilities under the package of measures
for the implementation of the Minsk agreements. We
condemn recent aggressive acts against OSCE monitors
in separatist-controlled areas, including being fired
upon and threatened at gunpoint. Such actions must be
repudiated by all sides.

On the political aspects of the Minsk agreements,
we need to see faster progress. Reaching agreement
on modalities for elections - which are to be held in
accordance with relevant OSCE standards, monitored
by the OSCE and in a secure, stable environment - is
a priority. Discussions in the Trilateral Contact Group
and Normandy format need to be approached in good
faith and with a determined focus on problem-solving.
We hope that practical steps can be agreed in order to
break the current impasse.

We must not lose sight of the ongoing suffering of

the civilians caught up in this conflict and its aftermath.
The humanitarian challenges flowing from the crisis in
Ukraine continue to affect the lives of millions. Huge
numbers of Ukrainians face daily challenges accessing
basic necessities, including food and water. All sides
need to intensify their efforts to ensure that support
reaches civilians in affected areas and those that have
been displaced by the violence. Ultimately, however,
the lives of civilians will be best protected through
full implementation of the Minsk Agreements and the
restoration of peace.

Lastly, let me reiterate New Zealand's rejection
of Russia's annexation of Crimea, in violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
the Organization.

