Mr. Loulichki (Morocco): It is a real pleasure,
Mr. President, to participate in this debate under your
leadership and your guidance.

I have the honour to speak on behalf the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), and I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this public
debate and for the opportunity to express and share our
views at this important juncture for United Nations
peacekeeping in terms of policy debates and future
direction. We thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support, for their insightful and informative
statements.

The Movement continues to stress that United
Nations peacekeeping operations should not be used as
a substitute for addressing the root causes of conflicts,
which should be addressed in a coherent, well-planned,
coordinated and comprehensive manner with the
relevant political, social, economic and development
instruments. NAM. further maintains that the United
Nations should give high consideration to the manner
2

in which those efforts can continue without
interruption after the departure of peacekeeping
operations, so as to ensure a smooth transition to
lasting peace, security and development.

NAM. believes that peacekeeping operations
should strictly observe the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, as well
as those that have evolved to govern peacekeeping as
its basic principles, namely, the consent of the parties,
the non-use of force except in self-defence, and
impartiality. The concept of the defence of the mandate
cannot be put at the same level as these three guiding
principles, since its application is restricted to the
operational and tactical levels.

NAM. also emphasizes that respect for the
principles of sovereign equality, political independence
and territorial integrity of all States and non-intervention
in matters that are essentially within their domestic
jurisdiction should be maintained in this regard.

NAM. continues to underscore that United
Nations peacekeeping operations should be provided
from the outset with political support, adequate human,
financial and logistical resources and clearly defined
and achievable mandates. The credibility of the
authorized mandates rests on their clarity and their
achievability.

The establishment of complex peacekeeping
operations in recent years underlines the importance of
a well-planned and carefully designed political process
supported by the parties to a conflict. The consent of
the parties and their adherence from the outset to the
peace process is the best way to ensure that
peacekeeping operates efficiently and leads to lasting
peace, security and development.

With respect to securing the needed financial and
logistical resources, NAM. reiterates that all Member
States contribute to the budget and that no special
privileges should be established or recognized. Rather,
we should all continue to sustain this unique tool at the
disposal of United Nations. Better planning and
budgeting, improved managerial and organizational
capacity and energized triangular cooperation between
troop-contributing countries (TCCs), the Secretariat
and this Council are key to enhancing and
strengthening the Organization's capacity to face the
current challenges.
09-44473

To accomplish this, it is necessary to synergize all
initiatives and processes to ensure continuity of the
reform process and to coordinate all efforts in a
coherent and strategic direction for peacekeeping. To
begin with, the General Assembly and its Special
Committee in charge of reviewing all aspects of
peacekeeping operations, the Security Council and the
Secretariat should work in a manner to ensure synergy
of efforts to meet our collective goals.

Troop-contributing countries of the NAM. remain
committed to these goals by providing 87 per cent of
the personnel of United Nations peacekeeping. This
unchallenged reality requires their imperative
involvement in a meaningful manner in all aspects and
stages of a peacekeeping operation. In this regard, we
would like to express appreciation for the effort made
by the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations to seek the Views of TCCs on
various aspects of current peacekeeping operations.
NAM. also appreciates the Council's call, through
today's draft presidential statement, to deepen
consultation through the mechanism of triangular
cooperation. NAM. will undoubtedly provide its views
in due course on how to energize such cooperation. In
this context, the concept paper prepared by the United
Kingdom presidency lays down some promising
options for a better dialogue and interaction.

Given its mandate, which has been reaffirmed
over years by the General Assembly, the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations remains

"the only United Nations forum mandated to
review comprehensively the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects,
including measures aimed at enhancing the
capacity of the Organization to conduct United
Nations peacekeeping operations ..." (A/63/l9, para. 18).

Its military and policy expertise, built on extensive
debate and discussion, could feed this Council's needs
for such expertise. The Committee, also known as the
Committee of Thirty Four (C-34), has always provided
the framework to discuss reform processes such as the
Brahimi report, the Peace Operations 2010 reform
agenda and the major restructuring of DPKO and the
creation of the Department of Field Support (DFS).

The assessments and recommendations provided
in the DPKO-DFS non-paper entitled "A New
Partnership Agenda: Charting a New Horizon for
09-44473

United Nations Peacekeeping" need to be considered
by the C-34, which took note of the non-paper in its
last session. I would like to emphasize once again that
the Special Committee remains the appropriate forum
to discuss the non-paper's ideas and suggestions, such
as a robust approach to peacekeeping.

NAM. will carefully examine the Secretariat's
non-paper and provide its observations and comments
in the same manner it did for the guidelines and
principles referred to within the Secretariat as the
"Capstone Document".

Twice this year - during the first and second
debate, under the French and the Turkish presidencies
respectively - NAM. has provided its views and would
like to renew today our readiness to deepen
consultations between the TCCs and the Council in
order to meet the rising challenges, having peace and
security as the main objective and benchmark. We also
reiterate our call on all developed countries to share the
burden of peacekeeping. Engaging their troops and
dealing with difficulties stemming from deployments
in hostile environments and difficult political contexts
would demonstrate that there exists a genuine
partnership among Member States and would bring
much-needed responses to the future direction of
United Nations peacekeeping.

Thanking you, Mr. President, for your indulgence,
I would like to wish you all the best in your new
endeavours.

