Mr. Acharya (Nepal): Once again, I would like
to congratulate you, Sir, on Viet Nam's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the current
month. I thank you for enabling me to participate in the
discussion related to the Secretary-General's report
(S/2008/454) on extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission to Nepal (UNMIN) in
accordance with Nepal's request.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative, Mr. Ian Martin, the officials of
UNMIN and the Department of Political Affairs for
their continuous support for meeting Nepal's request to
benefit the peace process in Nepal. As Special
Representative Martin has already informed members,
Nepal has completed several important milestones in
its peace process, which is nearing its logical
conclusion.

With the successful holding of the Constituent
Assembly elections and the declaration of Nepal as a
federal democratic republic, a new political
transformation has begun with a view to achieving a
lasting and durable peace in the country. We are likely
to see the first president of the Republic of Nepal
elected tomorrow. We will soon have a new
government, which will most likely be led by the
Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist), which has won
the highest number of seats in the Constituent
Assembly.

UNMIN has made important contributions to this
process. When the Security Council created the
Mission in January 2007 at our request, its mandate
included monitoring the ceasefire, monitoring and
assisting with the elections and monitoring the
management of arms and armed personnel. Some of
those tasks have already been accomplished. However,
we have yet to conclude our arrangements on the
management of arms and arms personnel, including the
future of the combatants in the cantonments, which are
being monitored by UNMIN.

Therefore, the Government decided to request, in
a letter dated 8 July 2008 from the Permanent Mission
of Nepal, the continuation of UNMIN's mandate for
another six months beyond 23 July 2008, on a smaller
scale so that it can carry out the remainder of its tasks,
which relate mostly to the ongoing work of monitoring
the management of arms and armed personnel, in line
with the agreement among the political parties, and
assisting the implementation of the agreement on this
matter in accordance with their understanding.
In his report on this subject, the Secretary-
General stated that he had sought clarification from the
Government of Nepal regarding whether he should
recommend an extension of the special political
mission and also regarding the continuation of the
Mission's political leadership. On behalf of the
Government of Nepal, I have provided our clarification
to the Office of the Secretary-General and the
Department of Political Affairs. I will read out the
clarification that we gave to the Secretary-General
regarding the extension of UNMIN's mandate in
accordance with our request. There is a slight
reordering of the sequence of the points, which I have
shared informally with members.

"The Government's letter sent on 8 July
represents the combined position of the major
political parties, including the Communist Party
of Nepal (Maoist), which is most likely to lead
the next government. Even after the formation of
the next government, there is virtually no
possibility of amending the letter and its contents,
which was agreed after intensive political
discussion among the political parties.

"By way of clarification, the letter dated
8 July from the Permanent Mission of Nepal on
the matter clearly states that the Government
would like 'to request from the United Nations
the continuation of UNMIN on a smaller scale',
which means an extension of the special political
mission as stipulated in Security Council
resolution 1740 (2007). The mission will have to
'engage itself for the remainder of the mandate',
which 'relates to the ongoing work of monitoring
the management of arms and armed personnel in
line with the agreement among the political
parties and of assisting in implementing the
agreement'. That is obvious, because the rest of
the mandate laid out in resolution 1740 (2007)
has already been accomplished.

"In View of the further evolution of the
situation in the country towards the successive
consolidation of the peace process, and the
understanding among the political parties that this
process should be taken forward to its logical
conclusion, as stated in the aforementioned letter,
the Government of Nepal would like to assume
that the political leadership of the mission will be
continued at the level of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General,
retaining adequate political and administrative
staff for the purpose, along with the arms
monitors.

"The Government of Nepal agrees with the
rest of the staffing and transition arrangements
that the Secretary-General proposed in relation to
the downsizing of the mission.

"A temporary extension for a month will not
be helpful in any way in the transition to the
formation of a new government or in the ongoing
discussion on matters related to the management
of arms and arms personnel among the major
political actors.

"The above clarification has also been
conveyed to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in his meetings with the
political leadership after the Secretary-General
sought clarification on the matter. Therefore, the
Government of Nepal is in favour of extending
the mission as per its request in its letter of 8 July
for next six months."

I am pleased to learn that the Secretary-General
has now accepted our explanation and authorized his
Special Representative to recommend to the Council an
extension of UNMIN for another six months, as per our
request. I am confident that the Council will lend its
support to our request. Listening to the statements
made here today, I am confident that our request will
be taken into account, as per the recommendation of
the Secretary-General.

I am grateful for the sentiments and words of
support and encouragement that all speakers expressed
in their statements. We have taken note of some of the
most important and constructive comments and
observations. I take this opportunity to thank you,
Mr. President, and every member of the Council for
your continued support and encouragement for the
peace process and for your readiness to meet our
request in all circumstances.

Since this will be my last opportunity to do so in
this format, since I do not expect another extension, I
would like to personally thank every ambassador and
representative for their readiness to support Nepal even
when they had so many other important matters to
handle.
Last but not least, I would like to thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for undertaking the
onerous effort of coordinating the draft resolution in
this regard. I am confident that it will be adopted soon.
I would also like to thank the Ambassadors of India
and Japan for their readiness to express support in their
statements.
