Mr. Otunnu: I warmly salute your leadership and
your commitment to this issue, Madam President. Your
country, Jamaica, has always been a leader,
spearheading the struggles for freedom, social justice
and international solidarity. It is also to your country
that the international community owes its heritage of
that very special form of musical expression, reggae.

The Security Council's systematic engagement
with the issue of children and armed conflict began
with the open debate and presidential statement of June
1998. Last year, the Council took a momentous step
when it adopted resolution 1261 (1999), which, as the
Secretary-General indicates in his report, document
S/2000/712, represents a veritable landmark for the
cause of children affected by armed conflict.

Today marks another milestone in this
engagement. For the first time ever, the Council has
received a report from the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict. The report has some very
important features: it contains a comprehensive
overview of the fate of children caught in conflict; it
draws on specific, concrete activities from the field; it
traces the progress made thus far, as well as indicating
the challenges that lie ahead; and it provides a
comprehensive set of recommendations, many of which
are addressed directly to the Security Council.

As the report indicates, in the course of the last
two years we have witnessed significant progress on
this agenda: the level of public awareness has increased
significantly; after almost six years of difficult
negotiations, a consensus agreement was reached last
January raising the minimum age for compulsory
recruitment and deployment from 15 to 18. Several
regional organizations have come to adopt this agenda
as their own, the most recent actions in that regard
being those of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Group of Eight.

Other elements of this progress are: child
protection concerns are now being systematically
incorporated into peace operation mandates by the
Security Council; reports to the Security Council on
specific conflict situations now contain distinct
sections on the protection and well-being of children;
the establishment of the role and the deployment of
Child Protection Advisors; the placing of children's
concerns on peace agendas, as we have seen in Sierra
Leone, Colombia and Burundi; the elaboration of
training programmes for peacekeepers in the domain of
the rights and protection of children and women; the
increasing and widespread engagement of non-
governmental organizations in advocacy work, the
provision of information and programme activities on
the ground; increasing focus and resource allocation
for children in post-conflict situations, as we are
witnessing in East Timor, Sierra Leone and Kosovo;
and some innovative national initiatives on behalf of
war-affected children, such as the National
Commission for War Affected Children in Sierra
Leone, and the enactment of a new law in Rwanda
which opened the way for girls to inherit land and other
property in the aftermath of a very tragic conflict.

If those elements reflect the progress that has
been made thus far, the Secretary-General's report
indicates a number of challenges ahead. A number of
measures need to be undertaken as part of an agenda
for action, looking to the future. Over the past two
years, a number of parties in conflict have made
concrete commitments concerning the protection of
children. The challenge now is how to ensure
adherence to those commitments. The Security Council
and other key actors can make a big difference in this
regard by using their collective weight and influence to
lean on parties in conflict.

In today's world, no party in conflict is an island
unto itself. The international community should make
any assistance - political, diplomatic, financial,
material or military - to parties to armed conflict
contingent on their observing standards for the
protection of children.

In the spirit of the Secretary-General's Global
Compact initiative, on which a most important meeting
is taking place today, the international community
should encourage the corporate sector to develop
voluntary codes of conduct regarding illicit trade with
parties in conflict in situations where children and
women are the primary Victims of such conflict. In that
context, Member States should consider putting in
place executive and legislative measures to discourage
corporate actors within their jurisdictions from
engaging in such illicit trade. The Security Council
should continue to investigate the linkages between
such illicit trade and the war machines in various parts
of the world, and should consider bans on such exports
of natural resources, especially gold, timber and
diamonds.

In the context of peace processes, it is important
that the international community should exclude grave
crimes against children from any amnesty provisions
and legislation.

Children tend to suffer the worst in situations of
sanctions regimes. I therefore hope that the Council
will continue to explore, within the present framework,
measures to ease the impact of such sanctions on
children.

During my visits to countries affected by conflict,
I have been deeply distressed by the conditions of
internally displaced persons, the vast majority of
whom, as we all know, are children and women. Surely,
the time has come for the international community to
develop a more systematic response and framework for
providing access, protection and practical support to
such internally displaced persons.

The mainstay of our efforts on the ground
comprises local actors and local people. It is for that
reason that I address a special appeal to United Nations
agencies, international non-governmental organization
and the donor community to do a good deal more to
provide support, and to strengthen the capacities of
national institutions, local governmental organizations
and civil-society organizations. That is important not
only for creating local capacity, but also for the
sustainability of our initiatives and efforts.

I am very struck by the existence, in societies
caught in the midst of conflict, of deeply rooted values
and norms relative to this agenda. The international
community needs to do more to recognize the
importance of such values and to work closely with
local communities in their efforts to strengthen local
values and norms and social networks that have
traditionally provided for the protection of children in
times of war.

I am very encouraged by the actions which have
been taken by major regional groups. I hope the
Security Council will encourage the regional
organizations to now move to the next step and
systematically incorporate the rights and protection of
children into their policies, activities and programmes
by the allocation of resources where applicable; by the
creation, perhaps, of child protection units within their
secretariats; by considering the posting of child-
protection staff within peace and field operations; and
by providing more systematic training on child
protection to their peace and field operations staff, and
by undertaking initiatives to curb cross-border
activities that are deleterious to children in times of
war - in particular, the illicit movement of small
arms, illicit trading in natural resources and cross-
border recruitment and abduction of children.

We cannot move very far in this task - building
the movement for the protection of children - without
involving young persons themselves in this movement.
We must involve them in the protection of children
affected by conflict, including in programmes for
reconciliation, peace consolidation and peace-building
and in developing children-to-children networks.

Beyond the call for the rapid ratification of the
Optional Protocol, we must surely turn our energies, in
terms of curbing child soldiering, to action on the
ground by mobilizing political pressure, by addressing
the economic, social and political factors underlying
this phenomenon, and by enhancing the woefully thin
capacities on the ground to receive and rehabilitate
child soldiers.

The international community needs to do a good
deal more to fill three gaps within our present mode of
response: the special needs of the girl child, the
vulnerability of the adolescent and the importance of
providing more consistent education to children caught
in the midst and the aftermath of conflict.

I have to say that in my work I have been
especially impressed by the role being played by non-
governmental organizations - their advocacy, their
activities on the ground and their role in shaping this
agenda. It is quite simply not only crucial but
indispensable. It is for this reason that I hope the
Security Council will seize the opportunity offered by
non-governmental organizations to engage in
constructive dialogue and collaboration. All of us will
benefit from this. Above all, children will benefit from
such collaboration.

I cannot complete my remarks without paying a
very special and heartfelt tribute to Madam Graca
Machel. She is the one who laid the foundation for
what we are discussing and the activities we are
undertaking today. To the operational actors on the
ground, beginning with the United Nations agencies -
UNICEF, first and foremost, and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food
Programme and other actors within the United Nations
system - as well as, of course, the non-governmental
organizations. Their activities on the front line are what
truly make a difference to the fate of children affected
by conflict.

May I say, finally, that we have said enough; we
have elaborated enough norms. The time has come for
the international community to move beyond the
elaboration of norms to the era of application; beyond
declaration to taking very specific, targeted measures
on the ground, including targeted sanctions against
actors, especially parties in conflict who flout
international standards regarding the protection of
children.

