It is undeniable that environmental degradation is heavily aggravating the socioeconomic challenges in certain countries and regions. The region of West Africa and the Sahel, which is particularly vulnerable to climate-related challenges, presents a good case in point. We fully understand the motivation of our colleagues from the Niger in convening this meeting. In the Niger alone, according to Reuters, the Sahara Desert keeps expanding at a rate of 48 kilometres a year, further degrading the land and eradicating the already scarce livelihoods of the rapidly growing population. Even the blue people of the desert, the Tuareg, have to adapt and move further south due to the lack of grazing areas and water sources. We share the concerns raised by the presidency and the need for the world community to treat the related issues in a priority manner in appropriate formats. However, we have yet again to register our doubts that the Security Council is a platform for a generic environment-related debate. In that respect, we would like to reiterate the following points. There is no automatic link between environmental issues, including climate change, and conflict. There is no conclusive, universally recognized and scientifically substantiated evidence that climate change has an impact on armed conflicts either. The social and economic situation in individual countries and subregions may be exacerbated by the adverse impacts of climate change and other manifestations of environmental deterioration. However, security and stability are often affected by more direct causes, about which not all the members of the Council are inclined to talk. These include external interference in Member States' domestic affairs, abuse or even the generation of conflict situations for the purpose of exploiting natural resources without the consent of host Governments. That is not only contradictory to international law, but also fraught with environmental disasters. In that context, we have many examples in Africa and the Middle East. Unfortunately, we have to note that, when the representative of the United States enumerated examples, he forgot the example of the occupation of the Syrian oil fields. We would like to highlight that, as well as the barbaric methods of oil production, which are fraught with ecological disaster in north-eastern Syria. Another way of interference is economic and political pressure in various forms. That includes the application of unilateral coercive measures without a Security Council mandate. Such actions particularly undermine the capacity of developing countries to achieve socioeconomic development goals and environmental protection and hinder their ability to participate in collective efforts to address climate change. The consideration of environmental aspects on its own may therefore be selective and ignore the broader context. Assisting developing countries in their sustainable development efforts, including environmental protection - both in general and in post-conflict situations - is a mandate of the United Nations development system and resident coordinators, with reliance on intergovernmental mandates and relevant scientific findings. Donor countries should not shy away from their commitments to help. In order to minimize environmental effects, it is necessary to help countries to strengthen their resilience. As for international humanitarian law, which our presidency included in the concept note (S/2020/882, annex) in the context of today's discussion, it is also well known that it prohibits the use of methods of warfare that are intended or may beexpected to cause damage to the natural environment. However, that prohibition cannot prevent the severe effects of armed conflict on the natural environment, irrespective of the level of adherence to this important rule. In that regard, it is paramount that the Security Council focus its efforts on the fulfilment of its core function of the maintenance of international peace and security on the basis of the Charter of the United Nations. If that is addressed, it will certainly contribute to the protection of the environment.
