Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):

Allow me first to say how pleased we are to have you,
Madam President, presiding, and to pay tribute to
Tanzania, whose dedication to peace in the Great Lakes
region - to which today's meeting attests - is well
known to us. I should like also to greet the ministers
and envoys present, especially those from the countries
of the region, who have come to New York to take part
in our debate. The members of the Council who
accompanied me on missions we have conducted in
Central Africa join me in welcoming them. Finally, let
me say how much we appreciate having in our midst in
this Council another country from that vast region, the
Republic of the Congo, to which I wish to convey our
congratulations upon the accession of President Sassou
Nguesso to the presidency of the African Union.

What is taking place in the Great Lakes region of
Africa concerns us all. To a great extent, it is there that
peace, security and democracy may succeed or fail for
all of Africa, as may the development of that vast
region. It is likewise of concern to us all because one
cannot overstate the suffering that the population of
that region has endured, and which we continue to
witness today.

It is hardly surprising, then, that the United
Nations should be deploying its largest peacekeeping
operation today to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The international community has invested great
efforts in advancing peace in the Great Lakes region.
United Nations activity in this regard is well known. It
is likewise often pointed out that we should pay tribute
to the leaders of the region, of the African Union and
of a number of countries which, like South Africa or
Tanzania, have spared no effort to bring peace to the
region. Thanks to those combined endeavours, we have
succeeded in placing the initiatives being pursued in
the region on a positive track. Burundians can be proud
of the successes scored there, and the Congolese
clearly seem to be moving in the same direction.

Nonetheless, all of this remains quite fragile.
Major obstacles have yet to be overcome, as the
President of the European Union pointed out earlier.
For my part, I would stress the following points.
First, the international community must focus its
efforts on the priorities. The first is elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Those elections
must be brought to a successful conclusion in the time
remaining before 30 June. The elections are important,
but are not an end in themselves. They respond to a
deep aspiration among the population for peace and
reconciliation, and one cannot help being moved by the
hopes that they inspire in the people. When we went to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we clearly saw
how much the Congolese people wanted those
elections.

We must succeed in this process, because we
must dispel the uncertainty. Democratic institutions
must be set up in the Democratic Republic of Congo,
because that great nation - that vast territory within
the heart of Africa - must have a solid and stable
State, and a solid and stable Democratic Republic of
the Congo is the best guarantee for the development of
the entire region and is crucial for the region's stability.

There are three essential requirements for the
success of the political process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. A truly integrated national
army capable of providing security for the country and
its borders must be established; the reconciliation
efforts must continue, so that no one is excluded and
that no one can exclude himself from public life; and
the rule of law must be established throughout the
territory, with the wealth of the nation being managed
in a transparent fashion.

In Burundi, peacebuilding is a matter of urgency.
More than ever before, we must support that country,
which has become a successful model for
reconciliation in the region, so as to guarantee that the
achievements of the Arusha process become
permanent.

I would like to say a few words about relations
among the countries of the region. Much remains to be
done if we are to improve the dialogue that is essential
among those countries. There is still too much
suspicion, too many hard feelings, too much mistrust.
The second Summit of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, of which we have high
expectations, must not be a missed opportunity. It is
therefore very important to focus on the crucial issue
of peace and security.

Armed groups are a problem of particular
concern in the region. Whether or not they are a threat
to the security of States, they are, today, the main cause
of the population's suffering. We must tackle that
problem together. However, there will be no solution
until the armed groups stop receiving support from the
outside and until they stop the traffic in arms and
natural resources that fuels their activities. Of course,
there can be no solution that is exclusively military in
nature.

In conclusion, I would like to return to the
question of the suffering of the people. In our work in
the Council, this is always at the heart of our concerns.
We must always remember the tragedy of the Rwandan
genocide. At that time, the international community did
not live up to its responsibilities, and today, when
talking about the region, the question of the protection
of civilians is on everybody's mind. That is one of the
most important elements of the draft resolution that we
will be adopting shortly.

It is not to be tolerated that children, women and
other vulnerable people find themselves at the mercy
of brutal criminal groups, such as the Lord's Resistance
Army. We must all focus our attention on the
humanitarian tragedy in northern Uganda. Mr. Douste-
Blazy, the French Minister for Foreign Affairs, will be
visiting Uganda in a few days' time in order to discuss
with our Ugandan partners what we can do in order to
improve the situation.

Eight Guatemalan Blue Helmets serving in the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo were killed last
Monday. The problem has taken on a regional
dimension, and it is time for the Security Council to
address it. We believe that the draft resolution on
which we will shortly be voting, which follows up on
the Jan Egeland, will make it possible for us to move
forward.

