Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, Iwould like to thank Ambassador
Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, established by resolution 1373 (2001), for
his informative briefing, which shed light on the current
status of the implementation of resolution 2341 (2017),
on the protection of critical infrastructure from terrorist

attacks. We sincerely thank Kuwait's presidency for
including such a relevant and important issue on the
Security Council's agenda in February.

Terrorism in all its forms and manifestations is
one of the most serious threats to international peace
and security. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
is extremely concerned about and supports the
protection of critical infrastructure from potential
terrorist attacks. The Government of His Excellency
Mr. Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, President of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea, is one of the principal
investors in development and infrastructure projects of
all kinds in Central Africa, which are key to making
progress in achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals in the subregion. We therefore understand and
acknowledge the crucial importance of protecting
critical infrastructure that guarantees the distribution
of drinking water and food, access to education, health
sources of renewable energy, air, maritime and land
transportation and financial services that sustain the
economy and well-being of our people.

In that regard, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
endorses resolution 2341 (2017), which calls for
the establishment of suitable national, subregional
and continental mechanisms for cooperation,
information-sharing and public-private partnerships
for planning, preventing, managing crises and deterring
potential attacks on the critical infrastructure of the
countries. Similarly, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
is encouraged by regional initiatives that are supported
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, as outlined in the briefing we just heard.

Nonetheless, we must point out the lack of African
initiatives listed. We would therefore encourage greater
cooperation with the African Union and the subregional
and regional economic communities, where - as we
all know - particularly complex vulnerabilities exist
with regard to maintaining the progress made towards
achieving the Millennium Development Goals, which
should lay the foundation for reaching the Sustainable
Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and the African Union Agenda 2063.

We understand that the implementation of
resolution 2341 (2017) complements the objectives
of the Committee and of other Council resolutions,
including resolutions 1373 (2001), 2309 (2016), on civil
aviation, and 2322 (2016), on international cooperation,
and that mechanisms to implement the resolutions must
be incorporated into national and regional counter-
terrorism strategies. The Republic of Equatorial
Guinea is committed, to the extent possible and in
line with its national laws, to working to ensure the
implementation and application of the resolutions. In
order to implement effective strategies, we call on the
international community to support the development
of initiatives to protect critical infrastructure in Africa
and the rest of the world, in particular in the most
vulnerable countries. We also call on it to participate in
initiatives that ensure that representatives of all social
and economic sectors take part in programmes that
help us to better understand terrorist threats, prevent
terrorist acts and detect suspicious activities.

Let me conclude by thanking the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate for its cooperation
and excellent work; the Monitoring Team on the
implementation of resolution 1267 (1999) of 15 October
1999; the International Criminal Police Organization;
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, and
all other bodies of the United Nations. Together, all of
those organizations carry out an essential function in
helping Member States to develop strategic capabilities
to protect their infrastructure from terrorist attacks.

