Mr. Roet (Israel): Seventy years ago, when
representatives of 50 nations met to establish the
founding vision for the newly formed United Nations,
they were not engaging in a merely academic exercise.
The purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations emerged from a painful confrontation with
the horrors of the Second World War. Nations of the
world understood that, in order to achieve all the lofty
principles outlined in the Charter, the family of nations
would have to stand firm in defence of the Charter's
first principle, in Article 1, namely,

"[t]o maintain international peace and security, and
to that end: to take effective collective measures
for the prevention and removal of threats to peace".

Today we confront a new reality that requires learning
that lesson anew. The purposes and principles of
the Charter are only as strong and durable as the
international will to uphold them.

The primary challenge to the founding vision of the
Charter is no longer that of conflict between States, but
the explosion of violence and brutality in failing and
failed States. Nowhere is that more evident than in the
Middle East. the civil war in Syria is approaching its
fifth year, with little hope for an end to the madness.
Yet the international community continues to fail to
respond effectively to the scale of the disaster. News
of the siege and deliberate starvation of the 40,000
residents of Madaya by Hizbullah and Al-Assad forces
only underscores the magnitude of the horrors and the
futility of the international response.

Of course, Syria is not alone. From Libya to Iraq
and from Somalia to Yemen, insurgencies, proxy wars
and civil wars are transforming those countries into
living nightmares for their inhabitants. In vast stretches
of the Middle East, the promises of the United Nations
Charter have become but a distant dream.

The numerous violent radical extremists who
pose a major challenge to global peace and security
have filled the vacuum of law and order by imposing
their fanatical rule on growing numbers of people
across the world. Terrorist groups such as Da'esh and
Al-Qaida, Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab, Hamas and
Hizbullah continue to make a mockery of the values
and principles this institution was founded to uphold.
Those fundamentalist groups represent a fundamental
threat to the world of freedom and dignity envisioned
in the Charter. Yet this institution has failed to draw a
clear line in the sand in defence of the principles of our
founding document.

Like many other countries around the world, we
in Israel live with the consequences of this failure on
our own border. Hizbullah has amassed over 100,000
rockets ready to be fired at any Israeli city. In fact,
it has transformed numerous villages in southern
Lebanon into outposts of terror. This is the true face
of Hizbullah - a brutal organization that deliberately
targets Israeli civilians and uses Lebanese civilians as
human shields, which is a double war crime.

Instead of clear and unequivocal condemnations
of the blatant violations of resolution 1701 (2006), the
Security Council has remained silent. Hizbullah's utter
disregard for the lives of the people of Israel and the
people of Lebanon is in opposition to every principle
this institution stands for. If we are truly committed to
upholding the principles of the Charter, silence is not
an option.

On our southern border, Hamas prepares for the
next round of conflict. The terror group controlling
Gaza continues to stockpile rockets and dig terror
tunnels to threaten Israelis towns in southern Israel and
beyond. Yet when Israel brought clear and indisputable
evidence and facts of these intentions to the attention
of the Security Council, the silence was deafening.
Even when Hamas operatives admitted - actually
boasted - of their preparations for war, the Council
could not bring itself to speak out against Hamas by
name; there was not even a whisper of condemnation.

It is tragic that some in the Chamber seem eager to
ignore Hamas's iron-fisted grip on Gaza and to explain
away their ongoing campaign of terror against Israel.
Just two weeks ago, we reminded the Chamber of the
Council resolution against terrorism, which declares
that

"any acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable
regardless of their motivations, whenever and by
whomsoever committed" (resolution 2249 (2015),
fourth preambular paragraph).

And yet the Council has not lived up to this commitment
when it comes to terror attacks against Israel. That
wilful disregard for the peace and security of the people
of Israel undermines the credibility of this institution
and casts doubt on its fidelity to the principles of the
Charter. In order to achieve the worthy goals of peace
and reconciliation, it is time to state the reality as it is,
end the politicization and stop singling out Israel.

Yet only this morning we witnessed here in
the Chamber how two members of the Security
Council - Venezuela and Malaysia 4 proved yet again
that singling out my country and ignoring Palestinian
terror attacks has become a common practice.
Ignoring terror when it is politically convenient only
encourages more brutality and more bloodshed. I call
on the Security Council to condemn by name those who
instigate violence and carry out terror attacks, whether
it is Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Da'esh or
Hamas, and hold them accountable.

Ignoring Palestinian accountability and supporting
rejectionist policies towards direct negotiations is
another example of overlooking the true spirit of the
Charter when it comes to Israel. Just this morning, in
a striking rejection of relentless international efforts
to broker peace negotiations, Palestinian Authority
Foreign Minister Riyad Al-Malki said,

"We will never go back and sit again in direct
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations."

This statement leaves no doubt as to the Palestinians'
intention and should be widely condemned.

The commitment of the Council to the purposes
and principles of the Charter will be measured by how
it responds to threats to peace and security and whether
it responds to all such threats. At a time when cruel
dictators engage in the mass murder of their own people
and fanatical groups spread their message of hatred and
intolerance by the sword, a united stand against terror
is needed now more than ever.

Millions around the world look to us to defend their
rights and their very lives, and they are losing faith.
We must do more to help them. For the sake of these
men, women and children, let us come together to meet
these crucial challenges and leave the next generation a
legacy equal to the vision of the United Nations Charter.

