Mr. Czaputowicz (Poland): Nuclear affairs are
back on top of the agenda of international politics and
every day brings news on nuclear issues. Politicians
attach the utmost importance to topics like the
denuclearization of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, the further implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and the erosion
ofthe Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty.
They have dominated international political discourse
in recent months. In the past year alone, the President of
Poland has twice had the occasion to speak on nuclear
non-proliferation in this forum (see S/PV.8160 and S/PV.8362).

There is no doubt that the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) has been
a fundamental document and remains the only global,
legally binding instrument that commits the nuclear-
weapon States to continuing negotiations towards
nuclear disarmament. It also requires all its States
parties to pursue general and complete disarmament
and to refrain from acquiring nuclear weapons. Since
its adoption, the NPT has become an important part of
international law and a universal standard. Over the
years, the NPT has proved its value in containing the
proliferation of nuclear weapons, setting standards of
responsible behaviour in that domain and providing
a platform for cooperation between nuclear- and
non-nuclear-weapon States.

The NPT has adapted successfully to the changing
circumstances. That has been possible thanks to the
existing instruments that have enabled consistent
improvements, in the form of the preparatory
committees and the review conferences, which have
made it possible to air ideas and to test various solutions.
Next year, we will celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of
NPT's entry into force.

The NPT regime has unfolded along three main
pillars: disarmament, non-proliferation and the
peaceful use of nuclear energy. All are mutually
enabling, reinforcing and balancing elements. The first
two aspects could be described as a work in progress,
at best. Despite the achievements in reducing nuclear
warheads and their means of delivery, further progress
remains a serious challenge. The main reason for that
is a very complicated and unpredictable international
security environment, which is not conducive to
pursuing further disarmament efforts.

Non-compliance is the most serious challenge that
the NPT is facing today. The failure of some States to
comply with the NPT's provisions and their safeguards
obligations - the case in point was the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea - erodes confidence and
undermines the goals of the Treaty.

The last pillar - the peaceful use of nuclear
energy - has, however, been the least controversial
and largely successful. Under the auspices of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, technical support
has been created. It offers a wide array of programmes
to support nuclear-related research and development,
national legislative frameworks, and international
cooperative efforts.

The NPT's efficiency must be strengthened, in our
opinion. It is the only comprehensive instrument aimed
at stopping the proliferation of nuclear weapons, while
preserving the right of States to pursue civil nuclear
energy. Thanks to the NPT regime, transparency has
immensely increased. The verification instruments are
becoming more and more effective. That would not be
possible without the consistent support of institutions,
including the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
and the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs.

We should focus on closing the gaps in the NPT
system. That includes working towards the entry into
force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, the
commencement of negotiations on a treaty banning the
production of fissile material for use in nuclear weapons
or other explosive devices - the fissile material cut-off
treaty - and the establishment of a robust and credible
verification regime of nuclear disarmament measures.
In that regard, we welcome the work of the International
Partnership for Nuclear Disarmament Verification and
the Group of Governmental Experts to consider the role
of verification in advancing nuclear disarmament, in
which Poland is actively engaged.

Let me address the challenges to the NPT regime
arising from East Asia, the Middle East and Europe.

First, the nuclear programme of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea still presents a challenge to
the NPT. Despite encouraging diplomatic developments
on the Korean peninsula, a lasting peace will not be
achieved without the denuclearization of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea in a complete, verifiable
and irreversible manner, in accordance with several
Security Council resolutions.

Secondly, it is in our common interest to stabilize
the situation in the Middle East, reduce tensions in the
region and, most importantly, to prevent the further
proliferation of nuclear weapons. In order to address
those concerns, Poland, together with the United States,
organized in Warsaw the Ministerial Conference to
Promote a Future of Peace and Security in the Middle
East. One of its deliverables was the decision to establish
a working group on curbing missile development
and proliferation.

Thirdly, we are firm in our conviction that Iran
must continue to fulfil all of its nuclear-related
commitments under the NPT, as well as the JCPOA.
In that regard, we welcome the International Atomic
Energy Agency's efforts to strictly monitor and verify
Iran's commitments. We should find a way forward
on the operationalization of a zone free of weapons
of mass destruction in the Middle East. New, creative
ideas based on a realistic evaluation of regional needs
are needed.

Fourthly, in Europe, a return to full compliance
by the Russian Federation is the only way to save the
INF Treaty. Unless the Russian Federation destroys
in a verifiable way all of its 9M729 missile systems,
it will bear the sole responsibility for the end of the
INF Treaty. That will have a significant impact on the
strategic stability of Europe and, as such, on the current
NPT review cycle.

Upholding the rules-based order reflects the
long-term objectives of the Polish security policy. My
country has been a committed and pragmatic supporter
of strengthening non-proliferation norms. Our
priorities focus on securing widespread and credible
verification mechanisms, better implementation of
safeguards, stronger risk-reduction measures and
tighter international cooperation in nuclear safety and
security. During Poland's chairmanship last year of the
second session of the Preparatory Committee for the
2020 NPT review conference, we outlined paths to a
successful outcome of the upcoming review conference
by presenting the Chair's summary and reflection on
the state of the NPT. We hope they will constitute a
point of departure for our successors in upholding the
integrity and credibility of the NPT and securing its
effective implementation.

Close cooperation between the Polish and Dutch
Chairs of the Preparatory Committees remains
fundamental in that respect. New mechanisms of
cooperation among the consecutive Chairs have
contributed to strengthening the review cycle. They
include regular consultations, an exchange of know-
how, the organization of regional conferences and
experts' support.

The NPT is not a perfect instrument, nor has its
implementation been perfect. However, without the
NPT, the world would have been much less stable and
secure. It is our collective duty to ensure its viability
in the years to come. The 2020 review conference must
be a collective success. To that end, we must focus on
common interests, build bridges where differences
persist and take bold steps where we see opportunities
for deeper and wider cooperation. Only then can we
live up to our common obligations.

