Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your friendly country's assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July. I would also like to thank His Excellency Prime
Minister Stefan Lofven for his personal participation
in part of the Council's work today. I also express
our appreciation for the convening of this open
debate on the subject of children and armed conflict
under the theme "Protecting children today prevents
conflicts tomorrow".

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia appreciates the
work of the United Nations and its agencies and the
important role they play to spare children the ravages
of war and the pain of the diasporas to which they are
exposed every day in different parts of the world. A
child is killed in Gaza. Another child is recruited in
Afghanistan. Yet another child is being armed in Sa'ada.
Children in Syria are being asphyxiated by toxic gases.
And many children's rights throughout the world are
violated by various terrorist organizations.

We very much appreciate the efforts made in the
preparation of the report of the Secretary -General on
today's topic (S/2018/465). We express our country's
support for all actions and precautionary measures
being taken to safeguard the safety of children, put an
end to the loss of life among civilians and prevent the
destruction of infrastructure.

The Palestinian people continue to face the most
heinous kind of occupation. The children of Gaza in
particular live under an extremely unjust embargo that
has been in place for more than 10 years. We witnessed
the Israeli occupation's defiance of the international
community and humanity itself several weeks ago
when in the course of several days it killed scores of
innocent children who were peacefully demonstrating
to express themselves and call for their rights. It is truly
painful to note that similar things are taking place at
the hands of Syrian authorities in Dar'a, which is the
cradle of the Syrian revolution. Syrian children took to
the streets in peaceful marches in that city to condemn
injustice and tyranny and call for their rights, justice
and a bright future. The regime responded with a level
of brutality that continues to this day.

We appreciate your initiative, Mr. President, in
putting forward resolution 2427 (2018) in order to
develop an international framework to protect children
from armed conflict. We hope that the resolution will
lead to supporting the task force for protecting children
in armed conflict. However, we had hoped that the
resolution would call on United Nations bodies dealing
with this issue to ensure the accuracy of the data
and statistics they gather and not to use one-side and
unreliable information. We had also hoped that it would
call for supporting the office on children and armed
conflict and providing it with human and financial
resources to make it self-sufficient in collecting
information and avoiding unreliable sources.

The record of my country and its partners in
the coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen is an
honourable one. The fact is that during the operation
to liberate Al-Hudaydah the Coalition has proved that
it is exercising a maximum degree of self-restraint and
abiding by all the relevant international conventions,
covenants and laws. The coalition also cooperated
continuously during the recent months with the United
Nations. That led to updating and upgrading the rules
of engagement and the identification of thousands
of prohibited sites, including schools, hospitals,
civilian places and other infrastructure. A unit was
establishment by the coalition to protect children
and to find and reintegrate children bearing arms
and return them through Yemeni authorities to their
families. The programmes carried out by the King
Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre have
become a model in providing children with protection
and rehabilitation. The Centre will cooperate with
the United Nations to share its experience throughout
the world.

The Houthi militias in Yemen, supported by Iran,
recruit children, force them to participate in the war and
use them as human shields. They also launch missiles
from civilian areas. All of that is a flagrant violation of
international law and humanitarian principles. We call
on the Council to condemn such acts in the strongest
terms, as well as the parties supporting the militias,
which continue to fail to implement international
resolutions. They are the same parties that export their
corrupt ideologies, destruction and discord to promote
their sectarian agendas and obscurantist thinking. They
do not take into account the well-being of children, who
are the flowers oflife and should be going to school and
playing in parks and playgrounds.

