The President: I thank the representative of the Czech
Republic for his kind words addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Botswana.

The Botswana delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. II), contained in document
S/1995/97. I wish to pay a special tribute to the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative for Angola, Mr.
Alioune Blondin Beye, for the excellent work they have
done in the search for peace in Angola. We are meeting
here today to launch UNAVEM. III thanks to their
resilience and tenacious efforts to find a solution to the
Angolan conflict.

The presence here today of the African Foreign
Ministers and the Secretary-General of the Organization
of African Unity is a clear indication of the importance
which Africa attaches to the Angolan conflict. The Lusaka
Protocol and the "Acordos de Paz" which preceded it are
the blueprints for the settlement of one of the most brutal
and destructive conflicts in Africa. It is our hope that our
Angolan brothers will, this time, faithfully adhere to the
spirit and letter of the commitments they have made in
these declarations of intent.

We also hope that they will leave no stone unturned
to ensure that UNAVEM. III becomes the success that the
United Nations and our tortured continent want it to be.
Nobody, and certainly none of us in southern Africa,
wants to hear anything about UNAVEM. IV. UNAVEM
III is Angola's last chance. It is our last chance.

The will of the international community to stay the
course with repeated, and costly, peace-keeping operations
has been tested beyond what is humanly acceptable.
Angola forms an integral part of southern Africa; it pains
our hearts to see the people of Angola continue to kill
each other with abandon in a region that is now otherwise
free of war, a region now marked by good governance
and the rule of law.

We want for the people of Angola what we cherish
most in Botswana: peace and stability, freedom and
development. In other words, we desire for the people of
Angola exactly the good things in life that we desire for
ourselves. We want Angola to become another political
success story in our region, following in the footsteps of
Malawi, South Africa and Mozambique. That would make
southern Africa a strong and viable economic proposition.

As I have already stated, there is general "peace-
keeping-operation fatigue" among members of the
international community. This is perfectly understandable:
peace-keeping operations, by their nature, are very
expensive enterprises with no immediate benefits or
returns. They are prone to breakdowns, as the experience
of the United Nations in Angola, Rwanda and Somalia -
to mention but three cases - has amply demonstrated.
They also become wasteful in material terms, and a
source of frustration. They divert scarce resources that
could otherwise be released for social and economic
development. It is for those reasons that our Angolan

 

brothers must understand why UNAVEM. III must on no
account fail.
I have so far placed the onus for the success of
UNAVEM. III on the people of Angola. I believe, however,
that the international community has an inescapable role to
play in the progress of Angola towards stable and lasting
peace, national reconciliation and reconstruction. After all,
some Members of the United Nations may be as
responsible as the people of Angola for the colossal
destruction and mayhem that have unquestionably befallen
that country. In that context, the international community
should get its act together and assist the people of Angola
in achieving peace.

In that regard, we wish to urge the Security Council
to guard against making the United Nations Mission in
Angola a victim of stringent conditionalities that could
impede its implementation. We should realize that the work
of the United Nations in Angola is not going to be easy.
Failure or success will depend to a large extent on the
patience, understanding and cooperation of all involved.
There will be no easy solutions. The fact that we are
discussing the deployment of UNAVEM. III today is a clear
indication that we are not dealing with a normal situation.
It calls for the exercise of restraint and flexibility in
monitoring the situation on the ground. In other words,
isolated and sporadic violations of the cease-fire provisions
should not be used as a pretext for the withdrawal of the
Mission.

We should also realize that each peace-keeping
operation is unique and that the experience gained in one
peace-keeping operation is not necessarily directly
replicable in others. Each peace-keeping operation is an
experience in itself. This should not be taken as advocacy
of or a licence for an open-ended peace-keeping mission.
We have noted the concerns of those who advocate "sunset
provisions" in all peace-keeping operations. There is no
problem with that approach so long as it is universally
applied. It would surely help make the parties to a conflict
understand that the United Nations does not have an infinite
amount of time at its disposal for such operations. At the
same time, however, we should guard against being overly
cautious, to the extent that we might threaten the success of
the Mission.

In short, all we are saying is that we should not
unintentionally impede the progress of UNAVEM. III with
too many conditionalities. We should also ensure that we
have in place post-conflict peace-building measures, which
are an indispensable condition for the stabilization of the
country. Thus, the staged implementation of the operation
at the beginning should be followed by phased withdrawal
of the Mission to help the people of Angola build mutual
trust and confidence and live peacefully together as good
neighbours.

To that end, there should be a continued, strong
United Nations presence in Angola beyond the expiry of
the mandate of UNAVEM. III to help the people of
Angola adjust to a new life. We are happy that
paragraphs 37 to 39 of the Secretary-General's report
cover some of these concerns.

Let me highlight once again the primary
responsibility of the people of Angola and their leaders
for the successful implementation of the provisions both
of the "Acordos de Paz" and the Lusaka Protocol. This
could be their last chance to receive the support of the
international community in the search for a peaceful
solution to their problem.

Equally, the United Nations has a responsibility to
the people of Angola. There should be no attempt or
threat to withdraw the Mission for flimsy reasons at any
stage in the implementation of the provisions of the
present resolution. It is the collective responsibility of all
involved to usher Angola into a new era of peace and
stability. We should do everything in our power to ensure
that we succeed this time.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The Minister of External Relations of Angola has
asked to make a statement. I call upon him now.

