Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Madam President, I would like to join the others in
expressing my gratitude to you for having organized
this debate, which shows the concern of Colombia and
his Government, as well as your own concern, for this
topic. I would also like to salute our colleague
Ambassador Valdivieso, who concludes four years of
brilliant action in this Organization, having presided
over the Security Council during a month when he has
had to deal with some very difficult issues.

This item is important for my country. My
country shares the concern for human security. Only in
recent years has the Security Council reacted in a
sustained fashion to the challenges raised in this area.
Three years ago, during the first debate, we had just
begun to warn about the need for a systematic
treatment of the situation of civilians, pointing out that
they were the direct and favourite targets of almost all
the factions in the conflicts.

I must also acknowledge Canada for its efforts to
ensure that this item receives regular consideration in
the Council. Its tenacity is bearing fruit.

The present debate is the fourth regular open
meeting of the Security Council on this item. We have
before us, and we are proceeding to consider, the third
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We should remember that in
his earlier reports the Secretary-General described the
grave situation of civilians and made recommendations
for confronting it successfully. The third report shows
that today we have managed to establish in the Security
Council the systematic treatment of the situation of
civilians in armed conflicts. This development can be
seen in the applicable norms as well as in the work of
the United Nations bodies.

The report now is no longer another compilation
of urgent measures that have to be adopted, but rather a
progress report - a review of the progress, difficulties

and new developments that turn up in the application of
these measures. In other words, we have made steady
progress towards the establishment of a practice of
protecting civilian populations, and this has to be
welcomed. Now, we have to focus most of our attention
on operative and systematic action.

The report points out that the sustainability of
processes in a transition to peace requires practical
measures in three key spheres. These measures are
increasingly seen as preconditions for lasting peace.

The responsibility of a State in protecting its
population is a first point that we would like to
reiterate. Already, when the Council first addressed the
question, my country focused on this aspect. It is States
that have the primary responsibility of respecting, and
ensuring respect for, international humanitarian law in
all circumstances and with regard for all individuals
under their jurisdiction. This is not in conflict with
State sovereignty. On the contrary, it is the most natural
expression of that sovereignty.

Another problem is raised with the arrival of
assistance to needy populations, often hampered by
obstructive actions such as blockades and curfews. A
central factor is the lack of formal contacts with non-
State agents. Therefore it is necessary that
humanitarian agents establish systematic contacts with
the belligerent factions in order to negotiate important
decisions.

This implies that the humanitarian agent must be
perceived as being neutral. This can be achieved more
easily when dialogue becomes regular and is supported
by framework agreements that guide its development.
We appreciate the usefulness of the Aide Memoire in
this respect, as well as the development of a manual on
the conditions that should govern relations with armed
groups.

The safety of humanitarian personnel is also
relevant in this regard. Like civilians, United Nations
staff and associated personnel and humanitarian
workers are often direct targets of aggression. This
impedes assistance, limits access to populations in need
and undermines the efforts of the Organization.
Peacekeeping operations should continue to include
plans for the protection and safety of personnel, who
must also be adequately trained to avoid abuses.

An important legal aspect of the protection of
humanitarian personnel involves the responsibility of
the host country, to which I have referred. Argentina is
working with other members of the United Nations to
improve and extend the legal protection stemming from
the 1994 Convention. On various occasions, the
Security Council has recommended doing the same,
including at the open debate held in February 2000
during my country's presidency of the Council.

Separating civilians from armed elements is an
increasingly complicated and relevant subject.
Experience shows that it is essential to disarm, separate
and intern combatants, as well as to offer them work or
educational alternatives. It is also necessary to move
refugee camps away from borders, where they are
exposed to attacks from neighbouring countries, and to
help States hosting large groups of refugees. The
efforts of civilian police tend to be determining factors
in these situations - as my country knows first-hand
as a result of its ongoing contributions of significant
numbers of civilian police to United Nations
peacekeeping missions.

Justice-based national reconciliation is another
aspect of the protection of civilians. Conflicts cause
great harm to the social fabric of a country that can
only be repaired by rendering justice and
demonstrating that there is no room for impunity.
Efforts in that regard should be geared towards
achieving lasting peace on the basis of social
reconciliation.

In the last decade, we have tried out various
jurisdictional formulas with regard to societies
emerging from serious conflict. Tribunals with
exclusive jurisdictions were created for very serious
crimes committed on a given territory. The Members of
the United Nations have also signed an agreement to
create an international tribunal. The idea of using
national tribunals enjoying international support has
also been studied. Finally, the International Criminal
Court was established, which entered into force this
year and which constitutes a powerful tool to
strengthen human rights. Moreover, national
reconciliation of a society in conflict can also be
manifested through truth commissions. As the
Secretary-General has pointed out, all of those
tribunals and mechanisms aim at striking a balance
between the need to render justice and settle accounts
and the pressure that exists to overcome divisions.

Of course, those international jurisdictions do not
represent the full range of the administration of justice,
as they only address the most serious of crimes and
represent a small, albeit most sensitive, part of the
overall administration of justice in a given country.
Local tribunals must also be strengthened, as they are
closely associated with the viability of institutions and
the rule of law.

One thing is inescapable, and the Security
Council must be very clear about it: reconciliation is
impossible where impunity rules the day. There will
never be true peace so long as there is impunity.

In conclusion, we have noted the introduction of
a new element in the report of the Secretary-General,
namely, the mention of the effects of terrorism on the
protection of civilian populations. Terrorism is a crime
that cannot be justified under any circumstance or for
any reason. Attacks aimed at terrorizing civilian
populations brutally ignore the rights of civilians. We
welcome the inclusion of that recognition in the report.
My country is particularly sensitive to this issue. In
that respect, I would like to mention the terrorist
attacks experienced by the Republic of Argentina in
1992 and 1994, which were directed, respectively,
against the Israeli embassy in Buenos Aires and the
AMIA Jewish Centre, which is the most important
mutual association of Argentine Jewry. The Jewish
community was the victim of acts of brutality that
claimed over 100 lives and produced thousands of
injuries.

