Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I am taking the
floor to explain Pakistan's vote. Pakistan is not a
signatory to the Rome Statute and thus not a member of
the International Criminal Court (ICC). However, we
recognize the rights and obligations of the States that
are members of the ICC.

Pakistan voted in favour of the draft resolution
before us today for the following reasons. The African
Union as a whole, and unanimously, has repeatedly
asked the Security Council to defer the cases against
Kenya's President and Deputy President, in accordance
with article 16 of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, for a period of one year. The African
Union has made a determination that the proceedings
of the ICC may pose a threat to the efforts to promote
peace and national healing and reconciliation in Kenya.
It has further determined that Kenya is a front-line State
in the fight against terrorism at the regional, continental
and international levels, as was demonstrated by the
terrorist attacks in Nairobi in September, and that the
ICC proceedings against the President and Deputy
President of Kenya will distract and prevent them from
fulfilling their constitutional responsibilities, including
the oversight of national and regional security affairs.
That request was made on sound and solid strategic
political and legal grounds. Its logic is compelling.

In making that request, the Government of Kenya
and the African Union have been fully conscious of the
complexities of the case and its repercussions for peace
and security in the region. The African Union is a close
partner of the Security Council in the maintenance of
regional and international peace and security. Almost
two-thirds of the issues on the Council's agenda relate
to Africa. In addressing those issues, the support
and involvement of the African Union and Africa's
subregional organizations are crucial. The African
Union has actively cooperated with the international
community, the United Nations and the ICC to end
impunity and administer international criminal justice.
In all the eight cases before the ICC, the African Union
has provided critical assistance to the Court.

The African Union has also reached out to the
Security Council and engaged it. We appreciated the
detailed briefings to the Council from the ministerial
delegation led by the Ethiopian Minister for Foreign
Affairs on 31 October. The group drew the Council's
attention to the peace and security challenges in the Horn
of Africa. The members of the Council are unanimous
in recognizing the crucial role being played by Kenya
in countering the terrorist threat in the region and in
promoting peace and stability in Somalia. We have
a shared desire to further strengthen the cooperation
between the African Union and the Security Council.

The proceedings of the International Criminal
Court in the Kenyan case illustrate a tension between
demands for justice by international courts and respect
for democratic choice for the people of Kenya. That
is a new situation; therefore, there should be a new
solution that addresses that genuine political and legal
predicament.

From the strictly legal standpoint, the principle
of complementarity is important. The International
Criminal Court is a court of last resort. The primacy
of national jurisdiction needs to be respected. The legal
norms of immunity have further complicated the case.
The core legal argument is thus the functionality of the
offices of the elected President and Deputy President of
Kenya. Demands for criminal justice and international
prosecutions should help, not hinder, efforts undertaken
to create a stable order, reconciliation and sustainable
peace.

A provision is already available in article 16 of the
Rome Statute for the deferral of the case for a year and
its renewal. That article can be justifiably invoked to
reconcile the demands ofjustice and the requirements
for peace and stability in the region. The considerations
that enabled the Court to postpone by four months the
case of the Kenyan President, primarily on the grounds
of the functionality of his office, could also provide for
a longer deferral, as requested by Kenya.

In the light of all this, we supported the draft
resolution on the request for the deferral of the Kenyan
case. The draft resolution reaffirms the commitment
of the case to end impunity and highlights various
developments, including the cooperation of Kenya with
the International Criminal Court during the past five
years. While the draft resolution could not be adopted,
we hope that the dialogue between the Council and the
African Union will continue in order to find a pragmatic
solution acceptable to everyone. That would be in the
best interests of the Council, the African Union and the
Court.

We voted in favour of the draft resolution to express
our strong solidarity with the African Union and Kenya
on political and legal grounds.

