Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): It is indeed with a heavy
heart that we address today the unspeakable suffering,
death and devastation of Palestinians wrought by the
inhuman, indiscriminate, brutal and disproportionate
military aggression and assault by a Member State
that is not following the rule of law and international
standards.

Prior to coming to this meeting, I glanced at a
newspaper headline stating, "While hundreds of women
and children are dying in Gaza, the global conscience
is quiet", and it carried three pictures of three world
leaders. One leader kept his eyes closed, another kept
his ears shut and the third one kept his mouth shut. I
hope that picture does not reflect a global leadership
characterized by inactivity even as unarmed fellow
human beings are being slaughtered mercilessly. I am
surprised that the leaders that always teach us the value
of human rights are now simply remaining quiet and
keeping mum.

I thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this open debate and allowing us to vent our frustration
and helplessness. We know that this debate will not stop
the brutality against innocent civilians in Palestine;
however, it may speak to the moral, ethical and human
rights values of the powerful. We feel better, at least,
that history is not repeating itself. When the Jews were
being mercilessly persecuted under the Nazis, hardly
anyone raised their voice. Here we have been given
a chance to raise our voice in frustration and also to
convey our solidarity with the Palestinian people and
their just cause.

The graphic and disturbing pictures of helpless
Palestinians exposed to Israel's full-scale military
onslaught greatly shock our conscience. We are no
less pained to see the inaction and helplessness of the
Security Council plus that of powerful leaders, yet
some lip service is still better than nothing so as to
give hope to those who are imprisoned in Gaza, where
more than 600 innocent lives have been lost. Collateral
damage has turned vibrant Gaza City into a dustbin,
destroying the water, sewerage and electricity systems
as well as hospitals. It is no wonder that a group of
young Americans of Philadelphia have urged conscious
citizens to do their best to end the modern-day apartheid
in Palestine.

The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs confirmed that four out ofevery five Palestinians
killed during Israel's ongoing military offensive in
Gaza have been civilians, including children, women
and elderly. Is this not genocide?

We do not deny Israel's right to exist in peace or
to self-defence. But we strongly condemn its practice
of routinely killing innocent Palestinians under various
pretexts. It is unfortunate that Israel has been using the
pretext of self-defence to kill people living under its
own occupation on a whim, with impunity and without
consequences. Its practice of cleansing Palestinians
from that sacred land under various pretexts must not
be acceptable to any.

More importantly, the advocates who so
vociferously champion the right of Israel to self-defence
often forget that the poor Palestinians also have the
right to live, not in the shadow of lurking death and
perpetual occupation, but as normal human beings with
equal dignity, freedom and security in peace, just like
all Israelis and like all free people on the planet Earth.
The occupation forces are trampling on that right
every day. How long will the international community
deliberately keep its eyes, ears and mouths shut and
refuse to see, hear and speak about the tragedy daily
unfolding in occupied Palestine?

Israel is currently attacking a population of
1.8 million that has no army, no navy, no air force,
no mechanized military units, no command and
control and no heavy artillery. Israel pretends that this
indiscriminate slaughter is a war. But as celebrated
journalist Chris Hedges puts it in his recent post on
www.TruthDig.com ,"only the most self-deluded
supporter of Israel is fooled". The rockets fired at the
Israeli civilian population -which we certainly do
not support, but rather condemn-cannot remotely be
compared to the 1,000-pound iron fragmentation bombs
that have been dropped in large numbers on crowded
Palestinian neighbourhoods; to the forced removal of
some 400,000 Palestinians from their homes; to the
wounding of more than 7,000 of them from missile
attacks fired by sophisticated Israeli F-16 fighter jets
and Apache helicopters; or to the destruction of basic
infrastructure, as well as 100,000 homes, in the wake
of indiscriminate aggression.

We condemn violence and destruction, and we urge
the Council to do so as well. The disproportionate use
of force against an unarmed civilian population is in
breach of the Geneva Convention and international
human rights and humanitarian laws.

Despite repeated calls for a ceasefire by the
Secretary-General and a few other leaders, Israel has
continued its ground offensive in Gaza, adding to the
death and destruction. We urge the Security Council
to adopt a binding resolution to enforce a ceasefire and
immediately end the hostilities so that no more blood,
whether Palestinian or Israeli, is shed. We express our
sympathy and condolences to the families of the dead.
The Security Council has a Charter responsibility and
obligation to secure peace by ending aggression and
addressing threats to peace. We hope that the Council
will rise to the occasion and take effective measures to
bring the bloodshed to an end.

In conclusion, as we have repeatedly said, there
can be no military solution to this conflict. Military
intervention, in particular the use of brute military force,
often exacerbates instead of ameliorating the conditions
for peace. Unfortunately, a political settlement of this
protracted crisis is nowhere in sight. With the latest
round of American mediation now dead and the Quartet
road map in limbo for the past few years, it is incumbent
on the Security Council to perform the role of honest
broker. It is a pity that for the past 66 years, the Council
has often hesitated to take concrete action, even when
its own resolutions have been blatantly flouted when
they could have meaningfully contributed to a fair
resolution of the issue.

This culture of impunity must end and the rule of law
and justice must prevail. We hope that the devastating
escalation of violence can serve as a wake-up call for
the Council to work vigorously to end Israel's military
occupation and bring about the beginning of a two-
State solution that guarantees the safety and security
of the residents of both the State ofIsrael and Palestine,
with its capital in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, so that they may
live side by side in peace and harmony.

