The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Chile, Cote d'Ivoire,
Egypt, Ghana, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Morocco, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Peru, Republic of Korea, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland and
Ukraine in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. James D.
Wolfensohn, President of the World Bank, who will
participate in this meeting via videolink.

It was so decided.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/316, which contains a letter dated
16 May 2005 from the Permanent Representative of
Denmark to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General.

I would like to open the debate by making a
statement in my national capacity as the representative
of Denmark.

This open debate on post-conflict peacebuilding
offers an opportunity to discuss one of the key
challenges that confront us. Peacebuilding is a
multidisciplinary task involving many States and
institutional actors, as well as many instruments. The
diversity of stakeholders is reflected in the speakers
invited today and in the wide interest aroused by the
debate.

Under the auspices of the President of the
General Assembly, discussions are currently taking
place on the reform of the United Nations, including
the proposal by the Secretary-General to establish a
Peacebuilding Commission. Denmark sincerely hopes
that those discussions will have a positive outcome.

The primary responsibility of the Security
Council is the maintenance of international peace and
security. The nexus between security and development
and the importance of addressing both when building
lasting peace are facts that we constantly need to keep
in mind.

Denmark has issued a discussion paper for
today's debate, which sets out some of the main
challenges we see on the road ahead. I would like to
elaborate on a few of them.

The aim of peacebuilding is, first and foremost,
to ensure the transition from conflict to peace,
development and reconstruction, and to prevent the
recurrence of conflict. Efforts in the immediate post-
conflict phase have often been too slow. We have
already seen that insufficient international efforts in the
post-crisis phase can result in a relapse into conflict.
This is particularly true in Africa. If the international
community is not able to act swiftly, the fragile peace
is at risk, leading to a loss of more lives.

Although the United Nations has made progress
lately in strengthening its coherence in post-conflict
situations, significant challenges remain in the policy,
institutional and financial fields.

First, on policy, we need to ensure local
ownership of the process of devising and implementing
post-conflict peacebuilding strategies so as to make
them sustainable. Truly participatory dialogues
between the United Nations and local stakeholders
need to be developed to reflect the fact that the country
in question and its people carry the main responsibility
for their own future. This would also impose a
responsibility on local authorities to cooperate with
and facilitate access for the international community.
The regional perspective is often underestimated
in the attempt to address a particular conflict. The
solution is comprehensive strategies that address the
specifics of the conflict and, when appropriate, deal
with the regional dimensions. Such strategies must also
include cross-cutting issues, such as small arms;
demobilization, disarmament and the reintegration of
former combatants (DDR); the protection of women
and children; and the repatriation of refugees and
internally displaced persons.

In West Africa, where soldiers of fortune,
mercenaries, and sanctions-busters are taking their
deadly business from one theatre of conflict to the
next, we should focus more on tackling the cross-
border issues by, inter alia, aiming for a comprehensive
subregional strategy on disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration. Otherwise, there is a risk that the
new DDR process in Cote d'Ivoire, which involves
large cash handouts, will draw opportunistic ex-
combatants from neighbouring Liberia and Sierra
Leone.

Regional organizations in different parts of the
world are taking on greater and greater responsibilities
in the area of peacebuilding. This development should
be welcomed and encouraged. We have seen the
European Union taking responsibility. Now the African
Union is taking on a greater role, particularly in the
Sudan. It is important to involve the regional
organizations and support them in taking a leadership
role.

That is exactly what we have been doing, both
bilaterally and through the European Union vis-a-vis
the African Union (AU). We hope to see substantial
contributions to the extended pledging conference for
the AU Mission in the Sudan in Addis Ababa today.

Most post-conflict situations have what one might
call a rule-of-law vacuum. The United Nations must be
able to more effectively help fill this vacuum. A key
prerequisite in this regard is building national judicial
institutions, strengthening governance and ensuring
transitional justice for crimes committed during
conflicts. These efforts require both increased technical
capacity and political will for reform in post-conflict
societies. I commend the Secretary-General's
leadership in that field, and would welcome thoughts
on creating a focal point for the rule of law.

Secondly, on the institutional set-up, all relevant
actors must be brought in. It is hugely important to
ensure systematic contributions from United Nations
development and humanitarian agencies in the United
Nations integrated mission planning process for post-
conflict situations under the auspices of the
Department for Peacekeeping Operations.

We must make better use of the knowledge and
experience already accumulated by the United Nations
country teams. To this end, a system of recording and
disseminating best practices should be devised.

The objective of coordination at Headquarters
level and in the field is to ensure the best possible
outcome through efficient use of available donor
resources with no duplication of effort.

That leads me to my final point, on funding. All
efforts at keeping and building the peace will come to
naught if we are not ready to provide the operations
with a sound financial basis. Failure to reintegrate
demobilized and disarmed combatants and to provide
them with an alternative livelihood is one of the most
frequent causes of resumed conflict. Training, job
creation and other measures aimed at general growth in
post-conflict situations must be subject to much closer
cooperation with the international financial institutions
and the United Nations funds and programmes. We
further believe that at least the initial costs of planning
repatriation and reintegration should also be funded
through assessed contributions.

The mandate of the recently approved United
Nations operation in the Sudan serves as a perfect
example of a well-integrated mission, where
peacebuilding activities such as security sector reform,
DDR, the rule of law and governance are given equal
weight with military aspects such as ceasefire
monitoring and separation of forces. It is, however, of
key importance that the international community be
ready to provide the funding pledged at the donor
conference on 11 April in Oslo to initiate the
implementation of these activities, particularly in
southern Sudan. Otherwise the North-South Agreement
may start to unravel.

To sum up, we need to develop peacebuilding
strategies that, first, aim for local ownership and
regional engagement; secondly, are coordinated
between all actors in the field and at the Headquarters
level and that make efficient use of the available
resources within and outside the United Nations; and,
thirdly, ensure sufficient financial means and long-term
donor commitment.

I hope that our debate may serve to further
strengthen the substantive case for establishing a
Peacebuilding Commission at the September summit.
I now resume my responsibility as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the Deputy Secretary-General.


