Mr. Mladenov: For the people of Gaza yesterday
was a day of tragedy. There are no other words
to describe what actually happened. There is no
justification for the killing. There is no excuse. It serves
no one. It certainly does not serve the cause of peace.
My heart weighs heavy today as I begin by expressing
my condolences to the families of those killed yesterday
and over the past six weeks of demonstrations in Gaza.
Who can possibly find words to console the mother of
a child who has been killed? I call on all to join me
today in condemning in the strongest possible terms the
actions that have led to the loss of many lives in Gaza.
Israel has a responsibility to calibrate its use of force
and not to use lethal force except as a last resort under
the imminent threat of death or serious injury. It must
protect its borders, but it must do so proportionally and
investigate every incident that has led to a loss ofhuman
life. Hamas, which has controlled Gaza for more than a
decade, must not use the protests as cover in an attempt
to place bombs at the fence and create provocations. Its
operatives must not hide among the demonstrators and
risk the lives of civilians.

Tens of thousands of people in Gaza have been
protesting for more six weeks to date - people who
live in abject poverty, who survive in prison-like
conditions and who live with no prospect for the day
after. Those people want their voices heard. They want
a future beyond mere survival. Their leaders have failed
them. The promises that they have made to them have
not been delivered on, and now the people are angry.
But their anger, if not channelled in a constructive
manner, will lead to more destruction and suffering.
Whatever we may think of their motivation, we have an
obligation to hear their plight. They have lived through
three devastating conflicts. Their lives are marked by
personal anguish, scarred by a national tragedy and
marred by daily suffering caused by leaders who use
them for their own political ends. For 10 years, they
have lived under the control of Hamas, while separated
from their families in the West Bank and isolated behind
crippling Israeli closures. The cycle ofviolence in Gaza
needs to end, and for if it to end it requires every single
one of us to put their best efforts into preventing an
explosion that could drag the whole region into another
deadly confrontation. The international community
must step in and prevent war. We need to move forward
quickly and effectively with regard to all the projects
that we have discussed for many months to solve the
energy, water and health crisis of the population.
We can do that only in coordination with Israel, the
Palestinian Authority and Egypt, but, before all of that,
the senseless Violence needs to stop.

Yesterday an estimated 35,000 people participated
in demonstrations in Gaza, as did hundreds more in
the West Bank cities of Ramallah, Bethlehem, Hebron,
Jericho, Nablus and East Jerusalem - as part of the
Great March of Return, as well as in protest of the
relocation of the United States Embassy from Tel AViV
to Jerusalem. Although no fatalities were reported
in the West Bank, where limited clashes took place
between demonstrators and Israeli security forces at
several checkpoints, the situation in Gaza deteriorated
throughout the day, particularly along the perimeter
fence. According to various reports, at least 60 people
were killed throughout yesterday, including six
children, and more than 1,300 people were reportedly
injured by live ammunition and rubber bullets. One
Israeli soldier was wounded and taken to the hospital
for treatment. Since the beginning of the protests on
30 March, more than 100 people have been killed,
including 13 children, over half of whom were killed
yesterday alone. That constituted the bloodiest day in
Gaza, with the highest death and injury toll since the
2014 conflict.

Hamas and Islamic Jihad have acknowledged that
members of their organizations were among those
killed, and the Israel Defence Forces (IDF) claims that
at least 24 had links to militant activities. Under the
cover of the protests, Hamas and other militants have
also engaged in violent and provocative acts, including
the placing of improvised explosive devices (IEDs)
at the perimeter fence and other attempts to breach it
with the intent of perpetrating attacks. According to
the United Nations Department of Safety and Security,
at least one IED reportedly detonated against an IDF
vehicle during an incursion. Eighteen airs trikes and
eight shelling incidents were also carried out by the
Israeli security forces on 26 Hamas targets in retaliation
for what Israel classified as violent acts.

Against that backdrop, hospitals in Gaza report an
unfolding crisis involving essential medical supplies.
Drugs and equipment are needed to treat those who
have been injured. The United Nations Humanitarian
Coordinator, who is currently in Gaza, visited Al-Shifa
hospital yesterday, where there is a shortage of beds for
the number of wounded arriving from the protests at the
fence. He witnessed at first-hand patients being brought
in on stretchers and left in the hospital's courtyard,
which was being used as a triage area. I appeal to Israel,
Egypt and the Palestinian authorities to facilitate the
exit of the seriously wounded from Gaza for medical
treatment, and I welcome steps reportedly taken by
Egypt to that end.

I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the bravery of the medical staff who continue to
put their own lives at risk, such as those working for
the Palestine Red Crescent Society, who have endured
casualties of their own. I am deeply saddened to note
the death of another health worker yesterday during the
demonstrations, and reiterate the inviolability of health
facilities and medical personnel under international
law. Journalists have also been among those injured in
yesterday's demonstrations.

The dire humanitarian situation in Gaza, about
which I have reported time and again in this Chamber
over the past year, has been compounded by the fact
that the Palestinian Authority continues to withhold
the payment of salaries to some 20,000 civil service
employees in Gaza. To further complicate a dismal
picture, on 4 and 11 May, demonstrators destroyed
most of the facilities on the Gaza side of the Kerem
Shalom crossing - the main point of entry for goods
and materials into the Gaza Strip. Members of my team
conducted an initial assessment of the site, and I can
report that the damage is extensive and will hinder
deliveries of fuel and much-needed goods to Gaza for
weeks to come. As we speak, the United Nations is
working with Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
bring in life-saving assistance, despite the destruction
and extensive damage to the crossing.

Whoever orchestrated that destruction shares in
the responsibility for worsening the suffering of the
2 million people in Gaza. The Secretary-General and
I have repeatedly called on all to exercise restraint, for
all the necessary steps to be taken to avoid escalation
and for all incidents to be fully investigated. I have
engaged with all sides to that effect. Public statements
and messages by Hamas indicate the intention to use
mass protests to infiltrate into Israel and attack Israelis.
Such statements and action endanger the lives of both
Israelis and Palestinians and cannot be justified. I
wish to underline yet again that it is imperative that
civilians, particularly children, not be targeted by
anyone, used as cover for militant activity or be put at
risk or endangered in any way.

As the violence continues, technical problems have
also resurfaced in the form of a further decrease in
electricity supply, leading to approximately 22 hours
of blackouts in Gaza. That is a critical reminder of the
fragility of Gaza's infrastructure. Starting tomorrow,
the United Nations, together with international
partners, will need to focus and redouble efforts to
implement projects that will have an immediate impact
on improving the electricity, water and health situations
as a matter of urgency.

The developments in Gaza are an extremely
painful reminder of the devastating consequences of
the continued absence of peace between Israelis and
Palestinians. I would like to reiterate that message,
particularly as Palestinians commemorate Nakba Day,
or the day of the catastrophe, by which they remember
the displacement during the war of 1948-1949, and as
they continue to demonstrate in Gaza and the West
Bank over the coming days. We must step up our efforts
in support of a peaceful resolution to the conflict. We
must collectively call on all to refrain from unilateral
measures that only steer us away from a peace process,
and instead work to end the occupation and advance
the goal of a just and sustainable peace, culminating
ultimately in two States - Israel and Palestine, of
which Gaza is an integral part - living side by side in
peace, security and prosperity.

