Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Even before statements by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea on their intention to
conduct a nuclear experiment and immediately after
Pyongyang had acknowledged taking this irresponsible
and destabilizing step, the Russian Federation
emphasized that any actions of this nature - whatever
the reasons behind them - could complicate the
prospects for a settlement of the nuclear problem on
the Korean peninsula, which is already fraught with
threats to peace, security and stability in the region,
and could undermine the non-proliferation regime.

Based on this understanding, we have
consistently called for a strong response on the part of
the Security Council to this serious challenge to the
entire international community, but at the same time a
response that is carefully vetted and targeted to prevent
further escalation of tension. We can only regret that
the North Korean leadership ignored the warnings
contained in the official presidential statement of the
Security Council adopted on 6 October 2006
(S/PRST/2006/4l) on the deleterious consequences
which would inevitably flow from a nuclear test,
especially those that would befall the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea itself.

We all find ourselves in an extraordinary
situation, one which requires us to adopt measures that
are just as extraordinary. Having supported today's
unanimous resolution, which was agreed to in intense
negotiations in which all members of the Council
participated constructively, we wish to note the
following.

The resolution reflects a concern for the
humanitarian consequences of these restrictive
measures. In principle, it is extremely important that
that be taken into account in the relevant United
Nations decisions and that we carefully weigh the
consequences on a case-by-case basis. In reacting this
way to this emergency situation, we reaffirm our
principled position that any sanctions measures
introduced by the Security Council should not remain
in place indefinitely and should be lifted if the
Council's demands are met.

We also believe it necessary to emphasize that,
when the Council is working to reach agreement on
common approaches, in which all interested parties are
involved, the decision on this type of problem by no
means promotes the practice of sanctions measures
being taken by Governments in a one-sided way.

The resolution adopted today contains a carefully
studied and targeted set of measures to deal with the
main problem, which is to bring the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to immediately correct its
dangerous course in the nuclear area, to rejoin the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and, without precondition, to declare that it is ready to
participate in the six-party talks. Achieving this goal,
which arises directly from the resolution, can be done
only through political and diplomatic means.

These measures with respect to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea must be implemented
under the strict and objective control of the Security
Council and the sanctions committee established by
this resolution. It is important that, as a result of the
resolution, full implementation by the Democratic
People's Republic of its provisions, including
resumption of the six-party talks, leads to a decision by
the Council to lift the sanctions regime it has imposed.

We hope that in Pyongyang the authorities will
understand the collective position of the international
community reflected in this resolution and that they
will take practical steps aimed at achieving the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and the
strengthening of peace and stability in north-east Asia.
Russia will continue to do everything it can to achieve
these goals.

