The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Georgia,
Guatemala, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar,
Norway, Pakistan, the Philippines, Portugal, Qatar,
the Republic of Korea, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, the Sudan,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet Nam and
Yemen to participate in this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the observer of
the Observer State of Palestine to the United Nations
to participate in this meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Virginia
Gamba, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict; Ms. Henrietta
Fore, Executive Director of the United Nations
Children's Fund; Ms. Mariatu Kamara, UNICEF
Canada Ambassador; and Mr. Majok Peter Awan, child
protection professional.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following individuals to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Gerton van den Akker, Charge d'Affaires ad
interim of the Delegation of the European Union to
the United Nations; and Ms. Clare Hutchinson, NATO
Secretary General's Special Representative for Women,
Peace and Security.

I propose that the Council invite the observer ofthe
Observer State of the Holy See to the United Nations
to participate in this meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/509, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on Children and armed conflict,
and document S/2019/605, which contains a letter dated
30 July 2019 from the Permanent Representative of
Poland addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
a concept paper on the item under consideration.

I now give the floor to Ms. Gamba.

