Mr. Berry (Canada): Thank you, Mr. President,
for providing an opportunity to contribute to this
important debate and for the leadership the United
Kingdom has shown, including by launching this
discussion last year. We join those who have already
congratulated the Secretary-General on his excellent
report on the rule of law and transitional justice in
conflict and post-conflict societies (S/2004/616). The
report eloquently draws our attention to the challenges
that we, the international community, face in a volatile
world. Today I would like to touch on a number of
issues that are of particular importance to the
Government of Canada.

(spoke in French)

The rule of law is a profoundly practical idea, one
that provides security and structure in a volatile world.
While accessible and just laws are the foundation of
the rule of law, it is in the consistent and just
application of those laws that the rule of law attains its
highest expression. To fail to apply the law to grave
international crimes such as genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes is the very negation of the
rule of law.

(spoke in English)

It is for that reason that Canada urges all States to
help strengthen the institutions that are at the forefront
of the campaign against impunity. The International
Criminal Court (ICC) stands out as the embodiment of
the hopes and aspirations of the victims of the most
serious international crimes. It offers us the best hope
for ending impunity. It is therefore not surprising that it
has so rapidly gained the support of a majority of
United Nations Member States. We call on the States
that have not already done so to ratify and implement
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
We also call on the Council to exercise its authority
under the Rome Statute to refer situations to the ICC
when appropriate. Through cooperation between the
Security Council and the parties to the Rome Statute,
we can build a reliable and responsible system to bring
the world's worst criminals to justice and to protect
their victims.

(spoke in French)

All too often, the victims of the worst
international crimes are women and girls. The fourth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security, at the end of this
month will provide the Council the opportunity to
recall that it has recognized and affirmed the
importance of taking gender perspectives into account
in all aspects of peace-building. Integrating a gender
perspective into the work of international criminal
tribunals demands that violence against women be
treated with at least the same seriousness as violence
against men.

(spoke in English)

The work being done by the International
Criminal Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda is also a major contribution to our efforts to
combat impunity, but the operation of the Tribunals
costs money. The timely payment of assessed
contributions by all States is especially critical at this
time, as the Tribunals embark on the final stages of
their work, with a view to completing their mandates
by the year 2010. Similarly, the Special Court for
Sierra Leone has entered a critical phase in its
mandate. Now is not the time to waver in our support.
These tribunals match deeds to words in fostering the
rule of law internationally. We must do the same by
ensuring that our rhetorical support for those bodies is
matched by our financial contributions. These courts
are, after all, the rule of law in action.

(spoke in French)

We know that international tribunals can try only
those most responsible for heinous crimes. The primary
responsibility for prosecuting alleged offenders lies
with States themselves. The implementation of the
Rome Statute offers States the opportunity to enhance
their domestic legal system and to ensure that criminal

trials are conducted in a manner consistent with
standards agreed upon by the international community.
Some States may require assistance in adapting their
judicial systems to prosecute those responsible for war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. Canada
has participated in preliminary discussions with a
number of interested States about means of doing so,
and will continue to work with others in order to
provide that assistance.

(spoke in English)

This report helps us focus our minds on the
efforts and challenges ahead. However, our work is not
over. Terrible conflicts will continue to occur. Crimes
such as genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes will continue to be committed. Those acts will
not immobilize us. Rather, they will galvanize us to
ensure that the rule of law is not relegated to the status
of an abstract concept, but instead serves as a guiding
principle that animates our work.

