Mr. Takasu (Japan): I, too, thank Special
Representative Staffan de Mistura for his very helpful
briefing this morning. Let me also take this opportunity
to thank him and all those who made the Council's
mission to Afghanistan possible: the members of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA); the Government, Parliament and civil
society of Afghanistan; and, of course, the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). I
would ask Ambassador Tanin to convey our deep
11
appreciation to President Karzai and his colleagues in
the Government.

As Ambassador Apakan made very clear in his
introductory statement, the trip was quite useful not
only to the members of the delegation, but also to the
Council's future work on Afghanistan. We are very
much grateful to the Turkish delegation for its
excellent work in coordinating this trip.

When the Council discussed the issue of
Afghanistan in March, I emphasized the need for the
further Afghanization of efforts to address issues in the
country. At the London Conference, the Afghan
Government made a commitment to enhancing its own
efforts towards Afghanization. The international
community agreed to back such efforts.

We seem to have been on the right track so far.
Efforts on the Afghan side have been moving in this
direction in such areas as advancing reconciliation and
integration, preparing for elections, ensuring aid
coherence and harmonization. Significant progress is
being made in building national security capacity with
the strong support of ISAF. International backing has
been fulfilling its role. To take one example, the
Japanese Government extended for an additional six
months payroll support for salaries of all Afghan police
personnel, providing an additional $180 million for
that purpose. Through this assistance, we help improve
the capacity of the Afghan police, which is essential to
long-term security.

One of the major developments was the Peace
Jirga early this month. I congratulate the people of
Afghanistan on their constructive discussion. Now is
time to make sure that a concrete plan for
reconciliation and integration is developed based on
the wishes expressed by people at the Jirga. We support
President Karzai's leadership in this regard.

Japan welcomes and supports Afghan principles
with regard to the reintegration programme, which is in
line with the Afghan Constitution, including women's
and children's rights. We are encouraged by the efforts
of the Afghan authorities to work out the details of the
reintegration programme for endorsement at the
upcoming Kabul Conference. When it is launched,
Japan is ready to support the programme financially
through the Peace and Reintegration Trust Fund and
calls on other Member States for general support.
12

Let me also express our appreciation that
UNAMA has taken an active and constructive role in
helping Afghan authorities to promote dialogue and
reconciliation, including in designing the peace and
integration programme now being worked out. We
hope that UNAMA will continue to play an important
role in the peace and integration process.

The upcoming Conference in Kabul will be a
major milestone in terms not only of its political
significance but also of its substance. From the
political perspective, it is significant to hold such a
meeting at the ministerial level on Afghan soil at a time
when we are stressing the importance of the
Afghanization of nation-building efforts. From the
substantive point of View, also, the Conference is
expected to discuss how to implement the
commitments made at the London Conference. It is
also an important opportunity to reaffirm the compact
between the Government and the people. Japan is ready
to contribute to the preparatory work, including
through discussion at the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board, in order to realize a fruitful
outcome for the conference.

It was emphasized by everybody we met in
Afghanistan that economic and social development is
crucially important for stability in the country. We
support UNAMA's approach in emphasizing the
Afghan Government's function in harmonizing
development aid and taking primary responsibility for
ensuring aid coherence. During the Security Council
mission, I was impressed by the strong determination
of Government leaders to take ownership of setting
priorities in each cluster of national development and
harmonizing external assistance according to
designated priorities in the project. As one of the top
donors, Japan will uphold alignment with Afghan
priorities as a key principle. We will fully take into
account the national priorities identified in the Afghan
National Development Strategy, such as rural
agriculture development, capacity and human
development, infrastructure and energy.

At the same time, as Prime Minister Kan
emphasized to President Karzai, it is essential for the
Afghan Government to lead us and to continue to take
firm steps to tackle corruption and to ensure good
governance at the national and provincial levels.

With regard to parliamentary elections, it is
essential to ensure a fair and transparent process while
10-42978
respecting Afghan ownership. The process must be
Afghan-led and supported by UNAMA and the
international community. Security is a major concern in
realizing an inclusive electoral process. We very much
appreciate Mr. De Mistura's active engagement with
the President in agreeing to electoral guidelines and his
ongoing proactive role in support of the Independent
Electoral Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission. We hope that the election will offer
Afghan men and women a good opportunity to
participate in building a democratic country, and that
the contribution that Japan and many other Member
States are making to support this process serves their
intended goal.

President Karzai paid an official visit to Japan
from 16 to 20 June, just before the Security Council's
visit to Afghanistan. Through a number of meetings,
Japan reaffirmed its historically strong bilateral
relationship with Afghanistan and also sent a clear
message. The Japanese side promised to support
Afghanistan's nation-building efforts. The Afghan side
committed to making its best efforts to address the
various outstanding issues, including in combating
corruption. For the new Prime Minister of Japan,
Mr. Kan, it was the first meeting with his counterpart,
and he took the opportunity to reaffirm Japan's
commitment to Afghanistan, as exemplified by its
assistance package of $5 billion over five years.

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to the
men and women of UNAMA. We have seen for
ourselves the harsh conditions under which they work
and the personal sacrifices they are making. We
support and stand by UNAMA, and very much look
forward to working closely with the Mission so that the
Council can provide the best possible support of its
valuable work.

