Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania, the
candidate countries Turkey and Croatia, and the
European Free Trade Association (EFTA) countries
Iceland and Norway, as well as the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and the Republic of Moldova,
align themselves with this declaration.

Let me begin by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Rucker, for a very
comprehensive and informative presentation that
clearly set out the progress that has been achieved in
Kosovo.

I would like to welcome Mr. Rilcker in his new
post as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. His long-term experience in leading UNMIK
Pillar IV gives him an excellent understanding of the
situation on the ground and thus the qualifications
required for successfully carrying out his new tasks. I
would like to underline the European Union's strong
support for Mr. Rucker in his efforts to implement
resolution 1244 (1999) and to prepare for the transition
from UNMIK to the future international presence in
Kosovo after the status issue is resolved. Special
Representative Rucker will be dealing with the double
challenge of supporting the ongoing status negotiations
and the preparations for the post-UNMIK period.

I would also like to reiterate our appreciation for
the work of the former Special Representative, Saren
Jessen-Petersen.
We urge all the parties to cooperate fully with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in a
constructive and committed manner. We fully support
the Secretary-General's View that Pristina and Belgrade
should constructively take part in the status
negotiations so as to enable the Special Envoy, Martti
Ahtisaari, to complete the political process to
determine Kosovo's future status. The Special Envoy
will continue to have our fullest support, and we
welcome his efforts to reach a negotiated solution.

Resolving the status issue is necessary in order to
maintain stability in the western Balkans region. The
status quo is unsustainable and must be replaced by a
solution that provides lasting peace and stability in the
region and promotes Kosovo's European integration.
The European Union underlines its long-term
commitment to Kosovo.

The EU fully supports UNMIK's efforts, together
with those of the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government (PISG) in Kosovo, to achieve concrete
progress on standards implementation. The
implementation of the priority requirements are crucial
to ensure a multi-ethnic Kosovo, but it is important not
to lose sight of the fact that all of the standards are
important for Kosovo's future. The European Union
welcomes the progress which has been achieved in
priority areas such as the functioning of democratic
institutions and the rule of law, as well as sustainable
returns and the rights of communities.

While this progress is encouraging, it is clear that
the successful implementation of standards for Kosovo
will require further efforts by all parties. It is also
necessary to prepare for a phased transition from a
reform process driven by United Nations standards to a
reform process based on the requirements of European
integration. That gradual transition has already started.

The European Partnership and the annual
progress reports and regular policy and technical
dialogue ensured by the European Commission are
helping the Kosovo Government to identify the priority
areas of reforms needed to move closer to the
European Union.

We have already integrated the essence of the
Kosovo standards into our European Partnership,
which will make for better monitoring and easier
implementation. We welcome the Kosovo
Government's recently adopted European Partnership
Action Plan outlining the Government's strategy for
implementing the merged standards. In parallel with
the status process, the PISG must also concentrate on
the reform process necessary for preparing for
Kosovo's European future.

It is a matter of concern, as the Secretary-General
has pointed out, that not all ethnic communities are
participating meaningfully in the Provisional
Institutions. We share the Secretary-General's concern
as to the governance of the portion of Kosovo territory
which lies north of the Ibar river. We once again
encourage Kosovo Serb participation in Kosovo's
governance structures. As the Secretary-General points
out, the current lack of engagement of Kosovo Serbs in
Kosovo's institutions remains an obstacle to the
fulfilment of certain standards. All of Kosovo's citizens
should benefit from the same level of social and
administrative services. The Serb community living in
Kosovo should be clearly and actively encouraged to
participate in the Kosovo institutions, in which they
can most effectively advocate for their own interests.

The European Union is aware that the Kosovo
status process is a major challenge for the international
community and has a vital interest in a positive and
sustainable outcome. We support the efforts of Special
Envoy Ahtisaari to engage both Belgrade and Pristina
through direct talks and expert consultations on key
areas such as decentralization, cultural heritage and
religious sites, as well as economic and minority rights
issues. The views of the two sides remain divergent,
but the process so far has been useful in clarifying their
positions and exploring possible common ground. The
EU fully supports those efforts and, through its EU
representative to the Kosovo future status process and
through the Commission, plays a leading role. The EU
also recently welcomed the decision to move forward
into direct political talks on the status issue and called
upon both sides to engage constructively in that phase
of the negotiations.

Depending on the future status settlement, the
engagement of the European Union in Kosovo is
planned to have three main components: the EU
contribution to a possible future international civilian
presence, a possible European Security and Defence
Policy operation in the broader field of the rule of law,
and an EU presence related to the European
perspective on Kosovo.

Preparations are well under way in all these
areas. An EU planning team has already been
established and deployed in Kosovo to make
preparations for a possible Security and Defence Policy
operation in the fields of police and justice, which are
areas crucial for the security and the stability of the
region. Preparations for the future EU role in Kosovo
are taking place in close cooperation with the European
Commission to ensure a coherent approach. High
Representative Javier Solana, together with
Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, has already
prepared three insightful reports on the future
European commitment to Kosovo. Those reports serve
as a basis for future planning.

We believe that, following a settlement and the
phasing out of UNMIK, Kosovo's own institutions
should be responsible for managing its affairs as much
as possible. Local ownership and accountability should
rest with Kosovo. The international engagement should
help Kosovo's institutions to assume full responsibility
for Kosovo over time, on the basis of rigid
benchmarking of performance and capabilities.

The objective of the European Union is to ensure
that Kosovo becomes a reliable partner, progressing
together with the rest of the region towards the EU. In
particular, it needs the political will and genuine
commitment of all parties involved in the current status
negotiations. As the Secretary-General has noted in his
report, it is crucial to reassure all communities that
they will have a place in Kosovo in the future,
regardless of its status. The future settlement should
guarantee the protection of the rights and the identity
of all communities in Kosovo.

Together with the Secretary-General, we urge all
parties concerned to cease inflammatory accusations
and to pursue constructive behaviour to ensure a
sustainable future for Kosovo. Belgrade must also play
its part in achieving those aims. Serbia has a crucial
role in the efforts to stabilize the Western Balkan
region and to ensure its smooth integration into the
Euro-Atlantic cooperation structures.

I would like to underline that economic progress
is essential for the creation of a tolerant, multi-ethnic
and democratic Kosovo. To date, the EU has provided
more than €2.6 billion to Kosovo to address urgent
post-conflict needs, develop and strengthen Kosovo's
new institutions, support the returns process and foster
economic development. Furthermore, the EU financed
UNMIK Pillar IV, which has been assisting in the
revitalization of economic activity in Kosovo and in
the creation of a modern, open-market economy
attractive for foreign investments. The EU is also
committed to assisting Kosovo's economy in the
future. The aim is to create sustainable conditions for
economic growth and development, as well as to bring
Kosovo's legislative and administrative frameworks
closer to European standards. The rule of law and
security conditions are crucial for the prospects of the
economic growth and development of Kosovo.

Finally, UNMIK's work is coming to a closing
phase. The smooth transition can continue only if the
necessary funding in crucial areas is available. The EU
is the largest donor to Kosovo, and we encourage
others to consider as a priority how they can deepen
their assistance to Kosovo. An international donor
conference is foreseen after the status settlement. A
long-term commitment from the international donor
community will be needed to ensure a lasting and
durable status settlement in Kosovo.

