Mr. Lowcock: Famines and extreme hunger have
been a part of the human experience since the first
person walked the Earth. Yet it is possible to eradicate
famine from the human experience within our lifetime.
I would like to take a few moments to explain to the
Security Council why I think that is the case and how it
can help achieve that goal.

Despite the wildest predictions, famines have
become less frequent and less lethal over the past few
decades. That is an big achievement. What happened?

First, we have seen a dramatic expansion in
agricultural output and productivity, making more
food available and making it Cheaper. In the past
50 years, dramatic improvements in agriculture,
from plant breeding to pest prevention to storage
to irrigation to transportation, produced a fourfold
increase in food grain production using only 12 per
cent more agricultural land. Transportation networks,
improvements in cold-chain technology, science and
trade allow food to be available more consistently
and more predictably. That trend is likely to continue.
Science and human ingenuity are likely to continue to
increase productivity, and we will seize the enormous
potential to develop agricultural land in less productive
areas of the world with today's technology and rising
demand.

Secondly, we have witnessed a global reduction in
poverty. Large numbers of previously poor people have
gained purchasing power over larger volumes of food
now being produced. That would not have happened
without international action and support, including help
with safety net schemes in some of the poorest countries
over the past 20 years, which have been able to scale up
and down as harvests fail or succeed and which have
been adopted into national policy frameworks. That
means that we do not have to face situations in which
drought automatically turns into famine.

While most of the world is better off and faces
fewer risks of famine and hunger, some people still
experience the opposite. The remaining risk of famine
and hunger is now concentrated in a relatively small
number of countries affected by large-scale, severe and
protracted conflict. Nearly two thirds of the world's
hungry live in countries in conflict. Nearly 500 million
undernourished people - and almost 80 per cent of the
world's 155 million stunted children - live in countries
affected by conflict.

My colleagues at the Food and Agriculture
Organization and the World Food Programme, together
with the European Union, released a new study
yesterday confirming that conflict - often conflated
with extreme climatic shock and high prices of staple
foods - is now the main driver ofglobal food insecurity.
That includes the four countries where there was a
famine risk last year. Famine was prevented in those
countries only through concerted international efforts.

We therefore have to build on the experience of
last year and sustain and expand our efforts in those
countries, with more funding and better access, while
we continue to join up humanitarian life-saving with
longer-term development efforts. We also need to
build upon the vast experience in the humanitarian
system, which, over the past decades, has become more
effective, efficient and better funded. We have learned
a difficult lesson: between hunger and death there lies
disease. Our response has become more professional
and more integrated. We cover health, nutrition and
education, in addition to food, water and shelter, which
used to be our focus.

Most people affected by conflict live in rural areas,
but South Sudan's former breadbasket, the Equatorias,
has nearly emptied as farmers have fled to Uganda.
In cities, fighting hinders other food production,
transportation and distribution to larger parts of the
population, reducing access to food and causing prices
to increase. When civilians exhaust their resilience,
they are often forced to flee. Once people are displaced,
food insecurity increases for both displaced people and
their hosts - communities of people who themselves
are often living on the cusp of survival. Hunger is the
clear corollary of the vicious cycle of displacement
and conflict.

The behaviour of combatants in these contexts
is often atrocious. Humanitarian access - both by
agencies to reach people and for people to reach aid - is
too often difficult or denied. In some cases, starvation
is being used as a method of warfare. Warring parties
damage or destroy water systems, farms, livestock
and markets. Food-sellers and traders face looting and
exorbitant costs to get food to their clients.

International humanitarian law is designed
to protect against hunger in armed conflict. The
fundamental rules of distinction, proportionality and
precaution serve to safeguard civilian objects necessary
for food production and distribution. International
humanitarian law is very clear: it prohibits starvation
of the civilian population as a method of warfare; it
prohibits attacking, destroying, removing or rendering
useless objects that are indispensable to the survival of
the civilian population; it requires that humanitarian
personnel and assets be respected and protected; and it
requires that all parties to conflict allow and facilitate
impartial humanitarian relief for civilians in need and
that they ensure that humanitarian personnel have the
freedom of movement to carry out life-saving work.

While parties to conflict bear the primary
responsibility for respecting international humanitarian
law, all States carry the duty to ensure that that law
is respected. Members of the Security Council have
influence over parties to conflicts. The Council has the
means to investigate violations of the law. The Council
also has the means to enhance accountability when that
law is violated.

There are no humanitarian solutions to conflict.
We all know that peace and political solutions are what
will disrupt the Vicious cycle of conflict and hunger.
The Security Council's main responsibility is peace and
international security. In other words, the Council can
help prevent famine from ever occurring again.

