Mr. Davutoglu (Turkey): Before I start, let me
take a moment to say a couple of words in
remembrance of Ambassador Richard Holbrooke. Dick
was a man of peace. He will be remembered for never
taking no for an answer in times of crisis and for
delivering peaceful solutions when all efforts seemed
to have failed. We mourn the loss of a consummate
peacemaker, a real Statesman and a true friend. May
his soul rest in peace.

I would like to thank the United States for
convening this timely meeting, as well as Vice-
President Biden, the Secretary-General and Foreign
Minister Zebari for their important remarks.

We meet today in a time of global transformation.
History teaches us that periods of profound change are
almost always difficult and rarely tidy. The current one
is no exception. There are strong undercurrents of
change, and a new dynamism can be felt, in
international affairs. As the prevailing realities of this
new era slowly but surely emerge, the need to promote
and bring about the restoration of regional and
international order becomes ever more evident. During
its tenure on the Security Council, while dealing with
the many issues on the Council's agenda, Turkey's
efforts have also been aimed at addressing that
overarching imperative.

Today, the urgency to restore order is valid for
our region, as it is in the case of Iraq. After decades of
turmoil, strife and suffering, Iraq today is at a critical
moment. The prospects are bright and the challenges
are many. By seizing the opportunity and making the
right choices, Iraqi leaders now have it within their
grasp to make a clean break from the infighting of the
past and to shape a prosperous future together.
Following much turbulence, today we are very happy
to see that Iraqis from all segments of society are once
again coming together and working with each other
through peaceful and democratic means to take charge
of their common destiny and collectively chart a future
devoid of oppression, fear or want. That is the future
for Iraq and for our region.

In moving forward, fundamental political
concepts, such as inclusiveness, national reconciliation
and partnership, will continue to be crucial building
blocks to ensure a political framework within which
democracy, human rights and the rule of law
irreversibly take root. On the other hand, gradually
altering both the perception and the language of
politics in Iraq, from those based on ethnicity and
religion to ones defined by political parties and blocs,
is also vital. Such a major change will not only help to
do away with entrenched divisive rhetoric but also to
realign the political discourse along more democratic
lines.

The legislative elections of 7 March were a
historic milestone for democratization and stabilization
efforts in Iraq. Despite the risk of terror attacks, the
Iraqi people participated in the elections with a high
turnout. The determination of the Iraqi people in
assuming ownership of their country through the
expression of their democratic will was commendable.
We believe that the election results clearly represented
the sovereign will of the Iraqi people and their hope for
a unified, strong and democratic Iraq.

Here, I should pause and applaud the role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
in supporting the conduct of free and fair elections. I
take this opportunity to reiterate our full support for the
Secretary-General, the United Nations and UNAMI,
and in particular Special Representative Melkert. I
commend them for their courage and excellent work.

The results of the elections also demonstrate the
voters' desire for a democratic process in Iraq. In order
to make political progress irreversible in that country,

it is crucial that the manifest desire for a broad-based
Government is heeded by all Iraqi leaders. Turkey
welcomes the development that Iraqi political groups
reached an accord on furthering the political process.
We sincerely regret that Iraq had to go through an
eight-month political impasse, which delayed the
implementation of long-needed economic and
comprehensive reconstruction programmes that should
aim to mitigate the daily problems of the Iraqi people.

It is now crucial to complete the political process
with the establishment of a representative, democratic
and effective national partnership Government, based
on the power-sharing arrangements, with full
adherence to the political agreement that the Iraqi
political groups reached. We hope that such a
Government can soon be formed.

During that delicate process, I visited Erbil and
Baghdad on 7 November. We, along with all the Iraqi
leaders, worked very hard in encouraging all political
leaders to reconcile their differences and agree on a
deal that would expedite the political process. We
welcomed the convening of the Iraqi Parliament four
days after my visit and following the national
reconciliation meetings in Erbil.

Turkey's stance vis-a-vis the Iraqi political
process has always been very clear. Turkey believes
that all segments of Iraqi society should participate in
the political process and in an inclusive political
dialogue to pursue a concerted effort to find fair, just
and consensus solutions to the challenges that Iraq
faces in the political, security, economic and social
fields and to achieve national reconciliation.

There are important challenges awaiting the next
Government in Iraq, such as the census, disputed
internal boundaries, hydrocarbon and revenue-sharing
laws, constitutional amendments, et cetera. Those
challenges cut across all segments of Iraqi society
regardless of their ethnic, sectarian or religious
affiliations. The peaceful resolution of such issues
therefore requires national consensus. Securing
consensus on all those issues will probably not be easy.
However, such solutions will have a greater chance of
implementation once they are achieved. Turkey stands
committed to working with the new Iraqi Government
to help in any way that it can to address the challenges
awaiting the Iraqi people.

We are also pleased to observe that violence has
decreased significantly in recent months. Iraq's
national security forces are assuming control over the
country's overall security. Efforts to rebuild the
security forces should be bolstered. The international
community should continue to support Iraq in
increasing the competency of its people in uniform. We
continue to train, advise and mentor members of the
Iraqi security forces.

After two major wars and years of instability, Iraq
has come a long way in rejoining the family of nations
as a fully sovereign and responsible partner. The
achievements to date are both impressive and
encouraging. It is therefore now high time for Iraq to
return fully to the fold. In that context, we
wholeheartedly welcome the resolutions adopted here
today (resolutions 1956 (2010), 1957 (2010) and 1958
(2010)). By virtue of those important resolutions, Iraq
is taking major strides forward in becoming a nation
that is no longer bound under Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter. To be sure, there are still some
tasks to be fulfilled. In particular, issues such as the
border demarcation, compensation, missing persons
and archives pertaining to Saddam's invasion of
Kuwait still need to be addressed by Iraq. We are
confident that Iraq will be more than up to the
challenge.

Turkey, for its part, is happy to be able to cast its
vote to recognize the achievements of Iraq and lift the
limitations that have been in place for too long.

This is a major accomplishment for Iraq, and we
commend the Iraqi Government for the hard work it
has done so far. In moving forward, we are confident
that the new Iraqi Government will continue to take the
necessary actions with a view to cementing stability
within its borders and working together with regional
and international partners to further enhance security
on a large scale.

By virtue of this meeting, the decisions we have
taken, the presidential statement we adopted and our
national statements, we are essentially closing a sad
but temporary chapter in Iraq's history and ushering in
a fresh, new era that is full of hope and promise. In a
sense, we are witnessing Iraq's rightful return to its
former status as a full-fledged sovereign member of the
family of nations. This is a welcome development that
must be applauded.

Turkey, as the only neighbour of Iraq at this table,
has strong and deep-rooted bonds with Iraq. Our
destinies have always been intertwined and they will
forever continue to be. To be sure, there are still many
challenges ahead for Iraq and for our region, which has
already seen enough war and strife. But Iraq will not be
alone to meet them.

Iraq's independence, sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity are vital for the stability and
security of our region and the international community.
Therefore, we are glad to observe Iraq's great strides in
becoming a secure, stable, prosperous and democratic
country.

Turkey will continue to support Iraq through
thick and thin. The alternative is not only
inconceivable, it is also realistically not possible.

