Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Her Excellency the
Secretary of State for International Development of
the United Kingdom, and to express our thanks and
appreciation to the United Kingdom for convening this
meeting. Our thanks and appreciation also go to the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict for their comprehensive briefings.

We express our sincere condolences to the friendly
people of France and to the French Government. We
condemn in the strongest terms the terrorist attacks that
befell Paris. We stand shoulder to shoulder with France
and with all international efforts to combat terrorism.
We condemn all the terrorist attacks that took place in
Beirut, Ankara, Iraq and Egypt and in all fraternal and
friendly countries. We affirm our solidarity with them
in combating terrorism.

We are deeply saddened by the situation in our
fraternal neighbour, Syria. Over the past five years, the
humanitarian scene has been staggering. I will not offer
statistics or figures, but the deep suffering surpasses
the understanding of humankind and the civilized
world. Violations of the basic norms of international
humanitarian law and human rights law by the
conflicting parties in Syria have become a hallmark of
the conflict in that country. The indiscriminate bombing
of innocent civilians, including children, has become a
daily occurrence, alongside displacement, starvation,
the destruction of infrastructure, the bombing of schools
and health centres, hindering medical assistance and
lifesaving assistance, intimidation, the obliteration of
Syrian identity and the plunder of its historic artefacts.
The international community should explore every
possibility for improving humanitarian efforts in Syria.
We will cooperate with New Zealand and Spain to
renew resolution 2191 (2014), in order to ensure the
continuing delivery of humanitarian assistance, which
has saved millions of Syrians.

The international community should make
concerted, unified efforts to fight terrorist groups, in
particular the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
which still controls large areas of Syria, where it
continues to wreak havoc, especially through cowardly
actions such as those that took place recently in France,
Lebanon and Iraq. We are dealing with the world's most
serious humanitarian asylum crisis since the end of the
Second World War. Jordan hosts the largest number of
refugees in the world, and the second largest number
of Syrian refugees, in proportion to our population.
Syrian citizens account for 1.5 million people living in
different parts of Jordan.

Nine per cent of Syrian refugees live in refugee
camps, which has put tremendous pressure on health
care, education, food security and employment. It
has also put tremendous pressure on Jordan's public
treasury at a time when we are facing economic
challenges resulting from the situation in the region. We
are sharing both our resources and our infrastructure
with the refugees, and both are being exhausted by the
heavy burden that this entails.

The Kingdom of Jordan and its kind people
have opened their homes to refugees from all over
the region. We will continue to pursue this generous
approach under the direction of our Hashemite leaders.
However, it should be said that the countries hosting
Syrian refugees are beginning to feel that the world
is betraying them by not providing sufficient support,
and they require the assistance of the international
community. The countries hosting Syrian refugees are
experiencing a serious deterioration in their ability
to deliver basic services. They are also experiencing
setbacks in development at all levels. The international
community should coordinate and cooperate with
the Governments of host countries in order to secure
a reasonable future for those whose lives have been
shattered by these tragedies. It should buttress the
resilience of host countries, because it is in the
interests of the whole world to do so. We are grateful
to the United Nations Development Programme for
organizing the Resilience Development Forum, which
initiates a new era of support for Syrian refugees and a
new international partnership to that end.

We continue to advocate for the Security Council
to keep the Syrian refugee issue on its agenda and
in its deliberations owing to the seriousness of the
consequences ofthe Syrian crisis for the entire world. We
stress the importance of implementing the presidential
statement contained in document S/PRST/2015/10,
adopted in April this year, and a resolution should be
adopted to the same end. There is no military solution
to the crisis in Syria; rather, a comprehensive political
solution to the crisis must be found.
We welcome the meeting of the International Syria
Support Group in Vienna, as well as thejoint ministerial
declaration. The large number of participants made the
Vienna meeting a historic event. However, there needs
to be a follow-up that will launch a political process
leading to a political transition and the realization of
the aspirations of the Syrian people.

A comprehensive political solution based on the
Geneva I consensus is the only way out of this crisis.
There is global agreement on that point. The solution
should meet the aspirations of all Syrians, lead to a new
political reality that enjoys their collective support,
enable us to defeat terrorism in the country and restore
stability and security there, inspire the voluntary return
of internally displaced persons and refugees to their
homes, and preserve the independence of Syria.

