The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Rwanda in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda) took a seat at the
Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
2
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2008/467, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

Members also have before them document
8/2008/436, which contains the text of identical letters
dated 13 June 2008 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly and
the President of the Security Council, transmitting a
letter dated 6 June 2008 from the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, Croatia,
France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Panama, Russian Federation, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Viet Nam


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1824 (2008).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 10.15 a.rn.
08-42872

