Ms. Bensouda: I wish at the outset to thank
the Council for this opportunity to address it on the
situation in Libya. This is the tenth occasion on which
I am providing this briefing since the referral of the
situation to my Office in February 2011.

Libya has been embroiled in a seemingly endless
cycle of violence, large-scale commission of crimes
and chronic instability, with serious and debilitating
ramifications for not only the proper functioning of
State institutions, but also the human rights landscape
in the country.

The breakdown of law and order induced by
incessant conflict and political divide has resulted in
an increase in the number of violations of international
human rights and international humanitarian law.
In such an environment, national efforts aimed at
strengthening accountability for atrocity crimes and
establishing the rule of law face great challenges.

But from trial and tribulation comes hope. As we
are gathered here today, the Libyan people's long ordeal
may soon see a redirection towards a more promising
future for Libya. Thanks to the tireless efforts of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
and to the strength and commitment of the Libyan
people, significant progress has recently been made
towards the goal of achieving peace and stability in
the country through the creation of a Government of
national unity.

The ongoing national dialogue, facilitated by the
United Nations, aimed at the establishment of a Libyan
Government of national accord, represents hope for
a transition to national unity and durable peace, and
it carries important promise for Libya's efforts in the
promotion of the rule of law, the protection of civilians
and the ending of impunity for atrocity crimes.

Any such initiative that is embraced by the Libyan
people and achieves these laudable goals, including
paying homage tojustice as a critical pillar ofsustainable
peace, is, of course, welcomed by my Office.

In yet another important development of note,
UNSMIL has facilitated successful talks towards
the resolution of the Tawergha issue. The agreement
reached in Tunis in September to develop strategies
for the return of the Tawergha as well as to establish
clear plans for reparations to the victims is a welcome
development.

It is particularly noteworthy that the Misrata/
Tarwergha Joint Committee affirmed its full support
for the political dialogue and the formation of a
Government of national accord so as to meet the
aspirations of the Libyan people to establish the rule of
law, end the conflict and safeguard Libyan unity.

The era of accountability and the rule of law, as a
basis on which the future of the country can be built,
may indeed be within reach for the Libyan people.
We, as a collective, cannot fail the Libyan people by
standing idly by as the country degenerates into chaos
and further instability. My Office is ready to fully play
its part in accordance with the Rome Statute by ensuring
accountability for atrocity crimes in Libya. To that end,
the Council's tangible support remains crucial.

As indicated in my Office's tenth report to the
Council, a significant body of material provided by
the Libyan authorities in late December 2014 continues
to be reviewed, analysed and investigated, resulting
in investigative progress towards shedding light on
instances of atrocity crimes allegedly committed in
Libya. Our cooperation with the Libyan authorities in
obtaining the relevant materials continues. I stress the
importance of undertaking investigations with respect
to the ongoing crimes in Libya and reiterate my Office's
every desire to do so. To that end, the Office requested
resources for additional investigations as part of its 2016
proposed budget, to be considered by the States parties
to the International Criminal Court (ICC). However,
there are indications that those resources will likely
not be forthcoming. As such, resource constraints in
2016 will impede the Office's ability to conduct these
additional investigative activities.

It is of paramount importance that the ongoing
crimes committed by different actors in Libya be
investigated and that my Office be provided with
the requisite resources to undertake these necessary
investigations in accordance with its mandate. My
Office therefore relies on the critical financial support of
States parties in this regard, and I take this opportunity
to call on them to provide this crucial funding. I equally
and strongly invite the Council to seriously consider
assisting the Office, in accordance with article 115(b) of
the Rome Statute, to obtain the resources required for
the effective investigation of alleged crimes committed
in a situation that has been referred to the Court by this
body.

Devising innovative and effective strategies and
action plans on how to give meaning to the provisions
of article 115(b) of the Rome Statute is essential.

Turning to the cases of the accused, Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi, the Council will
recall that the Appeals Chamber of the ICC affirmed
the admissibility of the case against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi on 21 May 2014 and the inadmissibility
of the case against Al-Senussi on 24 July 2014. To
date, despite the repeated demands of my Office, Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi has not been surrendered to the
custody of the ICC. The Libyan authorities must heed
the Council's calls for cooperation and comply with the
Court's request to immediately surrender Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi to the ICC. The Libyan authorities are
under a clear legal obligation to do so, and remain
non-compliant by failing to surrender him into ICC
custody.

As Council members are aware, on 28 July the
Tripoli Court of Assize sentenced both Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi, among other
co-defendants, to death for the crimes they allegedly
committed during Libya's 2011 uprising. This was an
issue of concern, as my Office is still calling upon
Libya to surrender Al-Qadhafi to the ICC while it has
continued to monitor and collect information to enable
it to determine whether there are new facts that may
support an application for review under article 19 (10)
of the Rome Statute of Pre-Trial Chamber I's decision
finding the Al-Senussi case inadmissible before the
Court.
My Office was also deeply concerned by videos
of alleged acts of torture against Saadi Al-Qadhafi at
Al-Hadba prison, which circulated online in August.
Reports of alleged acts of torture or similar inhumane
acts at the prison are relevant to the Al-Senussi case
in the context of articles 17 and 19 (10) of the Rome
Statute. My Office is currently investigating the
circumstances depicted in the videos, including by
seeking information from Libya and reviewing and
assessing the materials already furnished by the Libyan
authorities.

In its latest correspondence to my Office dated
23 October 2015, and in subsequent recent meetings
with my team and myself directly, Libyan authorities
have assured my Office that these allegations are being
pursued, and that meaningful and concrete actions have
and will continue to be taken in this regard. In addition,
the Libyan authorities have provided my Office with
documents related to their investigations into the alleged
criminal events at the prison. Our initial assessment
of the information provided gives hope for optimism
about these national efforts. My Office will continue its
constructive engagement with the Libyan authorities to
ensure that the requisite information is provided for its
own assessment of Rome Statute requirements.

It is also important to highlight the fact that
on 30 July 2015, my Office filed a request with the
Pre-Trial Chamber seeking an order directing Libya to
refrain from executing Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, to
immediately surrender him to the Court, and to report
his death sentence to the Council. In its response on
20 August 2015, Libya explained that the death sentence
against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi was non-enforceable
in Libya because his trial was held in absentia, and that
he will enjoy an absolute right to a new trial when he is
transferred from Zintan into the custody of the Libyan
authorities. Libya acknowledged that Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi was not in its custody.

In relation to the AZ-Senussi case, my Office
continues to monitor proceedings at the national level
and to collect information to enable it to determine
whether there are new facts in support of an application
for a review of the decision on the admissibility of the
case. It is worth emphasising that, under article 19 (10)
of the Rome Statute, my Office can submit a request for
review of the Pre-Trial Chamber's decision only if it is
fully satisfied that there are new facts that negate the
basis of that decision. The Appeals Chamber of the ICC
has held that, for due process violations in a domestic
trial to lead to a case being deemed admissible before
the ICC, the violations must be so egregious that the
proceedings can no longer be regarded as being capable
of providing any genuine form of justice to the accused.
To that end, my Office sought and is carefully analysing
information on the progress of the proceedings against
Mr. Al-Senussi from UNSMIL, Human Rights Watch
and the Libyan authorities.

My Office currently awaits the full UNSMIL
report on the Libyan trial of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi and the trial judgment, and
will continue to follow the situation and to collect and
analyse information with a view to determining whether
to seek the Chamber's review of the admissibility of
the Al-Senussi case. My Office's assessment of the
information at its disposal at this stage is that it does
not support an application for a review of the Pre-Trial
Chamber's decision an the admissibility of the case
against Al-Senussi. This position is necessarily limited
to the information the Office currently has in its
possession and is subject to change in accordance with
reliable information that it may receive in the future.

My Office continues to monitor the situation
in Libya and is concerned that large-scale crimes,
including those under ICC jurisdiction, are being
committed by all parties to the conflict. I remain
equally concerned that all sides - including the Libyan
national army, Libya Dawn and the so-called Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and their respective
allies, and international actors - continue to commit
attacks resulting in civilian casualties. Examples of
these crimes have been set out in detail in my tenth
report to the Council. My Office recalls that those
responsible for these crimes can be prosecuted either
at the national level or at the ICC. I reiterate here my
Office's willingness and commitment to undertaking
further investigations in Libya, but stress once again
the need for States parties and the Council to ensure
adequate funding to my Office for this purpose.

Pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), the Council
decided that

"the Libyan authorities shall cooperate fully with
and provide any necessary assistance to the Court
and the Prosecutor pursuant to this resolution"
(resolution 1970 (2011), para. 5).
This important declaration has been reiterated in
subsequent resolutions of the Council. Continued
cooperation, consultation and coordination between my
Office and the Libyan authorities remain crucial for the
implementation of the memorandum of understanding
concluded in November 2013 on burden-sharing
regarding investigations and prosecutions in Libya.
The Office appreciates the cooperation it continues
to receive from both States parties and non-States
parties, as well as international organizations, in the
Libya situation, and we look forward to strengthening
efforts and synergies to assist Libyan authorities in
their efforts to build the rule of law in Libya. In this
regard, I reiterate my previous calls for assistance to
Libya in strengthening its national capacity to respond
to Rome Statute crimes through the formation of an
international contact group on justice issues.

The recent gains towards the establishment of the
Libyan Government of national accord and national
unity may indeed increase the prospects for reviving
discussions on this proposal in the near future.
Similarly, I appeal to all other States that have not yet
done so to engage and cooperate with my Office. Some
of the evidence and persons of interest to my Office
are located outside of Libya and can be accessed only
through the cooperation of States. Ending impunity
for atrocity crimes in Libya is an important goal that
is both achievable and necessary for sustainable peace
and stability in the country. It is also a goal that only
be met can through the joint action, commitment and
substantial support of all the relevant actors.

