Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for initiating this important meeting. I want to lend my
voice to those who have expressed a very warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadie, President
of the Republic of Serbia, and His Excellency
Mr. Skender Hyseni, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kosovo. I thank them for sharing their perspectives
with us. I also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his
statement in the context of the Secretary-General's
report on the situation in Kosovo (S/2010/5).

Nigeria welcomes the report and appreciates the
progress made in Kosovo during the reporting period.
In particular, we note that the security situation in the
territory remains calm and, although there are still
pockets of attack, incidents against minorities have
decreased. We also note the efforts to adhere to
democratic standards during the mayoral and municipal
elections in Kosovo.

We appreciate the relationship between the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo authorities and the
growing engagement between UNMIK and Belgrade.
We also appreciate the positive relationship between
UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX), operating within the status-
neutral framework of the United Nations. UNMIK'S
consistent and assiduous efforts to foster cordial
relations with all the major players within the region is
worthy of encouragement and support.

In spite of those achievements, we share the
Secretary-General's concern about the lack of progress
in implementing practical arrangements in the difficult
areas of justice, peace, customs and cultural heritage.
We urge intensified engagements on those issues by all
parties, in particular on discussions that would lead to
a mechanism for an enduring cultural agreement. The
Secretary-General's proposal to appoint a facilitator to
move that agenda forward merits further exploration.

We welcome the positive development on the
return of Kosovo Albanians to the northern part of
Mitrovica and the constructive engagement between
the UNMIK administration and the Mitrovica
municipality to address pending issues. We urge
UNMIK to continue its outreach activities in that
regard.
Although Kosovo remains calm, the situation is
still fragile. There are still reports of isolated attacks
against minorities. The measures in place to address
that concern should be sustained and strengthened. We
implore Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo Albanians to
eschew violence in the northern communities, just as
we condemn violence against UNMIK and EULEX
personnel and resources.

We want to commend UNMIK for the priorities it
has identified and pursued. We appreciate the efforts of
the Special Representative and his team to promote
security, stability and respect for human rights in
Kosovo and in the entire region. UNMIK's unrelenting
engagements with the parties should be directed at
reaching agreement in the rather difficult areas of
justice, peace and cultural heritage.

Nigeria believes that dialogue should be
optimally utilized at all times. We support all of the
peace efforts aimed at reaching a comprehensive
settlement of the issues in the region and call on all
parties to forge a united front through flexibility and
compromise to resolve the contending issues.

