Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): My delegation
offers its congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of our Council, and we also most
warmly congratulate your predecessor, Professor Ibrahim
Gambari, for having managed to get all our work done
last month, the United Nations jubilee celebrations
notwithstanding.

Although we co-sponsored it, my delegation is
completely exasperated over the fact that we would even
need resolution 1019 (1995). One would have hoped that
after three or four years of constantly appealing to,
admonishing, castigating, criticizing, ostracizing and
condemning people involved in "ethnic cleansing", indeed
after the formation of an International Tribunal to deal
with these crimes - the first of its kind since the
Nuremberg Court 50 years ago - no one could possibly
still be deaf. And yet, amazingly, an epidemic of deafness
seems to have affected whole groups of people, even
important people, in Croatia, and in particular in Serb-
controlled Bosnia. This deafness has prevented them from
appreciating that "ethnic cleansing", violations of
humanitarian law and wholesale Violations of human
rights do not belong among instruments of war, let alone
of politics, in countries of today's civilized world. These
people, even important people, place themselves beyond
the pale of civilized discourse.

We have heard, even here in the United Nations, the
argument that the recent Serbian slaughter of Muslim and
Croat innocents in places like Banja Luka and Sanski
Most was caused, or perhaps provoked, by Croat and
Bosnian Government advances along the nearby line of
fighting. We must declare most resolutely that efforts to
establish this kind of linkage, this type of causality, this
type of quid pro quo are repugnant and absolutely
unacceptable. No matter what we feel about the
movement of the battlefront, about violations of cease-
fires about one side prevailing over the other in combat,
we all have to recognize one thing: there is a fundamental
difference between, on the one hand, the struggle of
armed men, men in military uniform, on the field of
Mars; and, on the other hand, the one-sided expulsions,
rape and butchery of unarmed civilians, isolated in their
individual homes, defenceless and thus scared out of their
senses of the untrammelled brutality of their tormentors,
whether they be forces in official uniforms, paramilitary
units in black masks or vigilante squads. It is
impermissible obfuscation to interpret the one as equalling

 

the other; it is impermissible mystification to interpret the
one as causing the other; it is impermissible cynicism to
interpret the one as justifying the other.

We applaud efforts to get information out about the
screams of the victims. We have been particularly
impressed by the reporting of The New York Times and that
of Mr. David Rohde of the Christian Science Monitor.
Their reporting is all the more important since our own
United Nations feelers frequently do not reach quite as deep
or as far as these reporters do. We are gratified by
indications that the United States, whose national means
have been very helpful in bringing indications of the
tragedies to our attention, intends to share all its relevant
information with the International Tribunal. We fully
support the request that the Secretary-General submit a
written report on the issue at hand, based - I stress - on
all information available.

"Ethnic cleansing" is reprehensible no matter who
conducts it and no matter what methods are used. With this
in mind, we are concerned at "ethnic cleansing" not only in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but also in Croatia. And even
though, in Croatia, the killings may have been fewer in
number, even though they may not have been organized
and even though in Croatia a determined effort appears to
have been made to bring the perpetrators to justice, all this
is irrelevant to the victim. The wretched old man whose
throat is being slashed does not particularly care whether he
is one of thousands or merely of hundreds; he does not care
whether the knife was authorized or not. We are on the side
of the victims.

The most awful of atrocities with which we are
probably dealing here is that of Srebrenica. Melos was
destroyed in 416 BC. during the Peloponnesian War,
Carthage in 146 BC. during the Third Punic War. The men
of those cities were put to death, which appears to have
been the fate of thousands of men in Srebrenica as well.
The main difference between Srebrenica and those two
cities of antiquity, whose destruction has marked the entire
subsequent history of the world, was that, in Srebrenica,
women and children were not actually sold into slavery.
Some 18 months ago, we were deliberating in this
Chamber the shelling of Gorazde. I reflected then that
perhaps, for its fiftieth birthday, the United Nations might
receive a gift from the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, perhaps a piece of art called, for example,
The Fall of Gorazde. I suggested that it could be exhibited
outside our Chamber, in the vicinity of the tapestry of
Picasso's Guernica. Well, it seems I made a little mistake:
the possible gift would more correctly be called The Fall
of Srebrenica.

