Ms. Sanders (United States of America): With
regard, first, to the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the United States
expresses its appreciation to President Pocar and Ms.
Del Ponte for their reports to the Council. The United
States remains strongly committed to the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and is
pleased to note the increased pace of trials in recent
months. The Tribunal is now conducting seven trials
simultaneously and has taken other steps that
demonstrate its dedication to efficiency. We must
continue to work together to ensure the success of the
Tribunal's completion strategy, as previously endorsed
by this Council, which seeks to conclude trials by 2008
and all work by 2010.

However, we cannot accept the possibility that
the outstanding fugitives, notably Ratko Mladic' and
Radovan Karadzic, might escape justice by outlasting
the Tribunal's existence. It is therefore imperative that
we begin discussions now on how best to guarantee
that they face justice, no matter when they are
apprehended. As we have stated previously, the
Tribunal's doors will always remain open for Mladic
and Karadzic. The Council and interested States must
begin to address seriously this and other legacy issues,
such as planning for continued witness protection and
proper maintenance of archives.

We call on all States to cooperate fully with the
ICTY, in particular through the apprehension and
transfer of fugitives to the Tribunal. We also call on
Serbia and the Bosnian Serb authorities to fulfil their
obligations to the ICTY without further delay,
including through the apprehension and transfer of
fugitives to The Hague.

With regard International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), the United States expresses its
appreciation to President Mose and Mr. Jallow for their
reports to the Council. The United States remains
strongly committed to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and is pleased to note the
increased pace of trials under the leadership of
President Mose. We must continue to work together to
ensure success of the Tribunal's completion strategy,
which seeks to conclude trials by 2008 and all work by
2010, as was previously endorsed by the Security
Council.

In its last update on the completion strategy, the
Tribunal noted various new measures designed to
expedite trials. We commend such measures and invite
the Tribunal to continue to improve trial efficiency.

The success of the completion strategy does not
depend solely on the Tribunal, but requires the
continued assistance and cooperation of Member
States. The completion strategy will involve the
transfer of cases from the Tribunal to domestic
jurisdictions. The international community can assist
this endeavour by supporting the Tribunal's efforts to
create the capacity for domestic trials.

Building this judicial capacity is particularly
important in Rwanda, where the Rwandans have urged
the ICTR to transfer outstanding cases to their
jurisdiction. The transfer of those cases requires
Rwanda to have an adequate judicial system to meeting
international fair-trial standards. The 1994 genocide
seriously devastated Rwanda's judicial capacity.
Rebuilding is an arduous process and Rwanda has
made remarkable progress, but there still remain
critical steps to be completed before ICTR transfers
can take place. We urge Rwanda to act swiftly and
effectively in fulfilling these steps and to work closely
with the ICTR in negotiating these Rule 11 transfers.
We also encourage international donors to continue
their current support.

We again call on all States, particularly Kenya
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to fulfil
their international obligations to apprehend and
transfer to the ICTR all persons indicted for war crimes
by the Tribunal who are within their territory. These
fugitives continue to foment conflict in the Great Lakes
region and must be actively pursued and apprehended,
consistent with numerous Security Council resolutions
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, including resolution 1534 (2004) and 1503
(2003).

We also highly commend Mr. Stephen Rapp's
dedicated service to the ICTR, particularly since
assuming the role of Chief of Prosecution in May 2005.
His deft supervision guided the Court toward greater
successes and we warmly congratulate him on his new
appointment as the Prosecutor at the Special Court for
Sierra Leone.
