Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to start
by thanking Sandra Honore, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, and her team for their
dedicated work on the ground.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

In my national capacity, I would like to stress
several points on the political progress, security and
the rule of law, and United Nations engagement in the
country.

The last time we met in the Council on Haiti (see S/PV.7147), we welcomed the progress achieved in the
political process towards holding national elections
on 26 October and presidential elections in 2015. That
progress, however, has not been sustained, and today
the holding of the elections on the established date is in
doubt. The people of Haiti have suffered too much, and
gone through too much, to live in political uncertainty,
especially because that will inevitably affect much-
needed progress in the country's economic and social
development.

We call on all political stakeholders in Haiti to
overcome existing hurdles with regard to the electoral
framework and to engage in a genuine dialogue on
the matter, with all due urgency, keeping the tight
time frame in mind. A successful electoral cycle and
the consolidation of democratic institutions are key to
ensuring stability and addressing the challenges facing
the country's social and economic development. The
authorities in Haiti need to move forward with the
political process towards holding inclusive elections in
a solid legal framework. We commend the efforts of the
United Nations and of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to engage Haiti's
political actors on that matter and to advance towards
the elections.

Strengthening security and the rule of law are
some of the most important areas of United Nations
engagement in Haiti. We note the relative stability in
the security situation in the country. Thanks to the
commitment of the Government of Haiti and the active
collaboration of MINUSTAH's police component, the
capacities and professionalism of the Haitian National
Police have increased. Still, while the progress made
by the Haitian National Police is undeniable, as the
Secretary-General's report (S/2014/617) notes, it may
not have the strength to ensure country-wide security
without support, particularly if confronted with
additional challenges such as the electoral cycle, once
it begins.

Law and order problems also remain. Further efforts
are needed to solidify gains in combatting criminality
and tackling outstanding law and order concerns. Quick-
impact projects aimed at improving the rule of law and
good governance in the country, including through
training and construction or through the rehabilitation
of peace tribunals, are an important contribution to
improving security and building confidence among
the population. For our part, we remain committed to
continuing our modest contribution to MINUSTAH'S
police component.

We welcome MINUSTAH's commitment to assist
the Haitian police in addressing sexual and gender-
based violence. We are concerned, however, that much
of the violence remains underreported. Although there
has been progress in trials related to human rights
abuses, prosecution of the perpetrators of sexual and
gender-based violence continues to lag. Sustained
efforts are needed to prevent and respond to sexual
and gender-based violence and to promote the political
participation of women. In that respect, we welcome
the fact that training sessions on the prevention of
sexual exploitation and abuse were provided to more
than 1,500 personnel and we encourage continued
awareness-raising on the matter, since tackling
gender-based violence is an important component of
women's empowerment and their enhanced role in all
spheres of society, including as agents of the country's
development. We also welcome Haiti's continued
efforts to improve child protection legislation. The
Government's ratification of the first two Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
is a welcome step in that respect, and we appreciate it.

In terms of the way ahead, we are carefully
analysing the Secretary-General's proposals on the
future of MINUSTAH. While we concur that further
continued efforts are needed to strengthen the country's
capacity with respect to the rule of law and law and
order, we support a conditions-based consolidation plan
for the Mission, including a drawdown of its military
component, in view of the changing nature of the role
of the Mission as well as actual needs on the ground.

