I thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing. The year 2020 has been no ordinary year, with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic that has shaken the world. For many children, autumn marks the end of summer fun and the beginning of the new school year. The start of the new school year is a particular challenge for pupils and students in various countries living in conflict zones, who have to return to school in the era of COVID-19. My delegation welcomes the continued cooperation of the Syrian authorities with the World Health Organization and national organizations in their efforts to prevent and combat the spread of COVID-19, but also remains concerned about the deterioration of the Syrian health infrastructure as a result of years of conflict. A large number of vulnerable people, including internally displaced persons and refugees, are at a high risk of contracting the virus. This is a major risk factor for a larger crisis, as social distancing is virtually impossible in overcrowded camps. The Niger reiterates its support for the daily efforts of humanitarian agencies aimed at assisting people in need. It also calls for an optimization of the level of humanitarian assistance, in view of the situation on the ground. Our thanks go to those countries that are already making enormous efforts. As Mr. Lowcock communicated to us in his briefing - in which, with great eloquence and deep emotion, he described the realities of life for Syrians - if we are to improve humanitarian assistance, we must listen to the messages of humanitarian organizations working in the field in order to respond in the most adequate way to the appeals for help of thousands of women and children in destitution and distress. As [have said before on several occasions, the strength of the Security Council lies in its unity. It is a pity that it is taking so long to find such unity on the Syrian dossier. However, the gravity of the humanitarian situation and the hope that many people place in the Security Council for a permanent and secure solution - and one that will allow the displaced to return to their homes - must be found. The Council simply must do better. That is why my delegation calls on all stakeholders to echo the appeal launched by the Secretary-General last March for the removal or easing, on humanitarian grounds, of sanctions imposed on countries in crisis, in order to guarantee access to food and essential medical supplies to combat the pandemic. On this issue, too, I know that the Council is divided, and it is time that we overcome this other divergence. Of course, no positive progress on this issue, which has been taken up several times by the Council, will be possible without a ceasefire, which is the only way for dialogue to continue within the Constitutional Committee, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). My delegation reiterates its appeal to all parties to uphold their obligations in terms of protecting civilians and allowing rapid, safe and unimpeded access to all humanitarian workers and assistance to people in need throughout the Syrian Arab Republic. Humanitarian assistance must be free from political considerations. In conclusion, my delegation also remains concerned about the deterioration of the Syrian economy. The continued decline in the exchange rate of the Syrian pound and the shortage of certain basic necessities are early warning signs that must be addressed in order to prevent the economic crisis from further complicating the current situation, which is already so difficult for the Syrian people.
