Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation was not in a position to support resolution 2511 (2020), penned by the United Kingdom, which renews the sanctions regime and the mandate of the Panel of Experts on Yemen, because not all of our concerns were taken into account. During the consultations, we clearly and explicitly presented our principled and duly justified position. We made clear our objections to a host of the provisions contained in the British draft. A number of our remarks were taken into account only today, when yet another contrived crisis was already in the works in the Security Council. This all could have been agreed to calmly, without any drama or haste. I emphasize also that there was no unity in sight during the discussions of the report of the Panel of Experts of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014). However, any contentious issues were incorporated into the initial draft resolution, and many delegations did not have anopportunity to participate on equal footing in efforts to achieve a balanced text. Tell us, why does division have to be sown in the Security Council at a time when the situation in Yemen requires our concerted and collective efforts to help facilitate a settlement that would help to bring the conflict back onto a political track and ensure a comprehensive ceasefire and the delivery of aid to the Yemeni people? It is fortunate that, at least today, such division was able to be averted. If a crisis were to occur, that would only complicate the efforts of both the Special Envoy, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the United Nations. The Russian Federation fully support Mr. Griffiths' efforts. We once again emphasize the need for the international community to work jointly to achieve overall stabilization in the region. We should not focus on isolation and pressure or seek to pin the blame on parties but, rather, meaningfully seek ways to resolve the crisis. The goal of the resolution was to extend the sanctions regime and the mandate of the Panel of Experts, not compete with the putting forward of approaches that go beyond the objectives of the resolution. Unfortunately, what has transpired today yet again attests to the non-constructive working methods of the sponsors of the draft, which should have been geared towards the adoption of a consensus-based document and have allowed all voices, not just ours, to have been heard. Again, we would stress that the penholdership mechanism requires meaningful reconsideration. The fact that our concerns are not heeded during work on the draft resolutions of the Security Council and are often simply disregarded ultimately puts the sponsors, and not us, in a difficult position. If there is a wish not to listen to us during consultations or to hear our concerns, that will impact our position on the vote, as was the case today. We certainly do not wish to achieve everything just for our own sake, contrary to what some may claim. What we want is for the resolution to have a balanced text. However, the take-it-or- leave-it approach does not allow for compromise; we cannot agree to that kind of an approach.
