Mr. Christian (Ghana): Since the completion of
my predecessor's tour of duty in April this year, I have
had the honour to chair the Security Council
07-64646

Committee established pursuant to resolution 1518
(2003), as I shall continue to do until the end of this
month, when Ghana's two-year tenure on the Council
will draw to an end. Drawing on my personal
experiences in the Committee, I would like to take this
opportunity to give a brief account of the Committee's
work during my chairmanship.

Pursuant to paragraph 1 of resolution 1518 (2003)
the Committee is mandated to identify individuals and
entities referred to in paragraph 19 of resolution 1483
(2003) whose funds, assets or economic resources
should be frozen and transferred to the Development
Fund for Iraq. This applies to individuals and entities
associated with the former Iraqi regime, as specified in
paragraph 23 of resolution 1483 (2003).

The names of 89 individuals and 208 entities are
currently inscribed on the Committee's list. Although
during my chairmanship the Committee has continued
to consider various requests for the addition and
removal of names, no changes have been made to the
list, and the Committee's work has been focused
mainly on assisting the authorities of Iraq in seeking
information and clarification relating to assets frozen
outside Iraq. Since the Security Council remains seized
of the situation in Iraq, the Council's relevant
subsidiary organs may continue their assistance to the
Government and the people of Iraq, while keeping the
future work of the Committee under review, as may be
deemed appropriate.

In accordance with past practice, the views
expressed here reflect my personal perspective as Chair
and do not necessarily represent the views of the
Committee or its members.

I wish to conclude by thanking all members of
the Committee and all other relevant parties for their
support and cooperation during my chairmanship.
Finally, I wish to assure the incoming Chairman of the
Committee of my availability to assist in any way
possible with the transition of the chairmanship.

