Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): Allow me, at the outset,
to congratulate you warmly, Sir, on your assumption of the
office of President of the Security Council for the month of
November. We are convinced that, under your leadership,
the Council is in safe hands. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Gerardo Martinez Blanco of Honduras for his
skilful guidance of the work of the Council during the
month of October.

I will be responding to the statement made by the
representative of Zaire, but I will spare the Council a
lengthy and misleading statement so as to make good use
of the purpose of this organ.

For the past 48 hours, we have been registering 100
refugees per minute crossing the border from Zaire. We
expect that, by early next week, the bulk of Rwandese
refugees will have regained their motherland. The Rwanda
Government welcomes this long-awaited return of its
nationals. We believe that the conditions are now in place
for the orderly return of many more refugees. I am also
happy to inform the Council that the entire cabinet
accompanied the President of Rwanda to the Zaire border
town of Goma to welcome incoming refugees.

The local and Government machinery have been
mobilized throughout the country in order to prepare the
welcome centres for refugees, where they will be received
before returning to their respective homes.

 

In the light of these welcome developments, it is the
View of the Rwandan Government that the proposed
multinational force is no longer relevant, at least as far as
rescuing the Rwandan refugees in eastern Zaire is
concerned.

As the situation in eastern Zaire has changed, the
plans for the proposed multinational force should also be
changed to adapt it to the changing situation on the
ground. In this regard, the multinational force should
perhaps be smaller, reconsider the location of its troops,
seek a new mandate and be able to quickly address its
purely humanitarian mission. The mandate of the
multinational force should be for a limited period of two
to three months at the most.

If the mission of the proposed multinational force
were to be reconsidered in View of the changing
circumstances on the ground, it should be mandated to
disarm the former Rwandan Government soldiers and the
militia who have held captive thousands of Rwandan
refugees in camps in eastern Zaire. It is further the View
of my Government that the international community
should help by making adequate resources available to
facilitate the rehabilitation and integration of the returning
refugees.

In this regard, the Rwandan Government would like
to urge the Council not to hurry into the adoption of a
resolution before getting the full facts about the changing
circumstances on the ground. In this connection, the
Rwanda Government would have no difficulty.

The humanitarian assistance that is required should
be brought into Rwanda in order to cater for the
humanitarian needs that have just arisen.

I would like to state that I had not expected that the
Council would be subjected to a statement by the
representative of Zaire, but I would like here to deny and
refute the allegations put forward by the delegation of
Zaire.

The historical background indicated by the
representative of Zaire was given to this august body
through you, Sir, in a document that was submitted to the
Security Council - document S/ 1996/869 of 23 October
1996 - which indicated the root cause of the crisis in
Zaire. We are not responsible for the misery Zaire is
going through. We are not responsible for
"denationalizing" their own citizens. The Rwandan
Government is aware that Zaire is a long-term neighbour,

 

we have nothing against Zaire, but Zaire should have
nothing against its own citizens.

If I have briefly mentioned this document, it is
because I believe it would save the Council from going into
a long debate that would bore those present here.
I would like to thank you, Sir, for allowing me to
make this statement and to clarify the situation of my
Government in dealing with this urgent problem.

