Ms. Al Hallak (spoke in Arabic): I thank you,
Madam President, for having invited me to brief the
Council today. As the President noted, I am a member
of the Syrian Constitutional Committee and a member
of the Syrian Women's Advisory Board. For more than
half my life, I have worked for the empowerment of
Syrian women and the advancement of their rights in
all fields and continue to fight to achieve that. Today,
I am briefing the Council in my capacity as a Syrian
civil-society feminist.

The fate of millions of Syrians is still in the hands
of the Council because of the continued military
operations in Damascus, Idlib, Aleppo, the north-east
and other governorates.

My statement will focus on three key issues: first,
the gender impact of military conflict on millions of
women and ensuring accountability and punishment;
secondly, securing the effective participation of Syrian
women in the political process as well as in all aspects
of peace and security; and, thirdly, the release of
detainees and forced disappearances by all parties.

The Syrian conflict, which has been ongoing for
more than eight years, has had tragic impacts on all
Syrians, particularly women, girls and children. As the
Special Envoy noted, just this week 16 people, including
women, children and medical staff, were killed as a
result of a missile attack near a maternity hospital in a
displaced persons' camp in Idlib. This is the sixty-fifth
attack on health facilities in north-west Syria since last
April, according to reports by the Syrian American
Medical Society. Furthermore, tens of thousands of
people, the majority of whom are women and children,
have been displaced in north-east and north-west Syria
as a result of the recent military operations, which have
been causing catastrophic humanitarian emergencies.

The current deteriorating political and
humanitarian crisis in Syria has led to an exacerbation
of discrimination against women, and in turn to an
increase in gender-based violence, early and forced
marriage and trafficking of women. Syrian women have
faced numerous threats to their rights from all sides,
not only by existing Syrian discriminating laws but
also by practices of other groups, such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham and the Al-Nusra Front and
others, which have been terrorizing and committing
violence against women and girls, as well as depriving
them from their basic rights. Syrian women make up
the majority of those forcibly displaced. Ensuring
conditions conducive to their safe, voluntary and
dignified return to their places of origin is therefore
essential, as stipulated under the international law.
All parties to armed conflict in Syria today continue
to operate as ifthey can act with impunity. The Security
Council must therefore pressure all parties to abide
by their obligations in accordance international law
and ensure that all those who have committed serious
violations against millions of Syrian women and men
are held accountable legally and punished. Any efforts
by the Council to ensure legal accountability and
punishment, as well as transitional justice mechanisms,
must have the gender perspective and the impacts of
armed conflict on women and girls at their core. That
cannot wait until a political process is concluded.
Despite the fact that space for Syrian civil society
to influence the political process remains limited,
feminists and human rights movements persevere in
their pursuit to chart the future of Syria, especially
on issues related to justice, citizenship and human
rights. Let me be clear. There can be no democracy
in Syria without gender equality or women's effective
participation in the political decision-making process.
I stress those demands because they continue to be
overlooked in forums and decision-making platforms to
this day. Since 2014, despite the efforts of the Special
Envoy and the demands of Syrian feminists, there
have been only two women in the Government and the
opposition delegations to the negotiations process.

Many civil society activists support the ongoing
constitutional process and consider it a path to the
political process. The Constitutional Committee, which
met for the first time this month, is a good step forward in
increasing women's participation, which, as the Special
Envoy mentioned, has reached approximately 30 per
cent. That has been possible thanks to the efforts by
the Special Envoy and very strong advocacy by Syrian
feminists. We very much hope that this percentage will
increase in the negotiations process. That percentage
must be enshrined in our new constitution in order
to ensure that women's rights are guaranteed in
Syria's future.

The matter of detainees and missing and kidnapped
persons is a thorny issue. Regrettably, no progress
has been made since the previous Security Council
briefing (See S/PV.8593) on the matter, held in August.
Despite the Council's expressed sympathy, over
100,000 Syrians remain kidnapped or detained, as
my colleagues from Families for Freedom reported.
They are still subject to torture and other ill-treatment.
Parties to conflict detain many women and children,
using them as hostages to blackmail and exert pressure
on their fathers or husbands who are politically or
militarily active. The majority of detained or forcibly
disappeared persons over the past decade have been
human rights defenders, often under the pretext of the
so-called counter-terrorism efforts. Women activists,
including relief workers, have faced various forms of
violence that is not limited to arrest. Women and girls
who are detained face gender-specific consequences for
being women, particularly in our societies. That causes
them acute stigmatization upon release and can result
in honour killings, divorce or even suicide.

All warring parties in Syria must release all persons
who have been arbitrarily detained or kidnapped, in
keeping with international human rights law and the
provisions of resolution 2254 (2015). Addressing this
issue is a precondition to building confidence between
the parties to the conflict and the Syrian people; and
between the United Nations and the people of Syria, as
mentioned by the Special Envoy. If the United Nations
exerts pressure to prioritize this issue, the legitimacy
of its role in the process will increase in the eyes of
millions ordinary Syrians, who have felt for long that
they have been let down by the international community
efforts to put an end to their suffering.

In conclusion, I call on the all members of the
Council to ensure the full implementation of resolution
2254 (2015), which was adopted by consensus as a road
map for the future of Syria. I also call on the Council to
prioritize the following actions.

First, the Council should call for an immediate
ceasefire to end the current conflict and ensure that all
civilians are protected from repeated attacks.

Secondly, the Council should ensure women's equal
and meaningful participation in all ongoing and future
political decision-making processes. A minimum of
30 per cent representation of women, on the way to
reach the goal of 50/50 gender balance at all levels of
decision-making, must be guaranteed.

Thirdly, the Council should ensure that the new
constitution includes provisions that reflect principles
of international human rights law, including with
regard to gender equality and non-discrimination.
The constitution must also include provisions that
criminalize all forms of gender-based violence and
any kind of discrimination on the basis of gender, race,
ability, color or other status. In addition, it must include
provisions on the primacy of international conventions
over national law.

I return to our most important priority, namely,
giving the release of all arbitrarily detained persons a
humanitarian priority and, accordingly, to the granting
of unconditional access to all places of detention. The
Security Council should also support the ongoing
efforts of the Special Envoy to address the situation
of detainees as part of his tasks and ensure that the
gender-specific consequences for many detained and
kidnapped women after their release are addressed.

The failure of the Security Council to date to stop
the bloodshed in my country and end impunity in
Syria undermines its credibility in terms of carrying
out its core mandate of maintaining international
peace and security. Members heard - just this year
here, in the Chamber - briefings about the serious
impacts the war has had on civilians, including women,
children, persons with disabilities, the families of the
disappeared and medical workers. As Syrians, all of
us wish desperately for the day when all are free from
violence and war. We dream of a democratic country
and an inclusive future in which human rights are
respected, including women's human rights. But our
future, indeed our present, depends upon decisive
action by the Security Council.

