Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the presence of the new
leadership of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals - President Agius and Prosecutor
Brammertz - to the Chamber and thank them for their
detailed reports (S/2019/417, annexes I and II).

Given the particular circumstances, such words
of gratitude for the detailed reports and activities
paradoxically mean that the body that has been
entrusted to them is in a state of permanent breach of
the main purpose of resolution 1966 (2010). Contrary
to the guidelines provided by the Security Council, the
Tribunals, established 25 years ago, show a rare degree
of dynamism under this new arrangement.

The symbolism of that juncture has already
been evoked. Some delegations are commemorating
17 July - the date of the adoption of the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court - as the Day of
International Criminal Justice. However, we see no
reason for celebration. We believe that, in the context of
the subject of today's meeting, other events carry much
greater weight. Unfortunately, they are tragic events.

Twenty years ago, NATO air forces launched a
military operation against Yugoslavia, and for several
months they carried out missile and bombs strikes
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The
targets of those operations were predominantly civilian
facilities, including residential areas of Belgrade,
bridges and schools. Those attacks claimed the lives of
hundreds of people, including children.
At that time, the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) refused to investigate those
criminal attacks. Instead, the ICTY created the myth
about Belgrade's single-handed responsibility for the
war in the Balkans and brutally punished the Serbs,
while justifying the participation of others in the civil
war. All will recall the appalling acquittals of Lieutenant
General Ante Gotovina, Field Commander Naser Orie
and the Kosovo-Albanian Ramush Haradinaj.

That torch was taken up by the Residual
Mechanism. During the reporting period, contrary
to the first instance judgment, there was a retrial and
an inordinately more severe conviction handed down
to the Serb Radovan Karadzic'. Appeals proceedings
are still pending on the verdict involving the life
imprisonment of Ratko Mladie. Such sentences are
always complemented by aggressive media campaigns
and media pressure on judges.

We were surprised by the appearance on the
agenda of the Residual Mechanism of the contempt
case initiated by the ICTY in the context of the trial
of Vojislav Seselj. We view such measures as yet
another attempt to artificially extend the existence of
that body. Ensuring that the accused receive timely and
appropriate medical care remains a pressing issue. We
are very concerned about the health of Ratko Mladie.
We are unable to confirm from independent sources
that he has been receiving quality care and adequate
treatment in the Mechanism's penitentiary facilities.

With the change in leadership of the Residual
Mechanism, we expect improvements both within and
beyond that subsidiary body of the Security Council.

For the time being, we will not contribute any funding
to the part of the United Nations budget that has been
designated for that structure.

In conclusion, I would like to make a personal
request to Prosecutor Brammertz. In his briefing, he
said the following, and I will quote in English:

(spoke in English)
"No one emerged unharmed - not in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in Croatia, in Kosovo or in Serbia".

(spoke in Russian)

I would like to ask the Prosecutor explain to his
speechwriters that any reference to Kosovo in the
Chamber must accompanied by the following well-
established remark, which I will also quote in English:

(spoke in English)
"All references to Kosovo shall be understood
as being in full compliance with resolution 1244
(1999)."

