Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I would like at the outset to say how
pleased I am to see you, Sir, presiding over the
Security Council in the month of June. I am all the
more pleased that it is under the presidency of a noble
son of Central Africa that the Council will consider the
future of the long partnership between my country and
the United Nations, which aims to restore the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to its rightful place
in the community of nations.

I would also like to commend your predecessor,
Sir, the Permanent Representative of France, for the
knowledge and expertise that he demonstrated last
month in managing the complex issues under the
purview of the Security Council.

Lastly, I would like to recognize the essential
nature of the report of the Secretary-General contained
in document S/2011/298, of 12 May 2011, on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). I
thank the Secretary-General and I express my
appreciation for the briefing just given to us by his
Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Ambassador Roger Meece, whose presence
among us today I welcome.

On 18 May, the Security Council held an
important meeting that allowed us to reach the
necessary consensus on the progress achieved and on
identifying challenges on the path towards stabilization
and peacebuilding in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (see S/PV.6539). I will not revisit the fruitful
exchanges that took place during the meeting, which
allowed us to forge a three-fold consensus between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Security
Council, namely, on the progress achieved towards the
normalization of the situation in the country; on the
obstacles that continue to stand in the way of that

normalization, which require our urgent common
attention; and, on the basis of that dual assessment,
consensus on future United Nations action in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on the basis of
MONUSCO's mandate.

I will now briefly touch upon a number of
elements contained in the report under consideration
that seem to me to be essential.

I turn first to the issue of elections, the holding of
which under the best possible conditions will
undoubtedly be the primary immediate challenge for
the Government and the international community. It is
now up to the Congolese political class and the
Commission electorale nationale independante (CENI)
not only to accelerate the preparations for elections due
to be held in line with the established timeline and
within the constitutional deadlines, but also to
administer this process in a peaceful climate. With
regard to the expected role to be played by the United
Nations, I would like to reiterate the request of the
Government for MONUSCO's logistical and technical
support to CENI.

To that end, the United Nations Mission has told
us that it has drawn up a plan that will require
additional resources. This morning, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General reiterated his
appeal in that regard. We have understood that they
will be forthcoming. We trust that the United Nations
will respond favourably. I can assure the Council that,
as a Member of the United Nations and as the country
most directly involved, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will shoulder all obligations stemming from this
plan. We have no doubt that all of the States Members
of the Organization will do likewise. Some of them
have already done so, and we are grateful to them for
that.

Secondly, with regard to the renewal of
MONUSCO's mandate, in paragraph 83 of his report,
the Secretary-General recommends that MONUSCO's
mandate be extended by a further period of 12 months.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo supports that recommendation and also calls for
a renewal of the pertinent provisions contained in
paragraphs 6 and 7 of resolution 1925 (2010), which,
with a View to the progressive and orderly withdrawal
of MONUSCO, mandates the joint assessment team
with helping in the taking of common decisions
regarding the configuration of the United Nations
mission that will best respond to the new challenges
facing us on the ground.

I would like to reiterate here that, as a responsible
partner, the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo assures the Security Council that it has no
intention of weakening the consolidation of the
security situation under way. The Government is fully
aware that it needs the manifold assistance of the
United Nations and, to that end, is willing to discuss
this matter with the Council. It is therefore incumbent
upon us to take strategic multidimensional decisions
together with the Council, including military and non-
military measures, with a View, inter alia, to allowing
the Congolese Government to ensure and assume
security and State authority throughout the national
territory, good governance, the consolidation of the
rule of law and the economic development of the
country.

We call on friendly countries and our partners to
be well aware of the fact that the United Nations and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo are entering a
new transition in their partnership for the country's
renewal. In this new phase, we will undoubtedly need
to have a dialogue, but above all we will need to adapt
in the light of how the situation on the ground develops
and on the basis, let me reiterate, of the principles of
ownership of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
first and foremost, and of the subsidiarity of
international cooperation.

Thirdly, given that stabilization and the
consolidation of peacebuilding for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are a priority overriding all
other priorities, the time has come to move to a new
stage, that of economic recovery after several years of
war. In that area as in all others, as the Minister for
International and Regional Cooperation urged so
eloquently in the Council on 18 May,

"however essential it may be, all future assistance
from the United Nations, and MONUSCO in
particular, [should] be conceived and organized in
a way that makes full use of the investments
made by the international community. In this
way, we can end the crisis of legitimacy, relaunch
the economy and rebuild a State in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - in other
words, capitalize and build on the remarkable if
still precarious results that we have achieved in
this area" (S/PV.6539, p. 6).

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is already
benefiting from a Stabilization and Reconstruction Plan
for War-Affected Areas and from an International
Security and Stabilization Support Strategy, which
targets the province of North Kivu and has been
extended to the districts of Haut-Uele and Bas-Uele in
Province Orientale, the Province of Maniema, the
district of Nord-Tanganyika in the Province of
Katanga, as well as the districts of Sud-Ubangui and
Equateur, in the Province of Equateur.

It is our humble opinion that the aspects of
economic recovery and social rehabilitation and
integration of these stabilization and reconstruction
programmes, in particular the Stabilization and
Reconstruction Plan for Areas Emerging from Armed
Conflict, and the programme drawn up by the United
Nations country team that aims at the consolidation
and development of the regions of the north and the
west which, although free of conflict, are facing the
consequences of instability in the north and east of the
country, must be revisited and rethought.

It also seems to us just as important to go beyond
these programmes. We call on the international
community and on friendly countries that wish to do so
to come to our country, invest massively and
participate in our development and economic recovery.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo's potential and
its population's vitality allow us to envisage win-win
cooperation. Certain countries have already understood
this fact. We call on others to join us and help us down
that path.

Fourthly, on security sector reform, with respect
to the National Police, a request has already been
submitted by the Government, but as the Secretary-
General freely recognizes in his report, "[p]rogress
remains limited because of the lack of complementary
support by donors to provide the necessary basic
equipment" (S/2011/298, para. 55). Despite this, we
continue to place our trust in MONUSCO for the
reform of the National Police, with the short-term goal
of training for the police personnel required to provide
security for the elections.

Regarding the national army, the bilateral option
is preferred and the one for which agreements currently
being implemented have already been negotiated and
concluded with certain countries. Following the re-

opening of military bases - particularly those at
Kamina, Kananga, Kindu and Kisangani - the
7

military school at the Kitona base has been reopened
since 24 May to train junior officers in the Congolese
army, thanks to funding from the European Union
through its mission to provide advice and assistance for
security sector reform in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Officers and juniors officers of the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo
(FARDC) will be trained there by France. We thank
that country for its support to security sector reform
aimed at building peace and security, which will
certainly lead to the establishment of an army that we
trust will be republican, loyal and competent.

Fifthly, on the struggle against armed groups, last
month one of the 10 Rwandan fugitives still being
sought by international justice for their presumed
involvement in the 1994 Rwandan genocide,
Mr. Bernard Munyagishari, was arrested by the
FARDC. Other arrests will follow in the framework of
the commitment undertaken by my Government to the
United Nations, at a pace that will not undermine the
restored peace.

Regarding the threat embodied by the Lord's
Resistance Army rebel movement, it will be necessary,
with the help of the countries that have made a
leitmotif of the struggle against that movement -
which, we recall, is of Ugandan origin - to step up
measures to protect civilians from the atrocities
committed by the rebel movement of Mr. Joseph Kony
and his henchmen. We believe that all the elements are
objectively in place to concretely and significantly
reduce or even eliminate that armed group's capacity
do to harm as it runs riot in an area stretching across
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Sudan, Uganda
and my own country. This is possible, and is necessary
if we are to make peace a reality.

Generally speaking, we reaffirm that, when it
comes to the struggle against armed groups, including
Congolese outlaws, significant progress has
undoubtedly been achieved in reducing the threat to the
security of the population and in improving the
Government's management of the security situation.
The normalization of relations with neighbouring
States continues. Measures have been taken to remove
disruptive elements from the borders, although we
reiterate the position we have held since February
2001, which has remained unchanged, that any armed
foreigner, whoever he may be, should return to his
country of origin.

Sixthly and finally, on the issue of justice for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo: if we want a true
peace, we need to restore truth. I can assure our
mothers, wives, sisters and daughters that we have not
forgotten the atrocities they have suffered. We have not
forgotten those mothers disemboweled at Kabinda,
Kasika or Katogota. We have not forgotten the
massacres at Makobola, Kasala, Imesse and Kamituga,
and still less the images of our sisters buried alive at
Mwenga.

We recall that, in its determination to put a
definitive end to impunity for serious crimes
committed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and in implementation of the relevant
recommendations of the United Nations mapping
report of October 2010, the Government has taken the
initiative to establish within the Congolese judiciary
specialized mixed chambers attached to certain
provincial appeal courts with the power to try grave
violations of human rights committed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

To that end, the Government has submitted to
Parliament a bill on the creation of a specialized mixed
chamber for the suppression of these crimes. These
specialized mixed chambers will have the potential not
only to help put an end to impunity, but also to
improve victims' access to the justice system and to
more generally enhance the capacities and willingness
of the national Congolese judiciary to effectively
prosecute the most serious international crimes.

Since the bill on the specialized mixed chambers
contains specific provisions conferring universal
competence to these chambers, we believe that the
cooperation of other States, and above all of
neighbouring States, would be an important security
cordon allowing us to prosecute the perpetrators of
grave crimes even once they have fled the crime scene
or when the authorities of their respective countries do
not wish to prosecute them.

Thus, the specialized mixed chambers, although
established by the Congolese legislature under national
law, would see their effectiveness and credibility
enhanced if they were to receive the firm support of the
Security Council. Such support would require the
Council, acting under Chapter VII of the Charter, to
decide to establish a responsibility and an obligation
for Member States to cooperate with the specialized
mixed chambers, especially in the arrest and
extradition of suspects. This would be necessary when
the absence of cooperation and denial of justice could
pose a real threat to international peace and security.

In conclusion, I must voice my Government's
thanks to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
to all MONUSCO personnel and associated civilian
and humanitarian personnel for their tireless efforts to
achieve lasting peace and security in my country. To
all, I reiterate the full gratitude of my Government for
their total devotion to the cause of peace and to
restoring the dignity of the Congolese people.

To Mr. Ban Ki-moon, I say that His Excellency
Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, welcomed the
announcement early this week that the Secretary-
General would seek a second five-year term at the head
of our universal Organization. Our President echoes the
emerging unanimity on the subject of the Secretary-
General's tireless commitment and leadership in
spheres as varied as gender equality and the
empowerment of women, the Millennium Development
Goals, climate change, international peace and security,
development, United Nations system reform and
strengthening multilateralism. Our Head of State
assures the Secretary-General of his support for his
candidature - the candidature of a man of his word
who has devoted particular attention to and interest in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to which he has
shown every consideration.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has not
forgotten that, in January 2007, just a few days after
assuming office, the Secretary-General reserved his
11-36878

very first official visit for our country, followed by
others in November 2008, February 2009 and June
2010. This undoubtedly reflects the Secretary-
General's constant devotion to working for
peacebuilding in my country.

Once again, my country thanks him for his
personal investment in the quest for a lasting solution
to the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and for having spared no effort to enable the
universal Organization to help the young Congolese
democracy to reach its full potential and the Congolese
people to realize their political and socio-economic
aspirations. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
therefore remains convinced that, during his second
mandate, the issue of the Congo will be brought to a
close.

Before concluding, Mr. President, I would like, if
I may, to give you a little wink. I recall that on 13 June,
next Monday, the Secretary-General will be celebrating
his birthday. What better birthday present could the
Security Council offer him under your presidency than
to renew its trust in him between now and then?

