Mr. Tarragfi (Brazil): My delegation wishes to
associate itself with the Views expressed by the
Chairman of the Group of 77 earlier in this meeting.
We would also like to acknowledge the United
Kingdom's initiative to convene an open debate in the
Security Council to examine the interrelationships
among energy, security and climate.

Climate change is an extremely important issue
with multiple dimensions. However, utmost caution
must be exercised in establishing links between
conflicts and the utilization of natural resources or the
evolution of climate on our planet. To determine
whether any particular environmental phenomenon
represents a threat to international peace and security
remains a very complex task. Not only should conflicts
not be traced back to a single cause, but the matter is
also invariably loaded with many political connotations
that might impair an objective analysis.

My delegation considers that there is a more
relevant, stronger link between climate change and
development as opposed to security. Droughts or floods
can ravage the economies of many countries, especially
in the developing world, and can aggravate poverty and
underdevelopment. But the effects of climatic
phenomena per se do not necessarily result in conflicts.

The social and economic consequences of
extreme events related to climate change may arguably
impact international security. Should the countries
listed in annex I of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), which are
historically responsible for global warming, not fulfil
their commitments regarding the reduction in the
emission of greenhouse gases in a timely manner,
scientists have agreed that there is a high probability
that the world climate will be seriously affected,
thereby becoming another factor of social and
economic instability in many areas of the world.

My Government firmly supports the
strengthening of the international regime on climate
change, that is, the UNFCCC and its Kyoto Protocol.
We remain convinced that the negotiating process
should continue to take place exclusively in the context
of the international regime and that it should be guided
by the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities. That principle - according to which
the contribution one country can make to the solution
of the problem must be proportional to its contribution
to the creation of that problem - is of vital importance
for equitable and balanced international cooperation
among countries.

The global nature of climate change and its
multiple dimensions suggest that any relevant
international debate on the issue should take place at a
forum of universal representation, such as the General
Assembly. The increasing importance of issues related
to world climate would warrant serious consideration
of the possibility of convening a special session of the
General Assembly to discuss the matter.

The debate at the United Nations should not seek
to be a substitute for negotiations undertaken in the
context of the UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol. It
may nonetheless add to the political perspective on the
debate. It could also serve to underline such issues as
the recognition of the historical responsibility for the
accumulation of greenhouse gases and the funding of
adaptation measures.

The strategic nature of issues related to climate
change and energy requires stronger and more effective
cooperation frameworks that recognize the role of
developing countries in the search for solutions that
take into account the challenges of global warming
while contributing to economic growth and social
justice.

My Government favours diversification of energy
sources, both as a way to provide new development
prospects and new sources of income for many
developing countries and as a means to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions.

We recognize the strategic importance of
renewable energy as a driver of sustainable
development. Renewable fuels, such as ethanol and
biodiesel, can play a major role in the world's energy
matrix. We are indeed convinced that biofuels can help
to address four important challenges of our century:
energy supply; environmental sustainability;
employment and income generation in rural areas; and
technological development.

In conclusion, the delegation of Brazil recognizes
the importance of the international debate on climate
change and energy, with special emphasis on renewable
energies. The General Assembly would provide the
appropriate venue for addressing these issues in a
comprehensive manner and with the participation of all
Member States.

