The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

We note with satisfaction that the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) is continuing to work
energetically to implement resolution 1373 (2001). No
small credit for this goes to the Chairman of the
Committee, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, to all the members
of the Committee, to the experts and to the Secretariat.

It is important that the CTC not confine its work
to analysing the reports submitted by States on the
measures they are taking in the fight against terrorism.
The Committee must also constantly bear in mind the
need to give advisory and technical assistance to States
in order to enable them to effectively comply with their
obligations under resolution 1373 (2001). The active
work of the CTC in setting up close cooperation with
other international structures concerned with counter-
terrorism is of great significance. We expect that the
appointment of an additional expert on that subject will
give new momentum to the work of the Committee.

We also support the proposal that in selecting
new experts due attention should be given to ensuring
the representation of all regions. Of course, we support
Ambassador Greenstock's appeal to the effect that the
Committee should get the appropriate level of
Secretariat support. We agree too that, at present,
increasing interaction between the CTC and regional
organizations is of particular importance.

Since Russia is the current President of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), I can
inform the Council that the CIS attaches the utmost
importance to counter-terrorism issues. We have set up
the appropriate legal basis in the form of a treaty on
cooperation among States parties in the area of
counter-terrorism. In Moscow, we have established the
CIS Counter-Terrorism Centre, in whose work the
majority of law-enforcement bodies and special
services of the countries of the Commonwealth take
part.

Last July, a branch of the CIS Counter-Terrorism
Centre was opened in Bishkek; it will monitor the
situation in Central Asia and coordinate the activities
of the relevant CIS bodies in the counter-terrorism
fight in the region.

We support the programme of work of the CTC
for the coming 90-day period. We believe it is
important to begin preparing now for the next stage in
the Committee's work, when it will be necessary to
review the responses of States to the additional
questions put to them by the CTC. It is necessary to
establish in advance the methodology by which the
CTC should be guided in putting forward its
recommendations for the elimination of flaws in the
legislation and practical mechanisms of States to fight
terrorism.

The Security Council has a clear general
understanding that the Counter-Terrorism Committee
should not, and will not, function as a repressive organ
or in any way go beyond the limits of its mandate.

Nor should we forget that resolution 1373 (2001)
on counter-terrorism was adopted in response to one of
the most dangerous challenges of modern times, which
was described by the Council as a threat to
international peace and security. The Security Council
itself therefore bears the main responsibility for putting

an end to this threat, in strict compliance with the
Charter of the United Nations. Of course, this applies
also to the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

The positive trends in the work of the CTC over
the past six months have laid a genuine basis for the
effective implementation by the Committee of its key
functions in carefully monitoring compliance by all
Member States with the decisions of the Security
Council and of the United Nations in the counter-
terrorism struggle. Russia, as a permanent member of
the Security Council and a Vice-Chairman of the CTC,
is ready to continue to cooperate in these efforts.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Spain. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.

