Mr. Vieira: I would like to thank you, Sir, for
the invitation to address the Security Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).

First, allow me to inform the Council that, on
31 August, after my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.8337), I hosted, upon the request of the Prime
Minister of Guinea-Bissau, Aristides Gomes, a high-
level meeting of the PBC, with his participation. That
was an opportunity for the Prime Minister to have a
direct and interactive dialogue with member States.

On 10 December, I convened a meeting of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration when we received updates
from several briefers, including Mr. Jose Viegas Filho,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), and Mr. Tanou
Kone', Permanent Observer of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS). Unfortunately, the
Government of Guinea-Bissau was not able to hold
elections on 18 November as scheduled, due to a series
of sequential delays that led to the voter registration
process not being concluded on time.

Special Representative Viegas, in our meeting,
underlined that the political parties continued to
disagree over technical aspects of the registration,
trade accusations of attempts at fraud, and deliberately
delay the process. According to him, those tensions
are creating an unhealthy pre-electoral atmosphere.
Stability, in his view, is also affected by the spreading
of views that some would be interested in postponing
the legislative voting so as to combine it with the
presidential election in 2019. In that regard, it was
also mentioned during our discussion that some of the
political stakeholders in Guinea-Bissau could find it
financially difficult to organize two elections in the
same period.

We were also informed that the Government
announced the end of voter registration on 19 December
and indicated that more than 95 per cent of the estimated
potential voters were registered. I also received the
information that, yesterday, President Jose' Mario Vaz
published a decree establishing 10 March 2019 as the
new date for the legislative elections. It is important
to underline that the international community has been
active in supporting Guinea-Bissau.

The contribution to the election basket fund
administered by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) was positively answered and
financing the legislative elections is no longer an issue.
The fund has collected up to $9.8 million. Nigeria and
Timor-Leste have also provided a number of voter
registration kits. Portugal will provide the actual
ballot papers and the United Nations Development
Programme, on its part, has offered another batch
of registration equipment and consumables for the
polling day.

The international community has also remained
engaged with the authorities of the country regarding
the electoral process, especially the so-called Guinea-
Bissau P5 group of partners in Guinea-Bissau,
comprising the African Union, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, ECOWAS, the
European Union and the United Nations. I once again
commend the international community for supporting
the legislative elections.

Guinea-Bissau should also be congratulated for
starting the resource mobilization for the basket fund
with its own contribution. During our PBC meeting on

10 December, we were informed of the promulgation
by the President, on 3 December, of a gender-parity
law that establishes a quota of 36 per cent for women
candidates for Parliament and representation in public-
sector institutions. Allow me to welcome that important
step towards gender inclusion in Guinea-Bissau.

Following the deliberations of the configuration,
I would like to call on the political stakeholders of
Guinea-Bissau to sustain their commitment to the
Conakry Agreement. In that respect, I would also call
on the leadership of the country to avoid further delays
and to hold legislative elections on the established date
as a conclusion for the transition towards stability.

Bissau-Guineans should continue engaging in
dialogue to resolve their political differences. The
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commissionwillcontinuetofocusontheimplementation
of the Conakry Agreement and the preparations for
elections. We will continue to work closely with Special
Representative Viegas and all international partners
to that end. The ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau
(ECOMIB), UNDP and UNIOGBIS have an important
role to play in the crucial Guinea-Bissau electoral cycle.

At the latest PBC meeting, the Permanent
Observer of ECOWAS commented on the most
recent developments of the Community, including the
organization of the next Summit of the Heads of State
of ECOWAS, to be held on 22 December in Abuja. The
influence of ECOWAS remains very important given
the organization's key role in the Conakry Agreement
and the presence of the ECOMIB military force in
Guinea-Bissau, which had its mandate extended to
August 2019.

Allow me therefore to commend the Government
of Guinea-Bissau, ECOWAS and the European Union
for working to extend the ECOMIB presence in the
country. Those developments once more highlight the
need to building the capacities of the Bissau-Guinean
security forces. The PBC will continue to support the
United Nations and the international community, in
consultation with the Government of Guinea-Bissau,
to consider ways to strengthen the institutions of the
State, especially the justice system.

Another reason for organizing the PBC meeting
was the fact that Prime Minister Aristides Gomes
transmitted to me the need of the Government for
assistance in addressing the financial crisis afflicting
his country, particularly the education sector. During
our meeting, we heard from the World Bank on the
economic and fiscal situations of the country, which
remain severely strained. Officials from the Bank
informed me that economic growth is projected to
decline to 3.8 per cent from 5.9 per cent in 2017. Tax
revenues are also expected to decline from 10.3 per cent
of the gross domestic product (GDP) in 2017 to 8.5 per
cent of the GDP in 2018 - that is, from $140 million
to $115 million - mainly due to lower income from
cashew exports. A decline in economic activity and
a consequent decrease in imports also contributed
to this scenario by lowering tax revenue. They also
highlighted the fact that, despite some recent increases
in investments in this area, the total spending in
education in the country remains low, at 2.2 per cent of
GDP, and is dominated by salaries.

In connection with the socioeconomic and political
environment, Guinea-Bissau has seen a series of
strikes, which have affected the activities of the public
sector. State-owned schools in Guinea-Bissau have
been closed for months and teachers have organized
demonstrations requesting unpaid salaries. According
to the information that I received, Guinea-Bissau needs
an estimated $7.8 million to pay 18 months' worth of
accumulated salaries for teachers. We have also seen, in
the past months, a series of strikes and demonstrations
by civil servants and ex-combatants. Unfortunately,
student demonstrations organized on 9 November were
suppressed with force and resulted in the dismissal of
the Minister of the Interior by the President.

Allow me to add that I informally consulted
the International Monetary Fund and was informed
that a mission of the Fund to Guinea-Bissau is being
considered for 2019 in order to review the existing
programme with the country. Discussions in this regard
have been under way since October 2018 and have
not been able to reach a conclusion. I will continue to
follow this issue closely and bring it to the attention of
the PBC.

I would like to call on the international community
to consider the possibility of providing emergency and
targeted budget support to stabilize the public sector.
At the same time, I encourage the Government of
Guinea-Bissau, for its part, to do more to demonstrate
its full commitment to holding elections and to put in
place credible mechanisms to guarantee the proper and
transparent use of assistance that may be available.

Today, we have just heard the Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun,
introduce the special report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/1086) with options for apossible reconfiguration
of the United Nations presence in the country and a
reprioritization of its tasks, as determined by the latest
revision of the mandate of UNIOGBIS. Among other
points, as mentioned today, it proposes a three-phase
new engagement of the United Nations with Guinea-
Bissau that would end with a transition and the exit
of UNIOGBIS. I am informed that the Guinea-Bissau
Government was fully consulted in the recent United
Nations strategic assessment mission to reconfigure
UNIOGBIS. Allow me to add that I believe that it would
be positive if the Peacebuilding Commission were also
consulted in future assessments of this kind.

UNIOGBIS has continued to play a key supporting
role with the Government of Guinea-Bissau and in the
efforts ofECOWAS and ofthe Guinea-Bissau P5 to help
the country resolve its challenges. I would like to take this
opportunity to once again show the support of this PBC
configuration for the work of Special Representative
Viegas and his team. The PBC, in its advisory role to the
Security Council, could make a positive contribution
to the discussion of the reconfiguration of UNIOGBIS.
This effort should be consistent with a revised electoral
calendar and a transition plan that considers the
proposed ECOMIB drawdown.

There is also space for the engagement of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration in any transition effort
that might happen, including the elaboration of a
transition plan, if this is the decision of the Council.
The PBC has already demonstrated its potential in
transition settings, as exemplified by the work in Sierra
Leone and Liberia. We should continue building on
these best practices and lessons learned.

