Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - and
the associated countries, Cyprus and Malta, as well as the
European Free Trade Association countries members of the
European Economic Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein, align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union welcomes Bangladesh' s initiative
to organize an open debate in the Security Council on this
very important topic, which we View as being linked to the
chain of thematic debates organized in recent months - all
of which were aimed at addressing the serious problem of
the humanitarian consequences of internal strife and
conflict. We are particularly honoured to see you, Mr.
Foreign Minister, presiding over this session.

These debates should, in our view, be considered as
important steps in identifying possible actions to be
undertaken by the Council aimed at preventing and, when
necessary, putting an end to violence directed against
civilian populations or the humanitarian personnel charged
with assisting them. In its presidential statement of 12
February last year, this body expressed its willingness to
respond to those situations. It is our hope that the findings
and conclusions of the work done so far will lead the
Council to decide on necessary action directed at deterring
grave violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights law and at fostering what the Secretary-
General called in his latest report on the work of the
Organization (A/54/1) a "culture of prevention".

The Union welcomed the Secretary-General's report
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/l999/957). The Secretary-General's pertinent
recommendations need urgent consideration. The Security
Council is expected to give its first response to the
Secretary-General's report in April. That will offer the
Council an opportunity to discuss the problems in a
concrete manner and to make proposals on how to
improve the United Nations system to deal more
efficiently with threats to international peace and security.

We should bear in mind, however, that humanitarian
assistance cannot resolve conflicts that in essence have
political origins. That is why it is so important to address
the root causes of conflicts. The promotion of economic
and social development and the establishment and
consolidation of democracy, good governance and the rule
of law, as well as full adherence to and implementation
of human rights and international humanitarian law, are
of great importance in conflict prevention.

The Security Council, through early response, has a
duty and an irreplaceable role to play in the prevention of
conflicts and crises. When necessary, a preventive
deployment or another preventive United Nations
presence should be swiftly considered by the Council. The
Council has an important role to play in preventing
violent conflict, and this perspective should be a natural
feature of the Council's agenda. In the case of massive
and ongoing abuses, the consideration by the Security
Council of appropriate enforcement action based on clear
and identifiable criteria may also be necessary.

Massive and systematic breaches of international
humanitarian law and human rights law can constitute a
threat to peace and security and therefore demand the
attention and action of the Security Council. As a matter
of fact, this body has already adopted a number of
resolutions in the aftermath of massive violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law that it
considered a threat to peace and security. There are
several examples where the international community set
aside its differences and united to exert pressure on
violators of international humanitarian law and human
rights law. We hope that this will become the norm in the
future.

 

Increasing numbers of civilians, including women and
children, have been specifically targeted or used as direct
instruments of war. Non-compliance with binding
obligations under international law by warring parties has
become the norm in today's conflicts. The European Union
is alarmed at the seriousness of the situation and deplores
the persistent violations of international human rights law
and humanitarian law. This situation is of course
compounded by the lack of law enforcement mechanisms
to which the international community can resort every time
a serious violation of those norms and principles is
committed.

In the fight against impunity, the European Union
would like to stress the importance of the early activation
of the International Criminal Court, and its important future
role both in deterring grave violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law and in bringing to
justice those responsible for committing those crimes. We
would urge all those who have not yet signed the Rome
Statute to do so, and we urge all States to proceed to
ratification as soon as possible.

It is a well-established principle of international
humanitarian law that States have the primary responsibility
to protect civilian populations from violence. Secure access
to humanitarian assistance by all victims of armed conflict
is a prerequisite of any humanitarian operation. State and
non-State parties to a conflict are obliged to facilitate the
provision of humanitarian aid and should cooperate fully to
that end. There is also a responsibility on the part of the
international community to facilitate the provision of
humanitarian aid in cases where that obligation is not met.
Denial of access to civilians in need, in breach of
international law, and the targeting of civilian populations,
which are often used as tools of warfare, must be
condemned in all circumstances.

The European Union would like to encourage the
Council to further act on the willingness expressed in the
presidential statement agreed at the end of the debate last
month (S/PRST/2000/4), and to be prepared to take all
appropriate measures at its disposal to ensure the safety and
security of humanitarian assistance missions and
personnel - including the inclusion in peace agreements of
provisions regarding safe and unimpeded access for
humanitarian workers and supplies and the adoption of
resolutions stressing that imperative.

The Secretary-General proposed in his report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict that the failure to
comply with those obligations should result in the
imposition of targeted sanctions. The European Union
would like to encourage the Council to further develop
standards and rules aimed at minimizing the humanitarian
impact of sanctions.

The European Union wants to underscore the need
to ensure safe and unimpeded access by United Nations
or other humanitarian personnel to all those in need. The
European Union would like to recognize at this juncture
the extremely important role played by United Nations
agencies and other humanitarian organizations - with
special reference to the International Committee of the
Red Cross and non-governmental organizations - in the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to populations in need.

Much has been said about the changing nature of
conflicts and the fact that the majority of casualties are
innocent civilians, who are quite often utilized as
instruments in the complex dynamics of conflicts. In this
context, the European Union would like to encourage the
Secretary-General to resort more often to the prerogative
given to him by Article 99 of the Charter, in which he is
invited to bring to the attention of the Security Council
any matter that in his opinion may threaten the
maintenance of international peace and security. For that
purpose, we are of the opinion that it would be
indispensable to improve and use the capacity of the
Secretariat to enable the Security Council to consider
ways in which it might regularly monitor potential
conflicts or massive violations of human rights and
humanitarian law, either through the use of existing
mechanisms, such as the International Fact-Finding
Commission, or by other means.

A number of other measures have been identified
that can help alleviate the suffering of these hapless
populations. Curbing the excessive and uncontrolled
accumulation and spread of small arms and light weapons
is certainly one of them, given their potential to augment
violence against civilians, increase the suffering of those
affected, hinder post-conflict reconstruction efforts and
reduce the prospects for sustainable development. The
European Union encourages the Security Council to
consider using its powers in a more decisive way to
impose arms embargoes at the early stages of emerging
crises.

As to the use of anti-personnel landmines, the
European Union wants once more to emphasize the
importance it attaches to the full and speedy
implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-

 

personnel Mines and on Their Destruction. We are
especially alarmed by the re-mining that is taking place in
various conflicts. The European Union urges all parties
concerned to stop this practice.

All States parties to the Geneva Conventions have an
obligation to teach and disseminate humanitarian law to
their military forces and, conversely, there is an obligation
for these forces to respect those principles and laws.
The European Union recognizes the value of including
a humanitarian dimension into multidimensional
peacekeeping operations. Human rights tasks and
humanitarian assistance, as well as other relevant conflict
prevention and peace-building components - if they are to
be included in the mandates by the Security Council -
must be fully integrated into the planning of peacekeeping
operations and their functions made clear from the start.
Coordination of these components with others in
peacekeeping operations and the attribution of the necessary
resources available to achieve the mandates given are
prerequisites for success.

We look forward to the comprehensive study on
peacekeeping operations that the Secretary-General has just
commissioned.

The European Union would like to encourage the
Council to further consider modalities for the
implementation of measures aimed at effectively separating
combatants from civilians in camps designated for
internally displaced persons or refugees. It is essential that
international efforts are made to guarantee the humanitarian
nature of such camps. Equally important is that refugees
and internally displaced persons are placed at a reasonable
distance from areas of conflicts or the borders. In this
respect, the European Union would like to support a wider
use of the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, as
well as the inclusion of its provisions in the mandates of
United Nations operations.

We would also like to encourage the Secretary-General
to continue to actively seek to ensure that the rights and the
welfare of the child are afforded high priority in peace
negotiations and throughout the process of consolidating
peace in the aftermath of conflict. The European Union
commends the inclusion of children's concerns in the peace
agendas already adopted or in the process of being
discussed for Burundi, the Sudan and Sierra Leone. The
European Union would also like to highlight the recent
conclusion of the additional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on child soldiers, which raised the
age of participation in armed conflicts to 18 years.

The Secretary-General has suggested the
establishment of safe corridors - or security zones - for
the protection of civilians and the delivery of assistance
in situations characterized by the threat of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. We would like
to encourage him to further develop modalities for the
implementation of this recommendation.

With regard to confidence building, effective
information is vital. The United Nations should therefore
enhance its public information capability at the field level,
namely through the inclusion of public information
components at the planning stage of peacekeeping and
peace-building operations. In this respect, it is also
crucially important to prevent the media from being used
as a tool of conflict.

Some developments have taken place recently to
better coordinate humanitarian assistance and make it
more consistent with the broader United Nations peace
and development agenda. An example of this is the
continuous development of the strategic framework
approach designed, in part, to ensure that humanitarian
assistance supports overall peace-building activities.

The strategic coordination of humanitarian actors at
the field level should be further improved, including
through better articulation of the responsibilities of both
humanitarian resident coordinators and the special
representatives of the Secretary-General. A recent
welcome development in this issue was the elaboration of
a "Note of Guidance" intended to establish clearer
reporting requirements and lines of authority, as well as
ensuring that United Nations humanitarian assistance is
consistent with the broader United Nations peace and
development activities.

The consolidated appeals process is an important
strategic planning tool that facilitates the promotion of
transition from relief to development. In this respect, the
European Union would like to encourage the relevant
Secretariat departments to reinforce linkages between the
consolidated appeals process and the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) process
when the two are being used together, as this will further
enhance the cooperation and joint planning between relief
and development activities.

 

Let me conclude by saying that we have already done
much of the work needed to identify the actions necessary
to prevent unwarranted human suffering. What we have
lacked is the political courage to take those decisions. An
immense effort will be required to overcome old, ingrained
habits, but that should not discourage us from taking on this
fight in favour of humanity.

