Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): On
behalf of the delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
would like to express our appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report (S/2010/ 169) on
the United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo
(UNMIK). I would also like to thank Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Kosovo, for introducing the report. We
welcome the participation of His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremic', Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and
Mr. Skender Hyseni in today's meeting.
We note with appreciation that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, operating
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999), is
successfully continuing the implementation of its
strategic goal - the promotion of security, stability
and respect for human rights in Kosovo. We
particularly welcome and commend UNMIK's efforts
to encourage the process of reconciliation and to
facilitate constructive dialogue and regional
cooperation, as well as its focus on mediation between
the communities and its support to minority
communities.

In that context, we are of the View that efforts to
encourage inter-community dialogue and confidence-
building among the parties are of particular importance
in the area of returns. Although the number of
voluntary minority returns remains low, we are
encouraged by the fact that there has been an increase
in comparison to 2008. Furthermore, in stressing the
importance of providing conditions conducive to
sustainable return, we welcome UNMIK's efforts to
establish task forces, with the main objective of
decreasing tension and drawing attention to common
needs.

Furthermore, during the reporting period,
UNMIK continued to facilitate the activities of the
Reconstruction Implementation Commission, led by
the Council of Europe, on the reconstruction of cultural
and religious heritage sites. We also welcome the
European Union's announcement of the appointment of
the head of the Greek Liaison Office in Pristina as
facilitator in that area, and we urge the key
stakeholders to engage constructively in consultations
led by the facilitator.

Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that
strengthening the rule of law in Kosovo is of great
importance. Hence, we welcome the activities of
UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX), operating within the status-
neutral framework of the United Nations, in that
regard. We also support the existing practice of
cooperation and coordination among UNMIK, EULEX,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and NATO - the latter present through the
troops of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) - and we hope
that this practice will continue. Furthermore, we note
that, during the reporting period, the transition of
KFOR to a deterrent presence was implemented in
gradual and phased manner, as stated in the Secretary-
General's report.

In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina would
like to reiterate that stability and security in Kosovo

are important to achieving lasting peace and prosperity
in our region. We believe that the international
community should continue to play an important role
in supporting the aspirations of the countries of the
region to their integration into European and Euro-
Atlantic structures. At the same time, we believe that
the countries of the region should continue to
cooperate with the international community in order to
reach these goals. Finally, we would like to reiterate
that fostering good relations and cooperation with its
neighbours is of the utmost importance to Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

