The President: I thank Mr. Carrillo for his
informative briefing.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2014/828, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Australia, Chad, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, the Republic
of Korea, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2185 (2014).

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Australia.

Australia deeply appreciates the important role of
policing in peacekeeping and peacebuilding, reflecting
the lessons we have learned as a contributor to peace
operations in our region of the Indo-Pacific - from
Cambodia to Solomon Islands to Timor-Leste and
elsewhere. We are pleased that the Council is focusing
on policing issues in countries emerging from conflict.

Australia's close friend and neighbour Timor-Leste
provides a striking example of the vital importance
of building effective host-nation police and other law
enforcement institutions. In 2006, four years after
Timor-Leste's independence, violence broke out in Dili,
with Timorese police and military fighting each other
in the streets, dozens of deaths and over 150,000 people
displaced. The Council authorized a new peacekeeping
operation - the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste. And Australia led an International
Stabilisation Force, including 200 Australian police.
The focus of those police transitioned over time
from stabilization to institution-building. Just two
years later, Timor-Leste faced another shock - dual
assassination attempts against President Ramos-Horta
and Prime Minister Gusmao - yet overall law and
order remained intact. That was due to Timor-Leste's
efforts in the interim, with United Nations and other
international support, to build its own police and other
rule-of-law institutions.

Police are the public face of security, to whom
populations should turn for protection. That is why
the work of the United Nations on policing is so
vital. It can repair the community's faith and trust in
local authorities, build a sense of safety and security
and lay the groundwork for long-term stability and
development.

Australia has invested heavily in international
police peacekeeping. The Australian Federal Police
International Deployment Group is one of the world's
few stand-alone deployable police peacekeeping
capacities, and the first in the world to receive United
Nations recognition for its predeployment training. In
the last 12 months alone, the Group provided training
to over 3,500 law and justice officials from 20 nations.
This year, we celebrate 50 years of Australian police
contributions to United Nations peacekeeping.

Over the years, there has been a massive increase
in the number of police deployed by the United Nations.
Just 20 years ago, there were around only 1,600 police
in United Nations missions; today there are over 12,300.
And the policing-related mandates authorized by the
Council have become increasingly complex. We must
ensure that United Nations police components are as
effective as possible in achieving those mandates.

This meeting and resolution 2185 (2014), which we
have just adopted, are landmark steps. The resolution
includes clear and strategic guidance for United
Nations police, and practical, concrete measures to
improve their effectiveness. It reflects the breadth of
contemporary developments in United Nations policing,
including the adoption of modern technologies and
the use of specialized police teams in areas such as
sexual and gender-based violence and complex serious
crime. It articulates the relevance of policing across the
areas of focus of the Council, from the protection of
civilians - which is central to all the United Nations
work - to combatting transnational organized crime
and terrorism, countering violent extremism and
fighting impunity. I will highlight three elements.

First, with regard to training, standards and
guidance, over 100 countries contribute police to United
Nations missions, each with their own nuanced policing
approaches. The resolution calls on the Secretary-
General to continue to work on unified standards,
guidance and training.

Secondly, building police institutions is vital to the
United Nations work on justice, corrections and the rule
of law, but it is not easy. It requires highly specialized
skills. The resolution asks the Secretary-General to
focus on ensuring police components have the right
expertise to achieve this. The political dimensions of
reform can often be as important as technical aspects.
The Secretary-General's envoys must make that a focus
of their good offices work. Many arms of the United
Nations work on policing reform, and the resolution
calls for better coordination of those efforts.

Thirdly, on women and peace and security, in order
to be effective, police must recognize the particular
needs of women. The best way to ensure that is to
involve women in outreach and decision-making and to
have more female police officers, so that police forces
better reflect the diversity of the communities in which
they operate and can better respond to their needs.

A useful example is Vanuatu, where Australia
funded the establishment of female police barracks,
allowing large numbers of women to participate in
and graduate from recruit training and in turn become
mentors and role models. This has helped dramatically
redress the gender imbalance in the Vanuatu Police
Force. That issue was also raised by Mr. Ladsous, and
I ask Commissioner Carrilho what more we can do
to encourage and support more women to join police
forces in countries hosting United Nations missions.

Today's resolution paves the way for continued
Council focus on policing issues, including an annual
meeting with heads ofpolice components, so as to ensure
that the Council's decisions on policing are informed
by the actual experiences of police components in the
field. It makes the case for the Secretary-General's
forthcoming strategic review of peace operations to
deal with policing issues.

Policing is an integral part of United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding work. Importantly, the
development of effective, accountable and community-
focused policing institutions is an integral part of
responsible exit strategies for peacekeeping operations.
It is Australia's objective that today's meeting and
resolution make a practical contribution to enduring
peace, security and stability.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the members of the Council.

