Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Ging for his briefing.

The situation has stabilized in many areas in
Syria. The authorities are creating the conditions for
a dignified and safe return of refugees and internally
displaced persons. The Syrian Government has
called on its citizens to come home and participate in
rebuilding the country after the devastating conflict.
It has provided security and safety guarantees. Law
Number 10, as Damascus has continued to explain, is
not aimed at undermining property rights. A series of
measures was developed to streamline passport and
customs control, social and medical care, training and
employment assistance, and preferential lending.

At the same time, with the support of Russian
experts, there are efforts under way to demine, clear
rubble and repair infrastructure. A total of 93 medical
and 226 educational institutions have been restored; 318
kilometres of roads have been repaired; 242 kilometres
of electrical transmission lines have been laid; 88
electricity substations have been made operational;
and 72 water supply facilities, two oil wells and two
fuel and energy complexes were commissioned. In
118 towns in the provinces of Aleppo, Damascus, Deir
ez-Zor, Latakia, Hama and Homs, work is under way
to restore 82 schools, 56 preschools, 58 bakeries, 59
pumping stations, 54 electricity substations, 50 medical
facilities and more than 500 houses.

Russia has established a centre in Syria for
receiving, processing and housing refugees in the
country, which provides information about towns that
are ready to receive people. The process of the return of
Syrians to their homes is gaining momentum. In total,
since September 2015, more than 238,000 refugees
have returned to Syria from abroad, as well as more
than 1.2 million internally displaced persons. Starting
in July this year, more than 9,000 refugees, first and
foremost from Lebanon and Jordan, have returned.
Reception centres have been established in 412 towns
in order to place almost 1.5 million individuals.

It is clear that efforts to support Syrians in restoring
damaged infrastructure must be stepped up. Making
artificial demands that will only complicate that process
is unacceptable. It is high time to heed United Nations
assessments about the detrimental impact of unilateral
sanctions on the lives of ordinary Syrians and to refrain
from such inhumane measures.

The United Nations, especially the Office of the
High Commissioner for Refugees, should play an
important role in the process of the return of Syrians
to their homes. So far that Office has adopted a fairly
passive position, possibly because of an internal United
Nations directive that was developed at the end of last
year by the Department of Political Affairs without
consulting with Member States. That directive does
indeed exist, despite clumsy attempts to refute that fact.
It impedes the involvement of United Nations agencies
in efforts to rebuild Syria until political changes are
in effect in that country. What does that remind us
of? It is, word for word, the well-known politicized
position of the key Western countries, which the
Secretariat has, for some reason, adopted as the final
word. This irresponsible approach, which runs counter
to the neutral posture of the United Nations, must be
immediately reviewed.

At the same time, we were surprised by the
extent to which the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees expeditiously provided
assistance to the White Helmet activists in Jordan
who had been evacuated from Syrian territory by
their sponsors. It would seem that ordinary Syrians
who want to return home do not deserve assistance,
whereas those who abet extremists by pretending to
be humanitarian actors are welcomed with open arms.
Such double standards undermine the credibility of our
international Organization.

We agree that the situation in Idlib deserves close
attention. The priority task continues to be separating
the moderate opposition from the terrorists. In Idlib,
we see concentrated forces of Jabhat al-Nusra that are
attempting to lead and direct other groups, including
those that are interested in national reconciliation. The
terrorists have detained more than 2,000 "unreliable"
individuals, who are suspected of wishing to reach an
agreement with Syrian authorities.

We are seeing constant provocations against the
Syrian Army and innocent civilians in areas abutting
de-escalation zones. In August alone, the positions
of the Government forces were shelled 383 times by
mortars, anti-aircraft batteries and heavy-calibre
machine guns. Twenty-one soldiers and 10 civilians
were killed. The residential neighbourhoods of Aleppo
have also been shelled. We have shot down 45 drones
launched at the Khmeimim air base. Such drones are
not limited to reconnaissance; they sometimes carry an
explosive payload. Those practices will be countered.

We call on the commanders of illegal armed groups
to refrain from provocations and to embark on the path
of peaceful settlement. That option is still available.
However, the current status quo is unacceptable. In
violation of Syrian sovereignty, the United States has
illegally set up the Al-Tanfmilitary air base in the south
of the country in the security zone where the Rukban
refugee camp is located. There, hundreds of terrorists
from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
Jabhat al-Nusra feel quite safe and they carry out raids
against liberated areas. Delivery of humanitarian aid
to that camp has not yet been set up. We hope that this
situation will be resolved.

Unfortunately, in the report of Secretary General
(S/2018/777), the situation in the area around Rukban
is not given adequate consideration. Furthermore, the
essentially neocolonial policy to divide the country
has continued, while in north-eastern Syria, with the
support of the coalition, quasi-State structures that
have pledged allegiance to the coalition have been
established. We are seeing increasing numbers of
military sites of the occupying Powers that are part of
the coalition. There is clear evidence of a consolidated
terrorist presence in the country that is attempting to
secure control over the country's resources. That runs
counter to statements that the only goal of the military
presence is to combat ISIL.

The July meeting on the humanitarian situation
in Syria (see S/PV.8320 ) focused on the protection
of children. Some delegations said all the right words
about the priority tasks, including the psychological
rehabilitation of children and ensuring normal conditions
for their return to school. That was encouraging and
we began to ask colleagues what steps they intended to

take in order to help Syrian children. To our surprise, it
seemed that they had no such plans. In other words, the
goal was simply to draw attention to the issue. Making
noise and making a show of appearing humane to the
audience is not necessary. The Syrians understand their
problems better than anyone else. What is necessary is
concrete assistance.
Before the start of the meeting, you made the
following statement to the press, Madam President. I
will quote it in part.

"We all remember the risk of possible chemical
attacks. All of these issues will be discussed during
the Security Council meeting. The Russian Ministry
of Defence has made a statement on this subject. I
believe that this is an incredibly fake story, even
by the standards of Russian propaganda. Those
statements by the Ministry of Defence are absurd
and comical. We are not preparing any chemical
attacks. We think it would be best if the Russian
Ministry of Defence and the Russian Government
were to use their influence to convince Al-Assad
not to use chemical weapons and not to attack his
own population."

The Russian Ministry of Defence is not in the habit
of issuing fake, absurd and comical statements. Maybe
other countries" Ministries of Defence are wont to do
that, but certainly not the Russian one. If our Ministry
of Defence makes a statement, it does so based on
concrete facts. Let me tell the Council a bit about that
statement and leave it to members to decide whether or
not it is comical.

In Syria, another provocation is being prepared
with the use of chemical weapons. Terrorists associated
with Jabhat al-Nusra who have occupied Idlib province
are interested in stopping the Government army and
are counting on further actions of intimidation by the
United States and its allies against Damascus. It is
hard to consider it a mere coincidence that the most
loathsome leaders of the terrorists - Al-Baghdadi and
Al-Julani-have recently made appearances in the news.
According to reliable information, two large-capacity
trucks arrived in the area of Saraqib from the village
of Afs, accompanied by eight employees of the White
Helmets. At the point of arrival, they were met by two
high-ranking Ahrar al-Sham commanders. The White
Helmets delivered a large volume of toxic substances to
a warehouse for weapons and combustible lubricating
materials located in Saraqib. Later, some of the
chemicals, contained in unmarked plastic barrels, were
transferred to small vehicles and transported to another
militant base in the southern part of Idlib province.
Eight containers of chlorine were delivered to the Idlib
town ofJisr al-Shughur. After the cargo was transferred
to fighters affiliated with Hizb al-Islami al-Turkistani,
they were transported to the village of Halluz, where
they were met by a special group that was supposed
to stage a delivery of first aid to victims of chemical
weapons. The Syrian side has informed the members
of the Security Council and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) about this issue. The
group underwent training in the handling of chemical
weapons, under the leadership of the specialists of
the British private security company Olive. With the
active participation of Western intelligence agencies,
the provocation is meant to serve as a pretext for the
Western troika to conduct missile and air strikes against
the military infrastructure of Syria, as it has done in the
past.

We have all heard statements at the highest political
level in Washington, DC, London and Paris about the
readiness to respond forcefully to chemical weapons.
They are also threatening even broader actions, probably
forgetting that following the April aggression, they
stated that the alleged chemical potential of the regime
at the time had been completely destroyed. It is not by
chance that the destroyer USS The Sallivans arrived in
the Persian Gulf, armed with 56 cruise missiles, or that
a United States Air Force bomber, armed with 24 air-
to-surface cruise missiles, arrived at the A1-Udeid air
base in Qatar. In other words, we are being warned.

At the same time, Arab news networks have
aired reports that cases of terrorist child abduction
from villages in Idlib province have increased. These
children will probably be used for the staged episodes
directed by the White Helmets and funded by their
Western sponsors.

The Syrian armed forces have no chemical weapon
and have no plans to use such weapons. There is no
military need to do so. We have stated that repeatedly.
People in their right minds would not use means that
are useless from a military point of view, as that would
trigger reprisals from three major Powers. However,
publicizing those plans and awaiting the provocation
of militants could unleash such strikes. I am grateful
for the warning about these developments. We in turn
wish to warn that we are fully aware of those unsavoury
plans and we strongly suggest that they be scrapped.
Carrying out such plans will deliver a further blow
against a peaceful resolution in Syria, but the guerrillas
who are being protected will not help.

We see how certain Western countries are more
openly supporting Jabhat Al-Nusra and shielding the
terrorists. The issue of chemicals is being crudely
manipulated to pressure Damascus and its allies, and the
sabre-rattling is intended to resolve internal domestic
measures instead of reserving that energy to achieve a
political settlement, fight terrorists and promote post-
war reconstruction.

