Mr. Antenio (spoke in French): Allow me to
start by congratulating you, Madam President, on
the very topical choice for our debate here today, as
well as for the outstanding concept note (S/2015/307, annex) prepared by your delegation to better frame the
parameters for our discussions. I should also like to
convey my gratitude to the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Eliasson, as well as the Director-General of
Reporters Without Borders for their very exhaustive
briefings.

The testimony of Ms. Mariane Pearl says a great
deal about the serious and alarming risks that journalists
expose themselves to on the ground in conflict areas.
The continuing deterioration of conditions for carrying
out this profession in many hotspots throughout the
world, including Africa, quite rightly underlines the
scale of the challenges to be met at international and
regional levels to ensure that journalists in practice
enjoy the necessary protection.

Despite the setting up of a normative framework
to that end, including the 1977 Additional Protocols to
the Geneva Conventions, as well as Security Council
resolution 1738 (2006), which clearly guarantee that
journalists cover armed conflict situations as civilians,
the dangers facingjournalists continue to increase.

It quickly becomes apparent that the problem
does not stem from a lack of international norms,
but rather from the absence of their thorough
implementation - including their application in areas
controlled by non-State actors. Defying fundamental
rights, these entities often use violence to silence voices
of dissent. In Africa, terrorist groups such Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and
other negative forces are increasingly implicated in
abuses against journalists who attempt to investigate
and expose their criminal activities.

The plight ofjournalists working in conflict areas
in Africa remains a major concern for the African
Union. This critical situaton reflects not just a serious
violation of the freedom of expression, but also an
affront to shared democratic values and human rights.
In partnership with civil society and representatives
of the media, the African Union Commission is fully
committed to fighting against restrictions imposed on
journalists in conflict zones. This commitment includes
raising the awareness of State and non-State actors of
the need to ensure the safety ofjournalists. To that end,
in September 2010, the African Union held a workshop
on the security and protection of African journalists,
which, in addition to Member States, brought together
representatives of the Federation of African Journalists,
the International Federation of Journalists and the
African International Trade Union Confederation.

The action of the African Union in this area
was also bolstered by the establishment of follow-up
mechanisms to monitor the implementation of member
States' commitments falling within the the mandate of
the Special Rapporteur on the freedom of expression
and access to information in Africa. Moreover, the
issue of attacks carried out against journalists in
periods of conflict was given special attention by the
African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights,
which, in 2002, adopted the Declaration of Principles
on Freedom of Expression in Africa. The Declaration
recalls the centrality of access to information as well as
its importance in promoting and protecting fundamental
human rights - while encouraging democratic
values, accountability and sustainable development.
While underscoring respect for the non-combatant
status of journalists, it also highlights the need for
States to take the necessary measures to prevent such
violence, prosecute the offenders and bring them to
justice - ensuring that victims have access to effective
remedy.

Furthermore, during its fourty-ninth ordinary
session, held from 28 April to 12 May 2011, in Banjul,
the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
adopted a resolution devoted entirely to the security
of journalists and media practitioners in Africa. That
resolution, which notes the deterioration of the situation
ofj ournalists and media professionals in certain regions
of the continent, calls on all parties involved in armed
conflict to respect the independence and freedom of
journalists in the exercise of their profession and to
ensure their security in accordance with the rules of
international humanitarian law.

Before I conclude, Madam President, allow me to
stress the need to step up efforts to achieve our goal,
which is to silence weapons. By their very nature and
regardless of our efforts, armed conflicts will continue
to lead to situations of abuse and violation of human
rights.

