Mr. Wehbe (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic would like to
express its heartfelt gratitude for the understanding of
the members of the Council in responding quickly to
convene this open meeting at the request of the Arab
Group and the caucus of the Non-Aligned Movement.

This meeting has been convened to discuss the
tragedy that is unfolding by the minute in the
Palestinian territories as a result of the barbaric and
bloody Israeli invasion. The world has come to realize
that the Israeli Prime Minister and his officials and
army generals - who have made murder, destruction
and hatred their profession - are trying to hide behind
the pretext of combating terrorism. This is a failed
attempt to justify the scorched-earth and genocidal
policies that are being systematically pursued by the
Israelis. The primary objective of those policies is the
continued Israeli occupation of Arab lands and the
stifling of the aspirations of the Palestinian people to
build their independent State on their land, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

The international community expects that these
continuous meetings of the Security Council will be
able to put an end to Israel's arrogance and its
violations of the most basic rules of international law
and international humanitarian law, and the Fourth
Geneva Convention in particular.

Despite the fact that the Security Council has
adopted numerous resolutions in recent years, months
and even days, it has become clear that Israeli defiance
of these resolutions and this legitimacy knows no end.
It has also become evident that the authority vested in
the Security Council in particular, in the Charter and in
the United Nations as a whole is being continuously
violated. This confirms the view - widely held among
our peoples and countries - that selectivity and double
standards on the part of the Security Council are the
order of the day whenever the Council is called on to
condemn Israel's policies and its continuous flouting of
the Council's resolutions and authority, or its trampling
of international law and international legitimacy.

We do not believe that our delegation needs to
describe the impact on international peace and security
of the current situation in the occupied Arab territories
and in the Middle East region. By continuing its
aggression and its declared war against the Palestinian
people, Israel is pursuing a policy of genocide,
destroying everything in the path of its tanks, and
mercilessly shelling Palestinian civilians, their homes
and their infrastructure.

Has the Council seen how the Palestinians have
had to bury the bodies of their fallen victims and their
martyrs in a mass grave in a parking lot? Has the
Council heard about the family that has yet to bury one
of its members, who was beheaded by the Israelis? This
is but a drop in the sea. In addition, many Red Cross
and Red Crescent officials have been killed, and
ambulances have been prevented from reaching the
injured.

The Israeli army, under instructions from Sharon,
has imposed curfews on the Palestinians for days at a
time. Water and electricity have been cut off and
thousands of Palestinians detained. The houses of
refugees who had already been displaced several times
were demolished arbitrarily. Examples abound of the
carnage committed by Israel against defenceless
Palestinian civilians, who have been deprived of any
protection. They are attacked and left to bleed to death.
Pregnant women are not spared; some of them
miscarried or gave birth at checkpoints.

We do not believe that we need to repeat here the
story of Bethlehem, the city of peace and the birthplace
of Christ. It has been attacked, along with its churches
and its mosques. The Church of the Nativity has been
under siege, and a statue of the Virgin Mary has been
destroyed.

Against this backdrop, it should be clear to
everyone that Israel is openly pursuing a policy of
State terrorism, including killing, destruction,
assassination and detention. Israel wants to mislead the
world regarding its acts of aggression by committing
such acts under the guise of self-defence. The fact of
the matter is that Israel is trying to defend its
occupation of Arab lands, and attempting to impose its
conditions on the Palestinian side by force.

The message that the Council should send to the
Israeli Government is the following: withdraw
immediately from the Palestinian territories, lift the
siege imposed on the Palestinian President and the
Palestinian leadership and put an end to the killing of
innocent civilians.

The Council is well aware that the Arab States
unanimously adopted a peace initiative at the Beirut
Summit. If Israel backed down from its position
rejecting the initiative and if it put an end to its acts of
aggression, the road would become clear for the
establishment of a just and comprehensive peace; then
an independent Palestinian state would be a reality and
not a mere dream.

My delegation, on behalf of the Arab Group, will
submit a draft resolution on the implementation of
previous Council resolutions. The Chairman of the
Arab Group has already transmitted the draft text to
you, Mr. President. The Arab Group hopes that the
Council will adopt the draft resolution, because it
believes in the role of the United Nations -
represented here by the Security Council - in the
realization of stability and security in the Middle East
region.

In conclusion, let me say that, even as we meet
here to put an end to the Israeli aggression and to call
for the withdrawal of the Israeli occupation forces,
dozens of Israeli tanks have started to occupy the city
of Nablus - a city of more than 120,000 people, now
that Israel has completed the occupation of the city of
Jenin.

That is the situation following the adoption of the
Security Council resolutions. What should the Council
do now? We have submitted a draft resolution in blue. I
urge all my colleagues in the Council to support the
draft resolution, which simply reaffirms the call for the
implementation of resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402
(2002).

