Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): First, I
wish to welcome Mr. Tom Koenigs, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, and to thank him for briefing the Council.
I also thank him and the members of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
for their efforts to accomplish the tasks entrusted to
them. My delegation also wishes to thank Mr. Antonio
Maria Costa, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime.

Now that nearly six years have passed since the
end of the rule of the previous regime in Afghanistan,
that country has made significant strides towards the
achievement of political, economic and social
development and assuming its place among the world's
nations. Significant milestones have been passed. The
Bonn process was concluded successfully and the
transition to the next step was marked by the adoption
of the Afghanistan Compact in London in 2006. There
is no doubt that the role played by the United Nations
and the international community, particularly donors,
was crucial to those efforts.

In spite of all of those efforts, we continue to
receive news about the deteriorating situation in
Afghanistan. On one hand, we are told that anticipated
opium production in Afghanistan for 2007 exceeds
global demand. As for the security situation, it is the
worst that it has been for many years and expectations
are that it will not improve in the coming period. The
Taliban have returned in force in some provinces,
particularly Helmand, challenging the authority of the
Government. Even the capital, Kabul, has not been
spared from frequent terrorist bombings, while an
increase in terrorist attacks is expected.

Under those conditions, the deteriorating security
situation must be addressed as a matter of priority in
order to prevent the country from reverting to
instability. The multinational forces have responded to
that threat by launching major operations not seen in
the country since 2001. But that still is not enough to
address the deteriorating security situation in the
country. Military strategies must be combined with
plans for development and national reconciliation. In
that context, we welcome the decision of the European
Union to establish a mission focused on law
enforcement to uphold the rule of law.

In order to consolidate sustainable security, the
Government must give due attention to national
reconciliation. In that regard, we wish to draw attention
to the need to strike a precise balance between national
reconciliation and the tolerance it requires. With that
purpose in mind, the Government of Afghanistan
recently approved the Action Plan on Peace, Justice
and Reconciliation.

Even after the efforts made and the progress
achieved, we are faced with a situation that requires the
international community to continue considering the
situation in Afghanistan a priority issue in order to
consolidate the progress achieved thus far. The time
has come for the people of Afghanistan to achieve the
desired level of prosperity and to consolidate what has
been achieved as far as democratic transformation and
advancement in the areas of justice and the rule of law
are concerned.

As part of the international efforts to support the
development of Afghanistan, the high-level meeting of
the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board (JCMB),
which was held in Berlin in January 2007 as a follow-
up to the London conference, was a commendable and
welcome step. New initiatives aimed at security,
poverty reduction, the protection of human rights and
the improvement of the political environment in
Afghanistan should also be welcomed.

Regional coordination plays a vital role in a
successful security policy in Afghanistan. The
Governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan must
continue to coordinate their efforts, taking in account
the interests of both. With regard to regional
cooperation, two conferences on regional economic
cooperation were held, in Kabul and in New Delhi. In
the next phase, the commitment and support of the
region and the international community must be
secured for the institutional frameworks that were
established in those two conferences.

UNAMA has played an indispensable role in
contributing to the creation of an atmosphere
conducive to the establishment of stability, security and
economic development. At this stage, UNAMA will
continue to play a central role in promoting
international commitment to support the Afghanistan
Compact, coordinating humanitarian assistance,
helping in the protection of human rights and
supporting regional cooperation. Here, we would like
to encourage UNAMA to increase its presence in the
provinces and strengthen its partnership with the
Afghan people.

Accordingly, we support the proposal of the
Secretary-General, as set forth in his report
(S/2007/152), for the extension of the mandate of
UNAMA for 12 months.

