Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank Ambassador Gary
Quinlan for presenting the quarterly report on the work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). The Committee has a key role to play in
ensuring compliance with the measures imposed on
Iran, so it is important to maintain its close relationship
with Member States. In this regard, we welcome the
holding of an open informational meeting on 24 June,
and we encourage the Committee to continue to
answer the queries it receives from Member States and
international organizations.
In addition, we understand that the Security Council
should continue to make sanctions enforcement bodies
more efficient and transparent, and have an appropriate
mechanism to review the measures taken. In this regard,
we believe that it should further enhance the quality of
the list of persons and entities subject to sanctions. We
therefore join the call of the Chairman of the Committee
on States to provide, on a voluntary basis, additional
information to enable the proper identification of such
persons and entities.

Let me briefly highlight three points concerning
the Iranian nuclear programme.

First, I wish to reaffirm the inalienable right of all
States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons to develop, research, production and
use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without
discrimination. This is a principled position we have set
out in this and other relevant forums. At the same time,
my country reaffirms its historic commitment to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and
understands that the international community should
continue to recognize the relevance of the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and its cornerstone, the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

Secondly, I refer to the most recent report
(GOV/2013/27) of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), of
22 May, which has been transmitted to the Council. We
agree with the assessment of the Director General and
share his concern over the lack of progress in clarifying
the outstanding issues and the lack of cooperation
on the part of Iran. We consider it essential that Iran
actively cooperate with the Agency and provide all
information concerning its programme nuclear as
required, providing access to all areas necessary
to allow effective verification. In that sense, it is
important that Iran take the necessary steps for the full
implementation of its obligations, including relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, and restore the
confidence of the international community in the
exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear program.

Thirdly, my country believes that it is essential to
continue seeking a solution through talks that will allow
certainty about the peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear
programme. We therefore encourage the parties to
pursue their efforts in this regard. We also understand
that Iran must adopt and implement the so-called
structured approach to resolve outstanding issues,
according to the call of the IAEA Board of Governors
in its resolution of September 2012. We regret that no
substantive progress has been made, despite several
rounds of negotiations between the IAEA and Iran
since the adoption of the resolution. We hope that the
ongoing periodic meetings, inter alia, will produce
concrete results based on structured approach so that
the clarification of the pending issues may begin.

