Mr. De Klerk (Netherlands): The Netherlands
fully aligns itself with the statement made this morning
by the Permanent Representative of the Czech
Republic on behalf of the European Union. I would
like to make a few additional remarks - first, on the
expansion of the trigger mechanism for monitoring and
reporting; and secondly, on impunity.

I would like to begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
children and armed conflict and for the work that
Mexico is doing in this area.

It is a sad reality that, as we speak, many children
around the world are being harmed for life by armed
conflicts. Sometimes, they happen to be in the wrong
place at the wrong time. More often than not, they are a
tool or a target of shameless violence. Whatever the
case, we all have an urgent obligation to do whatever
we can to protect children from armed conflict. That is
a political and moral imperative for all of us. Along
with the integrity of our children, the integrity of the
Organization and everything it stands for is at stake. In
children we see our future, and in their suffering during
armed conflict we see the dark side of humankind. We
heard impressive testimony to that effect earlier in the
debate.

The Netherlands strongly supports the valuable
work of Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and that of the Security Council's
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his most recent
report on that subject (S/2009/158).

We commend the Security Council for the
important progress made on its agenda related to
children and armed conflict, in particular with regard
to the use and recruitment of child soldiers. However,
the Council should take further action to ensure that
children caught in armed conflicts are protected from
violence and related threats to their security and well-
being. To that end, the Council should expand its focus
to include the other grave violations against children in
armed conflict, as they affect much larger numbers of
children and result in terrible and long-lasting
consequences.

The monitoring and reporting mechanism has
shown its value. Effective monitoring and reporting
help to reveal the extent and severity of violations,
increase the accountability of those who target, abuse
or exploit children and, last but not least, strengthen
programmes to assist and protect children in situations
of armed conflict. One step that the Security Council
should take is to extend the applicability of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism to other situations

in which grave violations against children in armed
conflict occur - first and foremost, rape and other
grave sexual violence.

Why should the Council do so? Over the past
20 years, rape and other forms of sexual violence have
been documented in at least 50 conflicts, affecting
millions of individuals, predominantly girls and
women. Like the recruitment and use of child soldiers,
rape and other forms of sexual violence are intentional
acts committed by individual perpetrators. Parties to
armed conflict can take action to hold those
perpetrators accountable for their actions. Progress in
ending such violations can be measured, allowing for
de-listing, an incentive for change.

In dozens of ongoing armed conflicts, sexual
violence continues to threaten the safety of women and
girls on a daily basis. In some armed conflicts, boys
also become victims of sexual violence, although in
smaller numbers than girls. Rape and sexual violence
against children may have long-term and long-lasting
consequences, and their impact may affect future
generations as well. Think, for instance, about the
situation of children born as a result of rape and about
their traumas, which may damage them - and, again,
others - for life.

In its resolution 1820 (2008), the Council has
already stressed that sexual violence can significantly
exacerbate situations of armed conflict and may
impede the restoration of international peace and
security, and has expressed its readiness to adopt
appropriate steps to address widespread or systematic
sexual violence. The expansion of the trigger
mechanism to cover the crime of rape and other forms
of grave sexual violence against children should be
seen as an appropriate step.

My second point: In most cases, the Security
Council has not taken strong steps to address
accountability and end impunity for perpetrators of
violations against children, especially with regard to
persistent violators. As stated before in this Council,
abuse really stops only when perpetrators have been
brought to justice. Anything short of that means a
continuation of the violation of victims' integrity. That
is why ending impunity is a critical element in ending
violations and abuses against children. The Member
States concerned should take effective action to bring
to justice individuals responsible for violations of
children's rights. Those who recruit or use child
soldiers, those who rape or commit other grave sexual
violence against children - all should be held to

account. We therefore stress the role of the
International Criminal Court in the investigation and
prosecution of such crimes falling within its
jurisdiction. Where national systems of justice fail,
either because of the unwillingness or because of the
inability to genuinely prosecute such violations against
children in armed conflict, the situation should be
referred to the Court.

