Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
reiterates its complete rejection of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, based on our firm position against
the use of any kinds ofweapons ofmass destruction and
their ownership, development or attempts to acquire
such weapons. We continue to safeguard and care about
the well-being of the fraternal Syrian people who are
suffering from the use of those chemical weapons.
For many years, their suffering has been unspeakable
because of the conflict in that country.

In that context, Egypt reiterates once again its
position, demanding the identification of the parties
responsible for the use of chemical weapons in Syria
by means of an investigation that would meet all the
substantive criteria to perform the task at hand.

Experience has proven throughout the existencce
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM) that there is a pressing need to improve its
methodology, particularly through carrying out field
visits to the sites that are under investigation because
they have witnessed the use of chemical weapons.
These visits should include the excavation, recording
and collection of evidence and samples. The JIM. should
also study and explore all possible scenarios related to
incidents of the use of chemical weapons.

Egypt has sought to include in any draft resolution
on the renewal of the JIM. mandate before the Security
Council all the bases and principles that would ensure
that it is able to operate, without excessive technicalities
that could obstruct its implementation and in a way
that would help to collect solid, trustworthy evidence.
However, our proposals have not been received very
positively or realistically. On the other hand, Egypt
has underscored the importance of the work of the JIM
and of improving its methodology, which would require
separating the renewal of its mandate from the issue of
addressing its reports. The reports are the substantive
aspect of the Mechanism's work and its results, and
should be addressed independently of the issue of
renewing the mandate and developing its methodology.
This principled position led Egypt to support the draft
resolution submitted by the United States in October
(S/2017/884), which was limited to renewing the
Mechanism's mandate without relating it to the content
of its reports.

In the past few days, Egypt has attempted in
all sincerity to arrive at a balanced, compromise
alternative that would enable the Security Council to
renew the mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism
and improve its methodology, with a focus on the
substantive observations that have been presented
regarding its methodology and the implications of that
since the renewal of its mandate last year. However,
the two draft resolutions submitted in the past few
days (S/2017/933 and S/2017/962) did not take those
concerns into consideration. That did not help us to
achieve the desired result, and the Security Council
reached a negative conclusion on the issue of renewing
the mandate.

Egypt abstained in the voting on draft resolution
S/2017/962, extending the mandate of the JIM, despite
our position in favour of identifying the parties
responsible for the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
We intended to abstain in the voting on the second
draft resolution (S/2017/933), which was withdrawn,
because it polarized the handling of the conclusions of
the Mechanism's report and the renewal of its mandate,
resulting in an inability to achieve the objectives sought
by the international community - that is, the renewal
of the Mechanism's mandate and the adoption of
working methods that would guarantee evidence-based,
indisputable results with respect to the identity of the
perpetrators in Syria.

Egypt is ready to revisit its position and overcome
fixed political positions in order to put the interests of
the Syrian people first. The Security Council, having
established the Joint Investigative Mechanism, is
responsible for guaranteeing everything it needs to do
an impartial job in carrying out its task of identifying
the persons and entities responsible for the use of
chemical weapons in Syria. Egypt is it prepared to work
with all interested parties and stakeholders to provide
the groundwork and criteria needed to guarantee an
objective investigation.
Egypt once again affirms that the only motive
behind our position on the issue of renewing the
JIM. and improving its methodology is to work in the
interests of our brother people of Syria, to ensure that
the use of chemical weapons in Syria does not recur and
to identify those responsible for using these weapons in
the past. That is consistent with our efforts to end the
Syrian people's suffering and achieve a final political
settlement that will guarantee them a life of dignity
and security.

