Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, I wish to thank
the Moroccan presidency for having convened today's
important meeting. Germany attaches great importance

to the situation in the Sahel, and we therefore highly
appreciate your timely initiative, Sir, to debate the
current challenges facing the Sahel region.

Germany aligns itselfwith statement to be delivered
later on behalf of the European Union (EU).

Let me also thank the Secretary-General for his
remarks, as well as Mr. Prodi and Mr. Guterres for
their very helpful briefings. Furthermore, I would like
to welcome the representatives of the regional and
subregional organizations, as well as the representatives
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the World
Bank and the African Development Bank.

The situation in the Sahel was brought to the
attention of the Council only at the end of last year. Yet,
long-standing structural problems have been hampering
the development of the region for a long time. The
current crisis in Mali has highlighted the challenges and
threats to peace and security that the Sahel is facing.
Tackling those highly complex challenges includes
strengthening the fight against terrorism, transnational
organized crime and proliferation; providing an
immediate responses to the humanitarian crisis; as
well as promoting socioeconomic development, good
governance, democracy, the rule of law and respect
for human rights. From a long-term perspective, it also
includes finding responses to environmental challenges
caused by, among other things, climate change.

Allow me, Sir, to elaborate on some of those
challenges. The rise of terrorism and the establishment
of a safe haven and training ground for terrorists
in the region are matters of paramount concern and
require immediate attention and action. In that context,
Germany would like to reiterate its support for the listing
of the relevant terrorist groups and their affiliates under
the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee regime.

The ongoing proliferation of arms in the region
is equally worrying. The international community
and established regional mechanisms should continue
to support national efforts in the region to combat
proliferation. Germany has been carrying out projects
on arms control, both bilaterally and within the
framework of the EU border management programme,
and has always advocated for a comprehensive approach
to combating the destabilizing accumulation of and
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons. We
are currently funding various projects on stockpiles
management and security, as well as on demobilization
and integration in various African countries.
Climate change and its adverse effects represent
another serious challenge to stability and peace in the
Sahel region. So far, that aspect has been neglected and
needs, without any doubt, greater attention. Besides
security, development and environmental issues, the
humanitarian situation in the Sahel region remains
of great concern and calls for immediate action. The
international community needs to urgently step up its
assistance. Since the end of 2011, Germany has pledged
$80 million to date.

Let me also address some possible ways of tackling
the challenges in the Sahel. First, the importance of
capacity-building and institution-building cannot be
stressed enough. Those elements are key to enabling
functioning State institutions so as not only to
adequately address national challenges individually but
also to strengthen their cooperation with neighbours
effectively as part ofjoint strategies and programmes.
In that regard, we would also like to underline the
importance of support through subregional and
regional organizations and the United Nations. My
country remains active in supporting a number of
capacity-building projects, such as providing technical
assistance within the framework of the Customs Data
Project or in the context of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime Global Container Programme.

We would also like to recall, in that respect, the
establishment of the West African Science Service
Centre on Climate Change and Adapted Land Use
earlier this year, a novelty in the region. The Centre
is designed to respond to climate change and preserve
sustainable livelihoods in the region.

Secondly, I wish to underline the importance of
improving national, international and multinational
cooperation and coordination, including with the
European Union and its integrated Strategy for
Development and Security in the Sahel. The EU Sahel
Strategy has already been translated into concrete
action, and I would therefore strongly encourage close
coordination and collaboration between the United
Nations and the EU in order to create synergies during
the development of the United Nations Sahel strategy.

Finally, we all agree on the need for a comprehensive
overarching approach, which we hope to see in the
United Nations Sahel strategy. The high-level meeting
on the Sahel in September gave us a first glimpse
of the outline of the strategy, and we welcome the
meeting of the Special Envoys for the Sahel last week
in Rome under the guidance of Mr. Prodi as a further
step towards the resolution of the multiple crises in the
Sahel region.
At this point, I would like to thank the Mr. Prodi
for his efforts and assure him of my Government's full
support to his endeavours.

