Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I take pleasure in
thanking Ambassador Negroponte and Ambassador
Jones Parry for the valuable information they have
shared with us on the situation in Iraq, in compliance
with provisions of resolution 1483 (2003). It is our
view that a new diplomatic reality is reflected in the
report transmitted by the Secretary-General after the
return of the complex mission sent to Iraq
(S/2004/ 140). The report shows United Nations as re-
setting its a presence in the country.

This is certainly not the moment to comment on
the report as a whole; my delegation looks forward to
such an opportunity. But I wish briefly to address a few
points relating both to the report and to the information
we have just received: in connection with firm
consensus on the transfer of sovereignty to Iraq by 30
June. A more immediate issue, however, arises from
the assessment made by Mr. Brahimi's team: defining a
process for constituting a transitional Government of
Iraq that could provisionally take over the
administration of the country as conditions are
established for the holding of fair and credible
elections as soon as possible.

We agree that such a process has to be defined by
the Iraqis themselves, and that the United Nations
should strongly contribute to such an effort with its
expert knowledge. We think also that this will lead to
putting this issue of the mandate and role of the United
Nations on our agenda once again, as the Iraqi situation
has already substantially changed since resolution 1511
(2003) was adopted by the Council, and will continue
do so.

Besides that question, which will certainly
require specific consultations, other areas regarding the
Iraqi issue need updating. For instance, it would be
appropriate to have a better picture of the preparation
of the Fundamental Law of Iraq that is to be adopted
before the end of this month. Another example is the
need for more information on the activities - or lack
thereof - of the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board created by resolution 1483 (2003) to
oversee the expenditure of the resources transferred to
the Development Fund for Iraq.

In conclusion, recent developments are a clear
demonstration that the relevance of the United Nations
to the question of Iraq goes significantly beyond
offering assessments and institutional solutions to
rather unconventional situations or providing technical
and humanitarian assistance, however important they
are. The fact is that the mission sent to Iraq, originally
intended as a technical assessment mission on the
feasibility of holding elections by the end of June,
acquired a dominant political relevance, as indicated by
the designation of Mr. Brahimi to lead it, by the
consultations in the Group of Friends of Iraq the other
day, and by the Secretary-General's report.

