Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I apologize to
Mark Lowcock that a previous engagement delayed my
arrival to the Chamber, but I thank him very much for
another sobering briefing. It is very good that the United
Nations can report swiftly to the Council, in line with
resolution 2417 (2018), whenever the risk of conflict-
induced famine and widespread food insecurity in
armed conflict contexts occur. In resolution 2417
(2018), the Council expressed its intention to give its
full attention to such information that the Secretary-
General provides, and as we on the Council all know,
Yemen has been one of those issues that the Council
follows very deeply and about which it is gravely
concerned. I am pleased to see that the Ambassador has
joined us today.

The numbers that Mark Lowcock has cited are
truly horrifying. The scale is a very grave concern,
and the fact that the crisis does not seem to be getting
better is also something that the Council needs to
take a deep interest in. I will not repeat the figures,
but the fact that they are in the millions ought to be
very salutary for us to think about, and in particular
the acute malnourishment of nearly 2 million children
under the age of five is a warning call. I understand
that nearly 400,000 of those children suffer from severe
acute malnutrition. That is a life-threatening condition
and it requires urgent treatment.

The highest number of severe acute malnutrition
cases is in Al-Hudaydah governorate, where there are
appropriateoximately 100,000 cases. After air strikes
in late July resulted in damage to the main sanitation
facility and water supply, suspected cholera cases
almost doubled, and that of course increases the risk of
a new wave of cholera. Only the humanitarian response
is containing an outbreak like last year's and a further
disruption of humanitarian operations could have, as
Mark said, catastrophic consequences.

Mark asked for increased funding and more
support to humanitarian operations. The efforts of
the United Arab Emirates and the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia are welcome. As for the United Kingdom, we
are determined to play our part. On World Food Day,
16 October, the United Kingdom announced a package
of over $125 million, which we hope will help UNICEF
tackle malnutrition in Yemen. But funding alone will
not be enough to address the growing risk of famine.
We need urgent action on the part of all parties on the
economy, imports and access, and the protection of
civilians and civilian infrastructure. I want to highlight
four issues in particular.

First, with regard to the economy, we share the
concern about the rapid depreciation of the Yemeni rial.
Soaring prices are putting several basic commodities
out of reach for many Yemenis, and the Central Bank
is struggling to pay public sector salaries. We look to
the Government of Yemen and the Central Bank to
take urgent action to stabilize the rial, for example by
issuing promised letters of credit to Yemeni commercial
food importers. Until that happens, we also suggest that
the Government of Yemen pause the implementation
of Decree 75, which is preventing staple goods, such
as wheat, cooking oil and rice, from getting into the
country at a time when they are most needed.

Secondly, unhindered access for commercial and
humanitarian food and fuel into and throughout Yemen
is essential if famine is to be avoided. The conflict is
cutting off important transport routes, including the
main route between Al-Hudaydah and Sana'a, and
alternatives have become more congested and more
vulnerable. For their part, the Houthis should stop
interfering with the humanitarian response so that
food, fuel and medicines can reach those most in need
throughout the north.

Thirdly, it is essential that military operations
be conducted in accordance with international
humanitarian law. This includes the protection of
civilians and the protection of civilian infrastructure.
We have consistently made this clear in the Council,
but I repeat it again today. Not only is it important that
military operations proceed with regard to the principles
of proportionality, precaution and distinction, but it is
also the case that further damage to food infrastructure,
such as mills and wheat silos, threatens already fragile
food supplies.

Fourthly and lastly, as we have made clear, only
a political settlement will enable the worsening
humanitarian crisis to be properly addressed and will
bring long-term stability to Yemen. We call on all
parties once again to engage constructively and in good
faith with the Special Envoy's efforts to bring about a
political settlement. We look forward to hearing from
Martin Griffiths again in the Council. We last heard
from him on 11 September (see S/PV.8348) following
disappointing news from Geneva. We support his
efforts, which have continued since then, and we
look forward to further updates in the coming weeks
on progress towards reaching agreement between the
parties on confidence-building measures and a broader
framework agreement.

With regard to the four points that Mark
made - some of which I have covered now i I think
they deserve very urgent consideration by the Council.

