Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The acceding
country Croatia; the candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova, align themselves with this statement.

Let me begin by thanking the Special Coordinator
for the briefing he provided to the Council today.

The European Union strongly condemns the deadly
terrorist attack on abus carrying Israeli citizens that took
place in Bulgaria on 18 July. Those responsible for that
horrible and barbaric act of terrorism, which claimed
the lives of Israeli and Bulgarian civilians, should be
prosecuted and brought to justice. The European Union
expresses its solidarity with the Bulgarian and Israeli
people and its deepest sympathy with the families
of the victims and all affected as a consequence of
that appalling act of violence. The European Union
reiterates its strong and unequivocal condemnation of
all forms and acts of terrorism, irrespective of origin,
cause or motive, as well as its unwavering commitment
to the fight against terrorism.

The European Union remains deeply concerned
by the deteriorating situation in Syria. The European
Union strongly condemns the ever increasing use
of force by the regime, including the use of heavy
artillery and shelling against populated areas, in blatant
violation of its obligations under the Annan plan and
resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012). It is appalled
by the horrific killings in the village of Tremseh on
12 July. The Union calls for an immediate international
independent investigation. The EU urges the Syrian
regime to end immediately the killing of civilians,
withdraw the Syrian army from besieged towns and
cities and allow for a peaceful transition, for the sake
of the country.

International humanitarian law must be respected
by all. The European Union is deeply concerned
about the recent intensification of violence, including
in Damascus, which demonstrates the urgent need
for a political transition that meets the democratic
aspirations ofthe Syrian people and bring back stability
in Syria. The European Union remains committed to
the sovereignty, independence, national unity and
territorial integrity of Syria.

The EU recalls its full support for Joint United
Nations-League of Arab States Special Envoy Kofi
Annan's mission and for his six point plan, which must
be implemented. It welcomes the outcome of the Action

Group meeting held in Geneva on 30 June, in particular
the call for the establishment of a transitional governing
body with full executive powers made up of opposition
and Government representatives and formed by mutual
consent. The EU encourages Kofi Annan to continue
working on the implementation of that transition plan
and urges all parties to support those efforts.

The European Union deeply regrets that the Security
Council was not able to agree to a draft resolution that
would have endorsed the communique of the Action
Group and foreseen measures to enforce compliance
with the Annan plan under Article 41 of the Charter
of the United Nations. The EU regrets that the Council
has thus failed to uphold its responsibilities and to back
the Joint Special Envoy's efforts. The European Union
calls for united action by all members of the Security
Council, including Russia and China, to add more
robust and effective pressure and ensure that there will
be serious consequences for continued non-compliance
with the Council's previous decisions.

The European Union welcomes the decision to
renew the mandate of the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria for a final period of 30 days, taking
into account the Secretary-General's recommendations
to reconfigure the Mission as well as the operational
implications of the increasingly dangerous security
situation in Syria. The EU recalls that the Syrian
authorities are responsible for ensuring the security and
safety of the Mission. The European Union is ready to
provide the needed support to guarantee the success of
the Supervision Mission.

The European Union welcomes the national pact and
the common political vision for the transition in Syria
issued following the Syrian opposition conference held
under the auspices ofthe Arab League in Cairo on 2 and
3 July, and encourages all groups to continue engaging
in that process. The European Union continues to urge
all opposition groups to put aside their differences and
to agree on a set of shared principles and start working
towards an inclusive, orderly and peaceful transition in
Syria. The European Union urges all opposition groups
to continue to support Mr. Annan's efforts and to be
ready to provide leadership and to engage with the
transition plan designed by the Action Group for Syria
on 30 June. All Syrians must have a place in the new
Syria and enjoy equal rights, regardless of their origin,
affiliations, religion, beliefs or gender.

On Monday, the European Union agreed on
measures to strengthen the enforcement of its arms
embargo. It will continue to urge the international
community to join its efforts by taking steps to apply
and enforce restrictive measures on the Syrian regime
and its supporters.

With respect to the Middle East peace process,
our objective remains the same. Changes across the
Arab world point to the urgent need for progress.
The resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is of
strategic importance to the entire region and beyond.
The European Union is convinced that heeding the
aspirations of the people of the region, including those
of Palestinians to statehood and those of Israelis to
security, is a crucial element for lasting peace, stability
and prosperity in the region. It is in the fundamental
interest of the European Union, of the parties and of
the wider region to resolve the conflict, which can be
achieved through a comprehensive peace agreement
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles, the Road Map, the agreements
previously reached by the parties, and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

The European Union stresses once again the
central role of the Quartet in that context, and has
redoubled its efforts with Quartet partners to facilitate
contacts between the parties in order to resume
direct and substantive negotiations. Our position is
clear - negotiations are the best way forward. The
European Union reiterates its call on the parties to
demonstrate their commitment to a peaceful solution by
taking actions that can create the environment of trust
required to ensure meaningful negotiations leading
to a comprehensive and lasting peace. The European
Union will continue contributing, including within the
Quartet, to a negotiated solution.

The European Union remains unequivocally
committed to the security of Israel, including with
regard to vital threats in the region. The European Union
is appalled by recurring rocket attacks from Gaza and
condemns in the strongest terms violence deliberately
targeting civilians. The European Union also recalls
its commitment towards Israel's full integration in the
region.

The viability of a two-State solution must be
maintained. The European Union expresses great
concern about developments on the ground, which
threaten to make a two-State solution impossible.
Those include the marked acceleration of settlement
construction, which remains illegal under international
law, ongoing evictions and house demolitions in East
Jerusalem, serious limitations on the Palestinian
Authority's ability to promote the development of
Palestinian communities in Area C, and the Palestinian
Authority's current financial difficulties.

At the Foreign Affairs Council in May, European
Union Foreign Ministers expressed a clear and strong
position on these issues, forging a common European
Union approach to developments on the ground. They
reiterated that a way must be found through negotiations
to resolve the status of Jerusalem as the future capital
of two States. The EU also recalled the applicability
of international humanitarian law in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including the applicability of the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Times of War.

On the humanitarian front, the most pressing
situation is in Gaza. The EU recalls that the situation
in the Gaza Strip will be unsustainable as long as it
remains politically separated from the West Bank.
While fully recognizing Israel's legitimate security
needs, the EU urges Israel to take further meaningful
and far-reaching steps allowing for the reconstruction
and recovery of the Gaza Strip. On this occasion, the
European Union underlines its strong support for the
work of all relevant United Nations agencies working
across the occupied Palestinian territory, including the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

The European Union continues to call for
intra-Palestinian reconciliation behind President
Mahmoud Abbas, in line with the principles set out in
his speech of 4 May 2011, as an important element for
the unity ofa future Palestinian State and for reaching a
two-State solution. The European Union looks forward
to the holding of elections as an important contribution
to Palestinian State-building.

