Mr. Johnston (United Kingdom): On behalf of
my delegation, Sir, we extend our congratulations to
Brazil on assuming the presidency and offer our best
wishes and our full cooperation in your programme of
work for this month. May we also thank the Permanent
Representative of Benin and his delegation and
congratulate them on their outstanding efforts during
the month of February.

The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), and therefore we are very grateful to the
Minister for his briefing this morning. We want to see
an active and effective OSCE covering the whole range
of its mandate. We welcome the work it is doing in the
security field, encouraging member States to sign
United Nations conventions on terrorism activity. We
welcome its general contribution to support for the
international standards agreed upon by all of us and
reflected in the United Nations and in other
agreements. We also believe it makes a very important
contribution to the building of democracy in Kosovo
and across the region. And, although we welcome the
reform initiatives and the report of the panel of
eminent persons, we believe it is very important that
new activities not be undertaken at the expense of the
very important human rights and democracy-building
functions.

Against that backdrop, I have two questions for
the Minister. First, how would he assess the OSCE's
ability to take on new areas of activity while remaining
as effective, and indeed becoming more effective, in
the areas in which it has specialized until now?

Secondly, given the expansion of the European
Union's activities in the field of conflict prevention
and resolution - with the European Security and
Defence Policy in its military and civilian aspects and
other issues of the European security strategy - how
can we achieve a complementary and effective
relationship among the European Union, the OSCE and
other actors to effectively address European security in
its broadest sense, both geographically and
functionally?

