Ihave the honour to submit this written statement on behalf of Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own country, Denmark. The Nordic countries would like to thank the Security Council for this opportunity to address it on the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations and the centenary of the Statute of the Permanent Court of International Justice. As the Security Council Report's fourth report on the rule of law concluded, strengthening the relationship between the Security Council and the International Court of Justice could further promote international peace and security. The Charter of the United Nations envisages a close relationship between the Council and the Court. The Charter therefore provides the two organs with ample opportunities for intensive cooperation. At a time when the rules-based order is increasingly under pressure, the Security Council and the Court should use their Charter prerogatives and play vital and mutually complementary roles in promoting the rule of law, including with regard to human rights and peace and security. The rule of law at the national and international levels is fundamental to peace and security. It is an important tool for preventing and resolving conflicts and is critical to building sustainable peace and protecting human rights in the aftermath of conflict. It is therefore not surprising that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in particular Goal 16, seeks to promote peaceful, just and inclusive societies, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels. The peaceful settlement of disputes forms an integral part of the rule of law. Therefore, the Nordic countries would welcome intensified cooperation between the Security Council and the International Court of Justice in order to uphold the rule of law. The large volume of cases indicates the trust and confidence that States place in the Court by referring disputes to it for resolution. The Court's many contributions to the peaceful settlement of maritime and land boundary disputes have been decisive in maintaining international peace and security. We would like to highlight the vital role of young people, especially young women, when it comes to promoting the rule of law in developed and developing countries alike. We therefore welcome the efforts of the Court, as well as the Council, to engage young people - for example, by giving students from various backgrounds a chance to familiarize themselves with international law and the judicial settlement of disputes. Since its establishment in 2000, the Judicial Fellowship Programme of the International Court of Justice has enabled 193 law graduates to enhance their knowledge of international law. We welcome the recent establishment of a trust fund to grant fellowship awards to selected candidates who are nationals of developing countries, thereby guaranteeing the geographic and linguistic diversity of the participants in the Programme. The International Court of Justice is the principal judicial organ of the United Nations. The Security Council has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. Together, they have the potential to be a powerful force for upholding the rule of law at the international level. In particular, the Nordic countries would like to recall that, in accordance with Article 33, paragraph2, and Article 96, paragraph a, of the Charter of the United Nations, respectively, the Security Council may call upon States parties to any dispute to settle such disputes by peaceful means and request advisory opinions from the Court on legal matters. We urge all States to engage actively and constructively in international cooperation to support the rules-based international order, of which the peaceful settlement of disputes and international peace and security form integral and crucial parts. We call upon States that have not yet done so to consider accepting the jurisdiction of the Court in accordance with its Statute.
