Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your outstanding leadership of the work of the Security
Council this month. We thank you sincerely for allowing
us to address the Council.

I begin my statement by pledging the full support
of the Government and the people of Yemen for the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed. We strongly condemn
the assassination attempt against him in the occupied
capital of Yemen by the Houthi militias allied to the
former President's followers. On Monday, 22 May, the
Government of Yemen issued its condemnation of that
criminal act targeting the Special Envoy. The group of
18, which sponsors the political operation in Yemen,
has also issued a statement strongly condemning that
criminal act and calling upon the leaders of the coup to
undertake a full investigation of the crime. It came at a
time when the Special Envoy carried new proposals to
resume peace efforts, including a truce during the holy
month of Ramadan, as well as arrangements to hand
over the city of Hudaydah to the legitimate Government
and the exit ofthe Houthi militias from the city as a first
step towards resuming peace negotiations in Kuwait
and signing such understandings.

The Government of Yemen has expressed its initial
acceptance ofthe peace proposals carried by the Special
Envoy and its desire to put an end to Yemeni bloodshed.
Regretfully, the recent visit of the Special Envoy was
met with the intransigence and aggression of the leaders
of the coup. Today, on the fourth day of the holy month
of Ramadan, we are facing a lost opportunity, with the
increasing suffering of the Yemeni people, who are at
the mercy of the militias of death.

After more than two years of a coup d'etat led
by the Houthi militias, in association with the former
President, and with the support and incitement of
Iran, Yemen is experiencing one of the most horrific
humanitarian tragedies. The victims of the coup are on
the rise, Yemenis have been displaced to the four corners
of the planet, famine has spread as have diseases - the
last of which was the dreadful cholera outbreak. Thanks
to the support of the international community, Yemen
had eradicated cholera in past years.

Today, Yemen is a terrifying scene out of Dante's
Divine Comedy, where death prevails in all of its
colours and human suffering is the major headline.
That is all due to the coup leaders holding on to stolen
power and stealing the scarce resources of the Yemeni
people. The head of that criminal coup d'etat, Abdul-
Malik Badreddin Al-Houthi, is sitting in his cave,
alleging the holy right to rule while the international
community combating terrorism is facing another
pretender, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, who has established
the State of death and terrorism and wrongfully called
it the Islamic State.

The terrorism of the Houthi movement, Da'esh, or
Al-Qaida, which is controlled by hidden hands in the
Iranian intelligence, is turning our lives into anightmare.
They have actually put an end to the dream of Yemenis
with the result of the national dialogue conference
to establish a democratic federal State. This war has
never been the choice of the Yemeni Government, led
by President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour. It was
imposed upon us after all other peaceful options were
exhausted and after we had reached many compromises
so as to not endure an indiscriminate war, where the
first and last loser would be the great Yemeni people.

Nevertheless, we extend a peaceful hand for a
just and comprehensive solution based on the agreed
instruments. Locally, regionally and internationally,
those are the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative and
its implementation mechanism and the resolutions of
the Security Council - the latest of which is resolution
2216 (2015). That solution would bring genuine peace,
instead of temporary peace that would lead to further
wars for coup leaders, terrorists and gangs to violate
our national sovereignty.

The catastrophic humanitarian situation that
my country has been enduring since the rogue coup
d'etat of the Houthi militias and the followers of the
former President requires further attention from
the international community. Those gangs, which
have forcefully taken power, have brought increased
humanitarian suffering and the spread of famine and
disease - most recently cholera - which have led to
the death of many people.

In that connection, I would like to refer to the
excellent outcome of the Geneva Conference of
25 April - under the sponsorship of the Secretary-
General and the Governments of Switzerland and
Sweden - aimed at supporting the humanitarian
response plan in Yemen for 2017. It raised approximately
$1.1 million. In that regard, we call upon all countries
that pledged funds to follow through so that we can
use the money to combat the cholera and famine in
Yemen. So far, only 65 per cent of the pledges have
been honoured.

The Government of Yemen, under the leadership
of the President, welcomes the Arab and international
efforts to combat cholera. I would also like to express
my gratitude to the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques,
King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, who has order the
King Salman Center for Humanitarian Aid and Relief
to make every effort to prevent the spread of cholera,
especially since most of the areas where cholera is
spread are under the control of the coup d'etat forces.
They have also provided facilities and medications for
50,000 people and signed an $8 million with the World
Health Organization to address the cholera outbreak. It
is regrettable and painful that the arrival of the Special
Envoy to Sana'a coincided with massacres by the Houthi
militias in Taiz, which has been under blockade for
two years. It led to the death of 50 innocent civilians,
most of them women and children, as well as five
journalists - which was met by the appalling silence
of the international community.

This is the picture of six-year-old Eliyas Aklan,
who was killed by a Houthi-launched missile in
Taiz on 23 May. His innocent tears will chase the
criminals until justice prevails for him and all innocent
children. Eliyas reminds us of another child, Fareed
Al-Tharabi, five-years-old, who was killed in another
Houthi massacre by a missile launched in Taiz on
13 October 2015. He died crying and pleading with
his doctors not to bury him. His story was referred to
by the former Permanent Representative of the United
States, Ms. Samantha Power.

Taiz continues to experience horrors after two years
of an appalling war and the collective punishment of its
children and adults, who have rejected the coup d'etat.
The blockade imposed under the coup d'etat has led to
further displacement and the daily killing of children,
women and the elderly, as well as the indiscriminate
bombing of hospitals and residential areas that lack all
water, food and medicine.

I call on the human conscience of Council
members, in the name of the Government of Yemen, to
condemn and criminalize the massacres committed by
the Houthi militias and Saleh, as well as the blockade
imposed on the city of Taiz and its villages. Day after
day, the militia set burn and shell the houses of citizens,
forcefully displacing them from their villages. We have
never yet heard a call for an end to the blockade.

As the number of child victims climbs, the number
of detainees and the forcible disappeared is also on
the rise. All the forcibly displaced and detainees are
now in the prisons of the coup masters. How many
victims, children, detainees and forcibly disappeared
does the Council, the United Nations, the Secretary-
General and the Special Envoy need before they
respond to the suffering of our people and condemn the
Houthi killers? How many messages have I sent to the
Secretary-General concerning the detainees without a
single response? It is as if international humanitarian
law has nothing to do with what is being perpetrated by
that criminal gang.

The ongoing efforts of the Government of Yemen
are focused on rebuilding the liberated zones and
pursuing its efforts to get rid of the terrorist gangs, in
cooperation with the Saudi-led coalition, the United
Arab Emirates and the international community, led by
the United States of America. We are striving jointly
with the international community and the specialized
United Nations agencies to speed the recovery and
transition, from the humanitarian-relief stage through
reconstruction. The Special Envoy referred to the
meeting that was convened in Riyadh by the World
Bank and the Government of Saudi Arabia.

We call for assistance to the Government of Yemen
in implementing its economic recovery plan in the areas
under its control, which constitute 80 per cent of the
total territory of Yemen. It is no surprise that the first
responder to the calls of His Excellency President Hadi
Mansour has been the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which
has pledged $10 million, $8 million of which support
construction projects in the liberated areas, while the
other $2 million are earmarked for the Central Bank
of Yemen to prevent the devaluation of the national
currency.

In line with efforts to address the deteriorating
humanitarian situation, the Government is still working
hard to provide salaries to all Government employees,
who have not been paid for eight months thanks to
the militias, which have stolen all the money from
the Central Bank and its reserves. We have provided
salaries in some liberated areas and allocated some
funds to areas under the control of the coup d'etat.
However, the militias have stolen 581 billion rials
from the tax revenues and refuse to pay the salaries
of those under their control. This has redoubled the
humanitarian suffering of the people and made it harder
for the Government to remain current in the payment of
the salaries of its employees.

To conclude, we reaffirm the Yemeni Government's
strong belief that a genuine, effective and sustainable
solution to the deteriorating humanitarian and
economic situation in Yemen requires efforts to
overturn the coup d'etat, restore legitimacy and State
institutions, and return to normal life. In that regard,
we commend the efforts of the Security Council and
the Ambassadors of the group of 18 to achieve security
and stability in Yemen. We reiterate our sincere thanks
and appreciation to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
the United Arab Emirates and all the Arab coalition
countries working to restore legitimacy in Yemen. We
call on all members of the Security Council to pursue
their unified efforts to end the humanitarian suffering
in my country and to take a firm stance against those
responsible for the coup and further pressure them to
comply with the relevant international resolutions and
respect international humanitarian law.

