Mr. Charwath (Austria): I would like to start by
thanking Sweden for convening today's debate and
for its active engagement as the Chair of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We commend
the committed work of the Special Representative
and her team, as well as UNICEF, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political
Affairs and the civil society organizations specializing
in the topic.

We have studied the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/465) and agree with him that preventing
violations against children affected by conflict should
be a primary concern of the international community.
Our support for the Security Council's children-
and-armed-conflict mandate is steadfast, and we
stand behind its integrity and impartiality to list all
perpetrators of grave Violations against children.

Austria fully aligns itself with the statements of
the European Union, the Group of Friends of Children
and Armed Conflict and the States that have endorsed
the Safe Schools Declaration. In my national capacity, I
would like to highlight three points.

First is promoting action plans. Action plans with
parties to a conflict provide the main engagement
framework for the United Nations to address immediate
protection concerns and as a lever to prevent future
violations. We have to further promote the work with
both State and non-State actors to follow up on their
implementation as well as to conclude new action
plans. Austria recognizes the challenges of engagement
to respond to and prevent violations by non- State armed
groups and continues its support for the United Nations-
led dialogue.

The Austrian Development Cooperation (ADC)
is actively engaged in projects aimed at reducing the
threat of violence against children. At present, ADC is
carrying out a project for the Sudan, where participating
parties in the Darfur conflict are being trained in the
rights of the child. That project also supports the Child
Protection Unit of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur in facilitating dialogue
between the parties to the conflict.

The second point concerns protection and
reintegration. Peace processes can be a vehicle
for advancing child protection and for promoting
reintegration and reconciliation, thereby helping to
prevent the outbreak of future conflicts. Provisions on
the protection of children, including their release and
reintegration, should therefore form part of the early
stages of ceasefire and peace negotiations.

We express our serious concern that children
allegedly associated with non-State armed groups
are too often perceived as a security threat and as
perpetrators, rather than as victims of grave violations.
While it is a priority to put in place alternatives to
detention and prosecution, the monitoring and reporting
on the detention of children for being associated with
armed forces or groups needs to continue. We would
also like to emphasize the importance of deploying
designated child protection advisers to United Nations
missions and of ensuring that the protection mandate
remains strong and unaffected.

Thirdly, with respect to commitment and action,
we encourage all States to endorse the Safe Schools
Declaration. Attacks on schools put children at risk
of injury or death. But the mere probability of attacks
can lead to higher drop-out rates, as parents then
tend to keep their children at home. Girls are often
disproportionately impacted and are less likely to return
to school even when the situation has become safer.

Austria has endorsed the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and
Use ofChild Soldiers as a measure to give priority to and
further operationalize child protection within United
Nations peacekeeping, and we are currently exploring
possibilities to contribute to their operationalization.

Austria has supported the development and the roll-
out of the new integrated protection of civilians training
materials by hosting train-the-trainer courses as part
of our long-standing cooperation with the Integrated
Training Service. We will continue to support the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support in developing training
materials on child protection for military peacekeepers
through their cooperation with the Integrated Training
Service and by hosting train-the-trainer courses for
troop-contributing countries.

We are struggling with new and recurring challenges
regarding the protection of boys and girls who are
vulnerable to violence and abuse. The international
community has to maintain its strong engagement to
bringing about positive change to the lives of children
affected by armed conflict. The full version of this
statement will be uploaded to our website.

