Ms. Rice (United States of America): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the United States.
The United States voted in favour of resolution
2043 (2012) authorizing the establishment of the United
Nations Supervision Mission in Syria, but we are sober
about the risks, all the more so given the Al-Assad
regime's long record of broken promises, deceit and
disregard for the most basic standards of humanity.

The Syrian people, like us, know that the
deployment of 300, or even 3,000, unarmed observers
cannot on its own stop the Al-Assad regime from
waging its barbaric campaign of violence against the
Syrian people.

What can bring a halt to that murderous rampage
is continued and intensified external pressure on the Al-
Assad regime. The Syrian opposition has said that it
welcomes the deployment of the United Nations
military observers and additional human rights and
other civilian monitors, because they will be impartial
eyes and ears on the ground to bear witness to the
Syrian Government's flagrant and persistent violations
of its commitments. Even more so, the Syrian people
expect, and deserve, that the Council will stand behind
today's resolution and ensure that swift and meaningful
consequences are imposed should the regime continue
to flout its obligations.

Since the adoption of resolution 2042 (2012),
exactly one week ago, in which the Council
unanimously called on the Syrian Government to
honour all its obligations, including a sustained
cessation of violence, the regime has unleashed yet
another wave of horrific violence against its own
people, resulting in the death of scores of Syrians daily.
The Government's use of shelling and heavy weaponry,
in particular in Homs, has reached levels that surpass
those before the ceasefire. Syrian Government troops in
armour have not been withdrawn from cities and
returned to barracks; protesters are still being
intimidated and murdered by Government forces; the
status of thousands of detainees remains unclear; and
precious little progress has been made on the issue of
humanitarian access, with an estimated 1 million
civilians still in urgent need of humanitarian assistance.

The Security Council has called upon the
Government to take concrete action. The Syrian
Government has ignored the Council. In the United
States, our patience is exhausted. Let me be plain: no
one should assume that the United States will agree to
renew this Mission at the end of 90 days. If there is not
a sustained cessation of violence, full freedom of
movement for United Nations personnel and rapid,
meaningful progress on other aspects - all other
aspects - of the six-point plan, then we must all
conclude that the Mission will have run its course.

We will not wait 90 days to pursue measures
against the Syrian Government if it continues to violate
its commitments or obstruct the monitors' work. We
express our deep gratitude to the monitors who are now
embarking on this unprecedented and risky mission. We
should be under no illusions: they are going to be
dependent for security on the very Government that is
responsible for the main security threats.

They are going to be deployed in the midst of
protesters who are desperate for a protection that the
monitors are not equipped or mandated to provide, and
they will be deployed in numbers too small to cover the
entire country but large enough to give rise to
expectations that will be impossible to meet if the
Syrian Government does not fulfil its commitments
towards a sustained cessation of violence.

All of our experience with United Nations
peacekeeping over the last 65 years teaches us that such
missions require that there be a peace to keep in order
for them to succeed.

The opposition has said that it wants and needs
this Mission, hoping that the presence of the monitors
will have a restraining effect on the Syrian Government
and help uphold the rights of the Syrian people to
assemble and express themselves freely. If that hope
does not materialize, however, the failure will be the
Syrian Government's, and it must be held accountable.
And we must be prepared to do so, given the Al-Assad
regime's track record to date.

The United States strongly supports the full
implementation of the Joint Special Envoy's six-point
plan. Yet let there be no doubt: we, our allies and others
in this body are planning and preparing for those
actions that will be required of all of us if the Al-Assad
regime persists in the slaughter of the Syrian people.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

