Mrs. Smith (Norway): This debate comes at a
time of momentous developments across the Middle
East and North Africa. The popular uprisings in the
region are ushering in a period of great opportunity. We
are hopeful that the people of the Middle East will be
heard in their rightful demands for political
participation and human rights. Our message to the
regimes and the people is clear - autocratic rule and
popular repression belong to the past; democracy and
freedom are the future.

In the midst of these historic changes, I would
like to take this opportunity to report on another and no
less historic event in the history of the Middle East
peace process. At the meeting of the international
donor group for the Palestinians in Brussels last week,
the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) and the United Nations reported to the donor
community that the Palestinian Authority is above the
threshold for a functioning State. The three
organizations have concluded that the Palestinian
Authority's delivery of public services to its population
and implementation of reforms now compare
favourably with those of many middle-income
countries. The IMF even reported that Palestinian
reforms have come so far that the public financial
management system is not only ready to support the
functions of a State, but has even become a model for
other developing countries. At the same time the,
Palestinian Authority has reduced its dependence on
donor budget support by almost 50 per cent. In other
words, we have a functioning Palestinian State
structure.

This remarkable progress over the past few years
could not have happened without the determination and
hard work of Prime Minister Fayyad and his Cabinet,
the cooperation and support of the Government of
Israel, and the unwavering financial support of the
international donor community. This tripartite
cooperation within the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
3
framework has greatly contributed to the success of
Palestinian State-building efforts.

However, there are still challenges that need
immediate attention. The Palestinian State-building
agenda is rapidly approaching its limits in terms of
what it can achieve within the political and physical
space available to the Palestinian Authority. As long as
Israel maintains control in Area C, which constitutes
60 per cent of the West Bank, economic growth will
not be sufficient to enable the Palestinian Authority to
become sustainable. To break this cycle and secure the
future sustainability of the Authority, Israel needs to
take further steps to dismantle restrictions and
measures in Area C, allow access to land and water in
these areas, and pursue a coherent trade strategy.

As noted time and time again by the international
community, the Palestinian State-building track and the
political negotiating track are interdependent. Progress
on one track can only go so far without progress on the
other. For all practical purposes, the State-building
process has been completed. The road towards the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State,
however, goes through negotiations.

But time is running out. We are only a few
months away from the internationally recognized
deadline for negotiating a framework agreement on
permanent status and a subsequent comprehensive
peace treaty. Now is the time for both parties to come
back to the negotiating table and show, through
decisive action, that this conflict can be ended and the
Palestinians can have their own independent,
democratic and viable State.

