Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I thank Judge
Meron, Judge Joensen, Prosecutor Brammertz and
Prosecutor Jallow for their reports.
Pakistan fully supports the important work of the
two Tribunals, as they contribute to procedural and
evidentiary international criminal law. Media spotlight
and scrutiny on their work has been sharp, but the
Tribunals have demonstrated composure, solemnity and
impartiality in conducting trial and appeal proceedings
and in passing judgements.

During the last six months, the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) has completed
its substantive work at the trial level with respect
to all 93 accused, and it has concluded trial and
appeals judgment. The transition from the ICTR to
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals appears to be on track. We are glad to note
that the Arusha branch of the Mechanism is operational
and that it provides active support and protection
to witnesses. The Mechanism's monitoring of cases
referred to the national jurisdictions is important. Its
work on the enforcement of sentences is Vital for a
smooth transition from the Tribunal to the Mechanism.
We are confident that the Mechanism will continue to
focus on State cooperation in the arrest of the remaining
nine fugitives.

The International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), too, has concluded proceedings
against 136 out of the 161 indicted individuals. We are
hopeful that the Tribunal will conclude all trials during
2013, except for those involving the three most recently
arrested accused. We appreciate the measures taken
by the ICTY to implement the completion strategy and
to pursue its procedural reforms. Concrete steps have
been taken to commence the work of The Hague branch
of the Mechanism next month.

In the final phase of their work, the Tribunals
face challenges in the preparation of archives, the
assignment of work to judges and staff management.
Adequate resources should be provided to the Tribunals
to do their job. The lack of experienced staff would
cause additional delays. Therefore, it is logical to
consider retention incentives on a case-by-case basis.

While there are no outstanding fugitives under the
jurisdiction ofthe ICTY after the arrest ofRatko Mladie
and Goran Hadzie, there are individuals indicted by the
ICTR who still remain at large. We hope that with the
cooperation and efforts of the relevant Member States,
the remaining fugitives will be held accountable.

We support the efforts of the ICTR President and
Registrar to find hosts for the relocation of individuals
who have either been acquitted or have served their
sentences. We call upon States that are in a position to
do so to respond positively to the Tribunals' requests.
Relocation of acquitted and released persons to third
States would give them an opportunity to restart their
lives and strengthen the rule of law.

This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
ICTY's establishment. It is essential to preserve the
legacy of both Tribunals given their contributions to
international criminal law. The work of preparing the
archives of the ICTR must be completed according to
its approved records retention schedule. The lasting
legacy of those tribunals should be to build national
capacities for accountability to end impunity.

We hope the Tribunals will also pave the way for
the process of reconciliation and lasting peace in the
Balkans and the Great Lakes region. The Tribunals'
contribution to jurisprudence and precedents in
international criminal law is important. So is the
reconstruction of a sense ofjustice, which would help
affected societies move beyond the events of the 19905
to closure and healing.

