The third round of the Constitutional Committee took place in Geneva despite the challenges due to the coronavirus disease. We welcome the fact that these talks were held in a constructive atmosphere, but unfortunately, that is the only positive news. I am glad to hear from Special Envoy Geir Pedersen that some common ground emerged, but we are afraid that this is not enough. Yet again, there was no real substantive progress. This is disappointing, but not surprising, given that the Syrian regime demonstrated once again that it is not serious about the Constitutional Committee. The regime instead wants to engage in endless procedural and general discussions. These delaying tactics must finally end. We need to see serious discussions around a meaningful political process with a view to implementing resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex), including a complete, immediate, nationwide ceasefire. The regime must end its obstructions and it must finally engage. The first step would be for the Syrian regime and the opposition to agree on a date, preferably very soon, and on the substantive agenda for the next session. We hope that Foreign Minister Lavrov used his visit to Damascus last week to firmly underline what is obvious. The conflict in Syria can come to a sustainable end only when the Syrian regime at long last engages seriously and constructively with the Constitutional Committee and the wider political process. On the release of detainees, this point has been made repeatedly by Germany and I will raise it again today. A key element of resolution 2254 (2015) is the call for the immediate release of arbitrarily detained persons by all parties. We need more and meaningful action on this crucial issue. The members of the Council have a responsibility to protect civilians, defend human rights and seek justice and accountability. Releases from detention are essential for creating the environment necessary for the Syrian parties to make progress in bringing this conflict to an end. Three points are important. First, the Council should request all parties, in particular the Syrian regime, which holds the overwhelming majority of detainees, to immediately release all arbitrarily detained persons, starting with the most vulnerable: women and children, the sick, wounded and elderly. Secondly, the Council should call upon all parties, in particular the Syrian regime, to allow immediate, unconditional and unhindered access for relevant humanitarian organizations to all prisoners and detention facilities. Thirdly, the Council should urge all parties, in particular the Syrian regime, to inform the families of the fate and whereabouts of the tens of thousands missing and disappeared persons. We will continue to make this point as long as it is necessary. I would also make some remarks on accountability. National reconciliation and sustainable peace in Syria will not be possible without truth, justice and accountability for all crimes and atrocities committed during the Syrian conflict. We are deeply concerned by the latest report of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic (A/HRC/45/31). The report concludes that the practice by Syrian regime forces of enforced disappearance, torture, sexual violence and death in custody amounts to crimes against humanity. According to the report, the Syrian National Army may also have committed war crimes such as hostage-taking, rape, cruel treatment and torture in Afrin and the surrounding area. There must be a follow-up to the findings of the report and other reports, such as those of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Investigation and Identification Team or the Board of Inquiry, which came to similar conclusions with regard to violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law in Syria. We must not tolerate impunity for the most serious crimes in Syria, and whoever commits crimes against humanity or war crimes must not feel safe anywhere and must be held accountable. The evidence for these crimes in the Syrian conflict is overwhelming, and it should be heard where it belongs - at the International Criminal Court. In the meantime, national jurisdictions in Germany and elsewhere are starting to fill the void caused by the vetoed referral to the International Criminal Court. Two former officials of the Syrian regime's repression apparatus are currently being tried before a German court in Koblenz. We have reported about this trial repeatedly in the Council. One witness, who was an undertaker in Damascus from 2011 until 2017, recently testified that he had been recruited by the Syrian regime to transport and bury victims of torture killed in prisons, security branches and military hospitals to huge mass graves outside Damascus. He reported that many bodies were mutilated and disfigured. One killed a woman who was still carrying a baby in her arms. What else do we need to hear for the Council to finally unite behind the fight against impunity in Syria? How is Syria ever to return to sustainable peace if the most serious crimes are not addressed? In this regard, we welcome the initiative made public today by the Netherlands to hold Syria accountable under international law for gross human rights violations and torture, in particular by invoking Syria's responsibility for torture under the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. The Netherlands has initiated the legal procedures foreseen in article 30 of the Convention Against Torture.
