Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): | too would like to express our sincere wishes for the success and future professional achievements of Ambassador Pierce. She has done a great deal personally and as a diplomat to ensure the productive work of the Security Council. We will certainly miss her. We also wish to thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Mr. Rajasingham, Acting Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for their overview of the political and humanitarian situation in Yemen. We commend the work of our United Nations colleagues on the ground in Yemen in the face of this acute crisis. In Yemen, we continue to see a deadlocked political settlement process, an escalation of hostilities and a degradation of the humanitarian situation. We must be aware that all those factors bring us closer to the point of no return, after which it will be impossible to put together a functioning unity of Yemeni State institutions. Unfortunately, the data provided today by Emergency Relief Coordinator Rajasingham cannot convey the full magnitude of the bleak situation in Yemen, where a humanitarian catastrophe is unfolding. The conflict has already done irreparable damage to the country's economy. Recovery will require a great deal of time and money. The people of Yemen have borne the brunt of the devastating consequences of the crisis. Most are hungry, need some form of assistance and are unable to access the basic medical services and treatment. The situation in Yemen therefore requires the close attention and assistance of the entire international community. However, the Yemeni parties themselves must also take steps to improve the humanitarian situation. There is a pressing need to open the international airport in Sana'a. We once again call for a negotiated solution to the Yemeni conflict. The parties must exercise restraint and eschew the use of force. The history of the Yemeni conflict shows that militaristic approaches do not work. Without a formula for a lasting comprehensive settlement of the Yemeni conflict, the humanitarian investments that are now critical to the population of the country will evaporate over the long term. Despite Mr. Griffiths' mediation efforts, the full implementation of the Stockholm Agreement has not yet been achieved. The responsibility for that failure lies with the Yemeni side. The Riyadh agreement has also not been implemented. It is imperative to unite around the Special Envoy and assist him in his diligent efforts to engage with all stakeholders and help them realize the futility of trying to use force to resolve Yemeni problems. With each passing day of war, the cost of post-conflict reconstruction in Yemen increases immensely, playing into the hands of terrorist groups that capitalize on chaos and entrenching their position in the centre of the country. We reaffirm our full support for Mr. Griffiths in his work to prompt the parties to the Yemeni conflict to acknowledge that there is no alternative to a political settlement. It is necessary to implement confidence-building measures and_ establish a comprehensive ceasefire. The Russian Federation will assist the United Nations mediation efforts, including through establishing contact with all political forces in the country and other stakeholders. We are convinced that it is still possible to reach an agreement, in particular on confidence-building measures, through the establishment of a comprehensive ceasefire and the relaunching of inter-Yemeni talks. What is needed is political will. We call on all parties to proactively join Mr. Griffiths' mediation efforts. In conclusion, we stress that, like any conflict in the Middle East, the conflict in Yemen cannot be resolved by trying to point fingers. As history shows, that approach only complicates efforts to resolve conflict. In that connection, we once again recall the importance of Council resolution 598 (1987), which called on the Secretary-General to develop a security architecture for the region, in cooperation with the States of theregion. We draw attention to the Russian blueprint of collective security in the Persian Gulf area, which is aimed precisely at unblocking conflict situations and developing confidence-building measures. The French Government has also put forward useful ideas. The Iranian Government proposed initiatives for peace as well. Such proposals create a constructive environment for improving the situation in the Persian Gulf region. We are nearing the day when, exactly five years ago, the bloody and, at the same time, unnecessary war in Yemen began - a war that is costing hundreds of millions of dollars every day. That money could have been spent on addressing the challenges of countering terrorism, developing the economy and dealing with the threats of the pandemic. We call on all Yemeni parties to renounce mutual accusations and to take responsibility for the fate of their own State. We call on the Yemeni people to urgently start negotiations under the auspices of the United Nations to achieve a comprehensive settlement in Yemen in order to put the country back on the path of sustainable development. We want to see a peaceful and stable Yemen, coexisting in peace and security with all countries of the region without exception.
