Mr. Kickert (Austria): We would like to thank the delegation of Viet Nam for convening this open debate and giving all interested Member States the chance to express themselves on what is now already the third day of the open debate. Austria aligns itself with the statement of the European Union (see S/PV.8699(Resumption 1)). We have come a long way since 1945. While we may have succeeded in saving humankind from the scourge of a new world war, we have not saved it from regional or national wars and we are still far from realizing fundamental human rights, the dignity and worth of every human person and the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small, as stipulated in the Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations. Nevertheless, the United Nations, with the Charter at its core, has undeniably proven to be indispensable. Austria strongly believes in multilateralism and that a rules-based international system with clear and predictable rules is an essential precondition for lasting peace and development. As States Members of the United Nations, it is our responsibility to adhere to the Charter and the rule of law at the national and international levels. Lately, as the United Nations Charter, legally binding Security Council resolutions and human rights obligations are being blatantly ignored, one might get the impression that some countries believe they are above the law. In order to uphold the principles of the Charter and the rule of law, it is clear that we must do more. We must further strengthen the prevention of violence and conflict, including in the Council. Early warning and response capacities need to be enhanced, as do national expertise in mediation and preventive diplomacy. Austria is working with partners in the Economic Community of West African States and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in that regard. Austria supports all means of peaceful settlement of disputes referred to in the United Nations Charter and we call on all Member States to accept, without any reservations, the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice, in accordance with Article 36 of the Charter. All States must refrain from actions that are in violation of Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter, prohibiting the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State. We note with concern the increasing number of cases where armed force is applied unilaterally, invoking the inherent right of self-defence pursuant to Article 51 of the Charter. These cases and the fact that other States Members of the United Nations do not publicly express their legal views on each and every case may not be interpreted as a new State practice or opinio juris that might lead to the erosion of Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter, which the International Law Commission has determined to be a peremptory norm, or jus cogens. We emphasize the importance of a collective response to threats to international peace and security, which must be guided by the rule of law. In this regard, in situations where Security Council action could prevent or stop violence, it is the Council's responsibility to do so. Austria urges Security Council members to refrain from using the veto to curtail Security Council action where such action could prevent or stop violence or conflict in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter. Austria supports the code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group as well as the initiative by Mexico and France in that regard. Also, when it comes to Security Council sanctions, fair and clear procedures, including an independent mechanism for review, are a prerequisite for the legitimacy of and compliance with sanctions. While Austria would like to highlight in this regard the vital function of the Office of the Ombudsperson for the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, we call on the Council to ensure that procedural human rights guarantees are institutionalized in all sanctions regimes. Finally, Austria believes that accountability and the fight against impunity for violations of international human rights and humanitarian law are central to ensuring lasting peace. Austria is a strong supporter of the International Criminal Court (ICC), and we call on the Security Council to refer the situation in Syria to the ICC as well as to ensure cooperation and follow-up in situations it has already referred to the Court. In conclusion, I would like to stress once again that the provisions of the United Nations Charter are legally binding for all States Members of the United Nations. They serve not an abstract goal but the protection of the rights and interests of both States and individuals. The United Nations Charter is the cornerstone of the rule of law at the international level. Austria, also in its role as coordinator of the Group of Friends of the Rule of Law, will continue to give utmost priority to this subject.
