Mr. Braun (Germany): To start with, let me join
those who have thanked the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his
comprehensive briefing today. I would also like to
thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his statement.

Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union earlier in this
debate.

Last year, Afghanistan successfully held
presidential elections, resulting in the first peaceful
and democratic transfer of power in the country's often
painful history. Those elections eventually led to the
formation of a National Unity Government. As the
legislative term of the Afghan Parliament ends today,
we strongly encourage the Government to continue
consolidating Afghan democracy and set a concrete
timeline for parliamentary and provincial-council
elections to be held in a timely manner.

It is of the utmost importance that the Afghan
people have their confidence and trust in democratic
election processes restored. The pending electoral
reforms have the potential to strengthen the election
system's credibility and sustainability. They should be
based on a broad political consensus that includes the
various political camps as well as civil society. In that
context, we welcome the establishment of the Special
Commission on Election Reform and urge it to assume
its duties as quickly as possible. A fully operational
legislative body alongside an efficient National Unity
Government is a prerequisite for tackling the many
issues facing Afghanistan and for building on the
country's numerous achievements of the past decade.

Now is the time to implement the ambitious
reform strategy, presented by President Ghani and
Chief Executive Abdullah under the title "Realizing
self-reliance", for the benefit of the Afghan people.
Refreshing the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework will be the cornerstone of that process. The
Government is currently working with its partners to set
out new priorities that can put Afghanistan firmly on a
path of self-reliance, and that process must continue.
One already certain result is that the international
community will abide by its commitments and continue
to support Afghanistan during its Transformation
Decade. At the London Conference on Afghanistan
held last December, Germany renewed its commitment
to maintaining its extraordinary level of civilian
assistance, amounting to almost $500 million annually
up to 2016.

The United Nations and its funds and programmes,
and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, will continue to play a vital role in
the implementation of Afghanistan's policy and
development priorities. As the role of the United Nations
may evolve over time, we welcome the establishment of
the Tripartite Commission, as mandated in resolution
2210 (2015). Any recommendation that can improve the
effectiveness of the cooperation between the Afghan
Government, the United Nations and donor countries
will benefit the Afghan people and is therefore welcome.

The current tragic record level of civilian
casualties is of great concern. As the Taliban and
other armed groups continue to deliberately target
civilians, including women, children and those actively
advocating for the rights of these most vulnerable
groups, it is the civilian population that pays the price
for the armed conflict. Today's attack on the Parliament
building, disrupting the confirmation process for the
Acting Minister of Defence, is a stark reminder of the
Taliban's outrageous actions. Our thoughts are with the
Victims' families.

In closing, I would like to say that an Afghan-led
and -owned peace process that upholds the gains in
human rights that have been made over the past decade,
in particular the rights of women, is key to alleviating
the suffering of the civilian population. We therefore
fully support such a peace process and the instrumental
role that the United Nations will play in it.

