Mr. Burian (Slovakia): First of all, I would like
to thank Mr. Antonio Guterres, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, for his briefing, which
provided a valuable update on the activities of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) in the conflict areas of the Sudan
and the Great Lakes region.

We very much appreciate the relentless efforts of
UNHCR staff and missions in providing protection and
assistance to the 19.2 million refugees and internally
displaced persons around the world. In that context, we
support UNHCR's global strategic objectives as
formulated in its ninth global appeal, with special
emphasis on enhancing the quality, effectiveness and
efficiency of the agency's operations by
institutionalizing results-based management.

Strengthening the international community's
overall capacity to protect civilians affected by armed
conflict is one of my Government's priorities. In that
context, we commend the efforts of UNHCR to address
one of the biggest challenges of the current refugee
regime: the problem of people internally displaced by
conflict. We agree with Mr. Guterres's past statement
that the treatment of people internally displaced by
conflict has been one of the biggest failures of the
international community in the past. In that connection,
we welcome the strengthening of UNHCR's support
for collaborative efforts to comprehensively address
situations of internal displacement, which is defined as
one of UNHCR's global strategic objectives. We would
like to hear Mr. Guterres's views about the progress
and challenges in that area.

We highly commend UNHCR for its remarkable
success in helping more than 4 million refugees in
Afghanistan to return to their homes. We also welcome
the information provided by Mr. Guterres regarding the
progress made in the repatriation of 66,000 refugees to
Burundi last year; more than 38,000 Liberians have
also been repatriated. This has been made possible by
the improved security situation in those countries. In
that connection, we share Mr. Guterres's belief that
UNHCR should become an important partner and
participant in the future activities of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peace Support Office. We believe
that the Commission will provide us with an effective
tool for securing post-conflict stability and
development. We also believe that UNHCR can
contribute to its work by virtue of its unique potential
and the experience it has gathered in areas of conflict
over the years.

In conclusion, I would like to ask Mr. Guterres a
question concerning recent developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the safety of
refugee returns to that country from neighbouring
countries, especially Uganda. According to the latest
news, having fled fighting in the Kivu region of the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Congolese refugees in Uganda have begun to return
home in recent days. As we have heard, the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is very volatile,
with military activity having resumed in that country in
recent days. We have also heard that 15,000 refugees
are living in the open at the airfield in Kisoro, waiting
for the situation to improve. Can the High
Commissioner provide us with some details about the
current situation of Congolese refugees on the
Ugandan border, as well as about the possible actions
of UNHCR to assist that group of refugees, who are
eager to return home but who are trapped at the border?
We have heard that, according to current UNHCR
practices, the agency can only provide water for
refugees who are in the border area, and nothing more.
We wonder whether that practice can somehow be
changed in the future.

