Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Fall and Mr. Lezhnev for their briefings.

While the overall situation in the countries of
Central Africa has been stable of late and positive
progress has been made, challenges remain. The
activities of Boko Haram, the Lord's Resistance Army
and other armed groups and terrorist organizations
still pose serious threats to the countries of the
region, especially the Lake Chad basin. Moreover, the
humanitarian situation does not allow for optimism.
Underdevelopment, extreme poverty and other deep-
seated factors perpetuate a range of serious challenges,
including terrorism and intercommunal conflicts.

China commends the collective efforts of the
countries of Central Africa to tackle these challenges.
We welcome the extraordinary summit of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), to be
held later this year, and support the Summit's planned
approval of ECCAS reform measures. China also
commends Special Representative Fall and the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
for their active work and good offices mediation and
conflict prevention in their endeavours to resolve issues
in the region.

China wishes to stress the following three points.

First, it is critical to highlight the importance of
the development perspective. A deep knowledge of how
development impacts peace and stability and relates
to specific issues provides the basis for an in-depth
analysis of regional issues. Most of the challenges in
Central Africa are, in essence, related to insufficient,
unbalanced and non-inclusive development. The
countries of the region should be more conscious of the
centrality of development so as to resolve the root causes
of the said issues. The international community should
support the countries of the region in their development
endeavours and promote cooperation in economic
and social sectors. UNOCA should strengthen its
development perspective and integrate it into conflict
prevention efforts.

Secondly, we need to respect host-country
ownership. The mediation and good offices of the
international community and the United Nations
should be based on the consent of the host countries.
The situation in some countries poses no threat to
international peace and security, and those countries
want no United Nations intervention. The United
Nations and the Security Council should fully respect
their positions. China supports regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union and ECCAS,
in their efforts to solve African issues in the African

way, through unity and self-empowerment.

Thirdly, United Nations agencies in the region
and subregional organizations should strengthen
coordination. The United Nations has an extensive
presence in Central Africa, such as the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Office of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region
and the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Burundi. All parties should enhance
communication and avoid stepping on each other's toes.
China appreciates the efforts of countries of the region
to address those challenges. UNOCA can strengthen
communication and coordination with ECCAS, the
Lake Chad Basin Commission, the secretariat of the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the
Multinational Joint Task Force against Boko Haram in
order to facilitate and complement each other's work.

China stands ready to continue to work more closely
with countries in Central Africa, continue to support
the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and UNOCA, and play a constructive role in
helping those countries maintain security and stability,
achieve greater economic development and improve the
humanitarian situation.

