Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Sir, the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, to the
presidency of the Security Council. We are grateful to
our friends and colleagues from the Vietnamese
delegation for the painstaking preparation of this
meeting and the arduous work that they have
performed in this regard. We are also grateful to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
participation in this important meeting. We are also
grateful to Ms. Coomaraswamy, Mr. Mullet,
Ms. Veneman and Ms. Hunt for the timely information
they have provided and welcome their activities in
trying to shield children from the horrors of war. We
pay tribute to the selflessness and personal courage of
both the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, who has carried out productive visits to hot
spots, and the UNICEF staff and other humanitarian
personnel working in such places on a permanent basis.

The Russian Federation views the securing of the
rights of children as a priority and is actively working
to that end. On 26 June of this year, the President of
the Russian Federation, Mr. Dmitry Medvedev, signed
a law on the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child relating to the
involvement of children in armed conflict. This step
was a further demonstration of Russia's commitment to
strict compliance with international legal norms and
standards and of our own meaningful contribution to
the United Nations campaign to widen the scale of the
obligations States sign on to in the human rights and
humanitarian fields.

The Convention on the Rights of the Child, which
is nearing universal ratification, and its Optional
Protocols are important international instruments in the
field of protection of children, including in the context
of armed conflict. We enjoin those States that have not
yet acceded to them to do so as a matter of urgency.
The task of protecting children in conflicts and
securing their normal life in the post-conflict period is
system-wide in nature and needs a consolidated
approach on the part of the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Human Rights Council, the Economic and Social
Council (ECOSOC) and its functional committees
alike. This issue must be the focus of attention of
human rights treaty bodies, first and foremost, the
Committee on the Rights of the Child.

It is important not only to tackle the tragic
consequences of conflict but also to direct efforts at
preventing them. An important factor in this regard is
the achievement of harmony between civilizations and
the eradication of extremism in whatever soil it may
spring from.

We restate our support for the Secretary-
General's appeal to pay due attention to all serious
violations of the rights of children in conflicts,
including not only the use of child soldiers, but the
remaining five categories of violations as well. We feel
that such crimes should not remain unpunished. We
feel that the killing and maiming of minors may stand
alongside their recruitment as a criterion for including
parties to armed conflict in the well-known annexes to
the Secretary-General's reports on this issue.

Specific long-term measures must be adopted to
rehabilitate the afflicted children and to reintegrate
them into society. It is extremely important in this
regard to create the conditions for children and young
people to receive a continuous and full-fledged
education as well as for children to have access to
comprehensive medical care.

Resolution 1612 (2005) is an important
benchmark for practical work to protect children. In
order to ensure that this activity is of high quality, it is
necessary for the monitoring and reporting mechanism
to function to the full in all situations that give rise to
concern, first and foremost those on the Security
Council agenda, and for it to provide to the Council
up-to-date, objective and reliable information. We
approve the report of the Chairman of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict (S/2008/455),
and we welcome the readiness of the Group to improve
its working methods in order to enhance its
effectiveness and impartiality.

We share the concern of United Nations bodies,
the Secretariat management and its specialized units
with respect to the deteriorating situation of children in
Afghanistan and Iraq. Unlike a number of other
situations, the suffering of children in these conflicts

does not receive proper attention by the Security
Council and other United Nations bodies and does not
elicit appropriate measures from them. We are
convinced of the need for the swiftest deployment of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism in those
countries. We stress the responsibility of all parties,
including the multinational forces, to ensure the safety
of the civilian populations, first and foremost children,
as well as strict compliance with the norms of
international humanitarian law. We resolutely condemn
the killing and maiming of children, where as the result
of premeditated attacks or as a result of indiscriminate
and excessive use of force. We feel that it is
unacceptable for hundreds of children to continue to be
held in the military prisons of multinational forces on
arbitrary charges and without access to civil justice. A
number of other delegations have already referred to
this situation as well.

It is impossible to secure the protection of
children without cooperation from the Governments of
countries in the grip of the conflicts or at the stage of
post-conflict restoration. The United Nations and its
Security Council must steer the international
community towards providing meaningful support, first
and foremost financial, for national measures to bolster
this protection, to effectively implement
demobilization and reintegration programmes for
minors, and to create the socio-economic and legal
conditions for prevention of recruitment of children
and other crimes against them.

