Ms. Kalay-Kleitman (Israel): On behalf of my
delegation, allow me to thank you, Sir, for your
leadership of the Council for the month of October.

(spoke in Russian)

I thank the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation for his briefing today on the work
accomplished by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and for Russia's leading role as Chair of the
Committee.

(spoke in English)

I also congratulate Mr. Ruperez for the
organization outline prepared for the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate.

The Security Council, especially since the
tragedy of 11 September 2001, has elaborated in clear
terms what is expected of each State in the global
confrontation with terrorism. There are clear signposts
set out by the Council and the CTC, which, together
with the numerous anti-terrorism conventions and other
international initiatives, form an impressive counter-
terrorism architecture and a road map for action. Those
include, for example, resolutions 1267 (1999), 1269
(1999), 1368 (2001), 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004) and
now 1566 (2004), adopted just a few weeks ago at the
initiative of the Russian Federation, which we
welcome.

Those resolutions set out crucial normative
standards and binding obligations for dealing with
what is perhaps the greatest challenge to freedom and
open societies in the first years of the twenty-first
century. They reflect the position of an international
community united against terrorism, and, if acted upon
with resolve and without compromise, they can deal
terrorism a decisive blow. The message that this
Council has sent through those resolutions is clear: the
threat of terrorism anywhere is a threat to people
everywhere. By acting on that threat, separately and
together, we can meet our legal and moral obligations
and create the conditions for a more peaceful world.

The Council has reached a number of vital
conclusions regarding the challenges posed by
terrorism. The invocation of Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter, the strengthening of the CTC and the
calls in resolution 1566 (2004) to consider new ways to
confront terrorist organizations throughout the world
demonstrate a collective understanding that we face a
global threat of truly dangerous proportions. Sadly,
those dangers have only multiplied, given the risks of
non-conventional attacks by terrorist actors and the
nexus in various parts of the globe between terrorists
and tyrants. In the light of what we know about
terrorist networks and the extremist ideology that feeds
them, it is simply wrong to see those actions in
localized contexts or as a trend that can be isolated to
specific regions.

As too many of us have learned through painful
experience, there is no possible legitimate reason that
can explain away terror and no such thing as an
acceptable targeting of innocents. There is no cause,
grievance or claim that can justify those actions.
Resolution 1566 (2004) sends that message clearly,
without leaving any room for doubt or debate. It
unequivocally states in paragraph 3 that terrorist
actions are "under no circumstances justifiable by
considerations of a political, philosophical, ideological,
racial, ethnic, religious or other similar nature

We all know what terrorism is. Even those
apologists who still insist on using code words such as
"resistance" or "freedom fighters" to blur the
distinction between means and ends cannot hide from
these clear statements. It is time for all of us to
internalize the message affirmed by resolution 1566
(2004) and to be clear in our statements and in our
actions and resolute in the knowledge that the
deliberate targeting of innocent people for political or
ideological objectives is beyond the pale. There has
never been a terrorist organization that did not claim to
be acting for some noble cause, but as this and many
other resolutions make clear, any organization,
anywhere in the world, that sees the killing of
innocents as a means to an end must be seen - without
appeasement or apology - as a terrorist organization
and as the enemy of humankind.

Building on the work of this Council, including
especially resolution 1566 (2004), there is much that
can and should be encouraged and developed beyond
the capacity-building initiatives of the CTC. It is
crucial that we take decisive action against terrorist
incitement and against the regimes that allow terrorism
and its support infrastructure to flourish, rather than
shutting it down. The battle against terrorism will be
won only if every State takes responsibility on the
ground, according to its cardinal legal obligations, for
the acts and encouragements to terrorism that emanate
from its territory and if it is held accountable for its
failures.

Our police departments, intelligence services and
anti-terrorist experts must share knowledge and
information. We must seek out modern technologies to
protect civil aviation and homeland security, to combat
the risks of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction into the hands of terror organizations, to
develop municipal responses, to share the experiences
of medical first responders, and to seek channels for
inter-religious cooperation. We have to examine
aspects of terrorism's relationship with a range of legal
and moral issues. Just last month, a three-day
conference hosted by Israel's International Policy
Institute for Counter-Terrorism in Herzliya allowed
experts and practitioners from 35 countries to discuss
all those issues.

Israel has with great interest offered its support to
the counter-terrorism efforts of the CTC and to States
and friends who seek to learn from our bitter
experience. Israel has experts in a range of disciplines
who could be at the Committee's disposal. Israel
encourages the Counter-Terrorism Committee to
intensify and expand its work so that it can effectively
fulfil its mandate on the ground and begin to name,
shame and isolate when necessary.

In closing, we must be reminded that the fight
against terror must take place within the framework of
domestic and international law, as stated, for example,
in resolution 1566 (2004). In that context, it is
important to appreciate that the fight against terrorism
is itself a fight for the most basic of legal norms and
the most basic of human rights: the right to life. The
United Nations and the law must have an impact on
implementation on the ground, providing safeguards
against abuse and protecting the rights of innocents on
all sides, but we should not provide a shield for the
terrorists where none is warranted. We should not
allow the law to be abused as a political weapon or to
wrongly empower those seeking to take life, rather
than those seeking to save it. Those individuals and
their supporters who abuse and threaten humanitarian
emblems, the sanctity of school rooms and even the
safety of their own people have shown as little regard
for the law as they have for life. They have no
compunction about misusing our words and
misrepresenting the law to serve their nefarious
purposes. We must not let them.

