Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We convey very
warm greetings to you, Sir, as you assume the
presidency of the Council for the month of February.
We are very pleased that you are leading the Council
this month.

This is a special opportunity for the Security
Council to welcome His Excellency President Joseph
Kabila soon after his assumption of the presidency of
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

It was encouraging to hear the commitment of the
President to pursue the Lusaka peace process. We noted
in particular his determination to make fresh efforts to
bring peace to the country and to hold free and fair
elections. His willingness to extend full cooperation to
the United Nations observer mission, and his assurance
to us of his support for the implementation of the
resolutions of the Security Council, are very
encouraging.

Today's meeting provides an opportunity to think
together about a new departure in our common
endeavour for peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The Secretary-General has given us a
perspective on the course of action ahead. We are in
full agreement with him. We also appreciate the
briefing on the situation that we received this morning
from his able Special Representative, Ambassador
Kamel Morjane.

It has been widely recognized that there can be no
military solution to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is important that all
concerned parties come to the same conclusion.
According to our understanding, the Lusaka Agreement
provides for a workable compromise for all parties. We
urge the leadership in the region, as well as the rebel
movements, to take a pragmatic approach to the peace
process. In this context, we look forward to our
meeting here next week with President Kagame of
Rwanda. The insistence on finding a military solution
or taking irreconcilable positions has not helped
resolve the conflict. It has only increased the suffering
of the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and their neighbours.

We understand that efforts are being made for a
regional meeting, possibly at the summit level,
involving all signatories of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement. For practical reasons, such a meeting
should preferably be held prior to our meeting here
with the Political Committee later this month. We shall
be expecting concrete steps from the Political
Committee and the Joint Military Commission
meetings this month.

In order for the Council to take a decision on full
deployment of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) at its authorized strength, we will certainly
want to see some real progress on the ground. There
have been arguments in favour of MONUC deployment
as the forces withdraw, in order to prevent any security
gap. For that to take place, the parties will have to
demonstrate their commitment by effectively
withdrawing as per the Kampala disengagement plan
and the Harare subplan. We shall be guided by the
advice of the Secretary-General with regard to the
further deployment of the United Nations observers,
assisted by the troops.

A fundamental element in the peace process is the
inter-Congolese dialogue for national reconciliation.
We shall call upon the Government of the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo to revive the facilitation process
at an early date.

Bangladesh particularly welcomes President
Kabila's pledge to prepare free and transparent
elections to enable the people to choose for themselves
a leader to preside over the destiny of the country. The
war of attrition in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has cost the lives of thousands of people; it
continues to destroy the lives of thousands more; it has
kept a whole nation hostage. The people of Congo have
suffered some of the worst atrocities, and this must
stop.

We call upon the leadership in the region to forget
the acrimonious past and commit themselves to a future
of mutual trust and confidence. It is time they took a
decisive step to end the conflict. A peaceful, united and
prosperous Democratic Republic of the Congo will be
in the best interests of all the people of the region. The
Security Council and the rest of the international
community will stand behind them in their efforts. A
courageous first step has to be made here. Today, with
President Kabila's commitment to bringing peace to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we have a window
of opportunity. We should seize that opportunity in
earnest.

