The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Judge
Yusuf for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of China.

I would like to begin by thanking Secretary-General
Guterres for participating in today's meeting and for
his briefing. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Al-Thani, Ambassador King and Judge Yusuf for their
briefings.

Today, the heads of the main organs established
under the Charter of the United Nations are gathered
here in the Security Council Chamber. Together with
Member States, we are jointly sending a clarion call
in support of multilateralism, a stronger role for the
United Nations and the maintenance of international
peace and security. As such, this meeting carries an
important historical meaning.

As the President of the Security Council for this
month, China proposed the convening of today's
open debate with a view to addressing the emerging
issues and challenges confronting international peace
and security in the current circumstances, as well as
exploring ways to strengthen multilateralism and the
role of the United Nations, uphold the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter, facilitate
the effective performance of the Council's function
as a collective security mechanism, and advance the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The United Nations embodies humankind's
aspirations for peace and development. More than 70
years ago, on the ruins of the Second World War, we built

the international system, with the United Nations at its
centre. The world today is going through a new round of
profound development, as well as tectonic changes and
adjustments. The protracted and emerging geopolitical
flashpoints, the looming shadow ofterrorism and armed
conflict, the proliferation of drivers of instability and
uncertainty, as well as increased risks and challenges
are all hallmarks of our times. As a result of the rise in
unilateralism and protectionism, the international order
and global governance system are under attack.

It is fitting to say that the world needs multilateralism
and a stronger United Nations more than ever. The need
to strengthen multilateralism and the role of the United
Nations is the consensus of the international community.
During the recent general debate of the seventy-third
session of the General Assembly, Member States took the
floor to call for supporting multilateralism, enhancing
the role of the United Nations and sustaining the rules-
based international order. During the general debate,
the President of the General Assembly, Ms. Espinosa
Garces, stressed that multilateralism is the only viable
response to the global problems facing humankind,
and the Secretary-General stated that working together
multilaterally is not optional, but rather the only answer
(see A/73/PV.6). That shows that multilateralism is a
prevailing trend and the common aspiration of all
people, representing the right direction of history.

The most fundamental principle of multilateralism
is that international affairs should be handled on the
basis of consultation among States and in accordance
with agreed rules - a process in which the interests
and concerns of all States should be accommodated.
States should engage with one another in a spirit
of consultation, respect rules and order, and solve
problems collectively.

China is a founding Member of the United Nations
and was the first country to sign the Charter. China
has been steadfast in maintaining the purposes and
principles of the Charter and in safeguarding the central
role of the United Nations in international affairs.
When addressing the General Assembly during the
general debate in September 2015, Chinese President
Xi Jinping systematically elaborated the important
concept of building a community of shared future for
humankind, guiding the way to a brighter future for all
humankind (see A/70/PV.13).

Multilateralism is an effective way of maintaining
peace and promoting development. How can we uphold
and champion multilateralism in the new era? China
wishes to offer the following proposals. We must abide
by the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter, honour our commitments, fulfil international
obligations, follow in good faith the rules collectively
defined by the international community, and comply
with international law and the basic norms governing
international relations. We must remain committed to
win-win cooperation.

We now live in a global village. Faced with
terrorism and other global challenges, no country can
cope with such phenomena on its own. We must deepen
multilateral cooperation in order to attain universal
and common security. Differences and disputes must
be resolved through peaceful and rational dialogue and
consultation. Dialogue and partnership should prevail
over confrontation and alliance. Solutions should
be found through diplomatic and political means.
We should advocate for a security concept featuring
common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security. We should insist that all countries, big and
small, are equal. We should respect the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
increase the representation and voice of development
countries, as well as medium-sized and small States,
in international affairs. We should translate our
commitments to multilateralism into concrete actions,
solve practical problems, seek tangible results and bring
real benefits to the peoples of all countries.

The United Nations is the standard-bearer
of multilateralism. China staunchly supports
multilateralism and the maintenance of the authority
and role of the United Nations. We hope that the United
Nations will continue to uphold fairness and justice
and play a leading role in maintaining world peace,
promoting common development and, in particular,
bolstering global cooperation in addressing global
challenges, thereby making the United Nations relevant
to all people.

The Security Council, as the core ofthe international
collective security mechanism, bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Let us demonstrate unity, wisdom
and courage, effectively fulfil the solemn duty
entrusted to this organ by the United Nations Charter,
and give full play to the role of the Security Council.
We must redouble our efforts in political mediation and
good offices, scale up our cooperation with regional
organizations, strengthen United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and give primacy to conflict prevention.

As a permanent member of the Security Council,
China maintains a consistent position of impartiality
with regard to international and regional hotspot issues,
and has put forward constructive proposals for the
political settlement of disputes. China is an important
troop-contributing country and the second-largest
financial contributor to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. At this very moment, more than 2,500
Chinese peacekeepers are vigilantly securing peace in
United Nations missions across the world.

Development is the basis for maintaining peace
and security. As the largest developing country, China
has been rigorously implementing the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and supporting and
stimulating the development of other countries while
pursuing its own growth. China's plan to jointly develop
the Belt and Road Initiative with other countries is an
offering of public goods to the world. The Initiative is
underpinned by the principle of broad consultation,
joint contribution and shared benefits. It originated in
China and belongs to the world. Its developments will
benefit an increasing number of countries and peoples.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that China
remains committed to defending the international order
and to pursuing multilateralism. We stand ready to join
hands with all States to build a community of a shared
future for humankind and a more peaceful world, with
a better live and greater happiness for all people.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to those other members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

