Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, Belgium thanks you for organizing
today's debate, which is on a subject that concerns the
entire international community and which hit Belgium
with full force on 22 March, as it did recently in France,
Lebanon, Pakistan, Cote d'Ivoire, Turkey and many
other countries as well. I would like to associate our
debate in spirit with all the victims of these atrocities.
I would also like to thank the many States and regional
and international organizations that offered their
moral or practical support in those difficult times.
These gestures are a sign of the commitment of the
international community as a whole to keep a united
front against international terrorism.

Belgium was not waiting for these tragic events
to occur on its territory before shouldering its
responsibility. The attacks showed us that we have
to continue pursuing our efforts with determination
and in close collaboration with our partners. For
several years now, many measures have been taken
to strengthen our capabilities, be they legal, judicial,
police, military or in terms of intelligence. Belgium,
which, like many others, has been affected by the

foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon, is giving priority
attention to implementing resolution 2178 (2014) and
has taken the steps needed to vigorously fight against
it. The Belgian penal code specifically criminalizes
trips for the purposes of training in conflict areas and
for participation in conflicts abroad.

In tackling terrorism and violent extremism,
the response must be integrated, comprehensive and
coordinated. The complexity of the phenomenon
requires us to treat it in a preventive, punitive and
remedial manner. Having become aware of the problem
of radicalization at an early stage, my country drafted
its first action plan against radicalism in 2005. In April
2013, the my country's Government adopted its first
national programme for preventing radicalization,
which was based on improved understanding of
radicalization processes, the promotion of preventive
social measures, strengthening the resilience of the
most vulnerable groups and raising awareness at the
local and regional levels.

Addressing terrorism and violent extremism on a
global scale requires multiple responses. I would like to
discuss three in the context of today's debate.

First, with respect to the defence of our societies'
shared values and resilience, if we do not address the
root causes we will be condemned to see resurgent
violent extremism elsewhere, wherever chaos allows
it to settle. Security and respect for democratic
principles, the rule of law and individual freedoms
are complementary and mutually reinforcing. This is
a message that we express with force, be it within the
United Nations, the European Union or the Council
of Europe.

The holistic approach that Belgium is committed to
is underscored in the Secretary-General's Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674), published in
January. We welcome this and support it. Besides calling
for each State and region to shoulder its responsibility,
the Plan of Action pertinently emphasizes the linkages
to be made with the Sustainable Development Goals
(General Assembly resolution 70/ 1) and the upholding
of human rights, rule oflaw, good governance, the fight
against impunity and the promotion of tolerance. In this
regard, we are convinced that young people, women,
education and access to decent employment will play
a key role in the success of this strategy. The all-of-
United Nations approach is, in this regard, key.
Secondly, with regard to prevention and political
resolution of international conflicts, we cannot defeat
the scourge of terrorism if we allow terrorists to take
control of territories from which they can develop their
capacities, spread their ideology and prepare their
attacks. It is essential for international community
to stay united to resolve conflicts peacefully and
politically, particularly those conflicts that create the
chaos that allows terrorist groups to come in.

Syria is the first hotbed of crisis to be extinguished.
In that context, we pay tribute to the tireless work
being carried out by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. De Mistura. But the work does
not stop there. Unfortunately, other regions of the world
are experiencing significant problems that do not cease
to provide terrorist groups with opportunities to expand
their networks. Belgium supports the United Nations,
which, by its mandate, legitimacy and capacity, has a
role to play that is more crucial than ever in the fight
against this new world disorder.

Finally, with regard to the security response, in
an integrated approach, such a response is crucial.
That is why we must continue to unstintingly fight
against the pseudo-States of the Islamic State and
Al-Qaida. Belgium is therefore actively participating
in the international coalition against Da'esh. It is
also the reason why Belgium is firmly committed to
strengthening its own means for responding to the threat
and continue working towards for closer cooperation
with its partners. Such international cooperation
becomes increasingly necessary as the threat of foreign
terrorist fighters returning to their countries of origin
evolves and continues to pose new challenges. I have
in mind, for instance, links to organized crime, the use
of simple chemicals for making bombs, the use of new,
unregulated virtual spaces such as the Darknet or the
trafficking of illegal weapons. It is therefore vital to
work together to adapt and react instantly.

In that regard, implementing the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects will help to counter the
acquisition of such weapons by criminal gangs or
terrorists. Many initiatives aimed at promoting better
data and information exchange have been undertaken,
particularly by the European Union and INTERPOL.
Many steps have thus already been taken in the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism, and it is now
our duty to focus on implementing them and to remain

vigilant in order to ensure that they can help us deal
with these constantly evolving threats.
