Mr. Dauth (Australia): I ordinarily dispense with
courtesies - I am an Australian, after all - but this
morning, I want particularly to thank you, Sir, for this
meeting and to commend you on your excellent
stewardship of the Council this month, and indeed for
an outstanding term over the past two years. In
addition, I want to thank Danilo Tiirk for his extremely
helpful and practical contribution and to thank his
colleagues for the excellent work they do on this issue.

We welcome the opportunity to address the
Security Council as it considers this issue. As the
Council is aware, we are a strong supporter of the
Bougainville peace process. Importantly, our support
has included leadership of the four-country regional
Peace Monitoring Group and, more recently, the small,
civilian Bougainville Transition Team. Both of those
bodies have worked closely with the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB), particularly
in implementing the agreed weapons disposal plan.

The peace process has now moved well beyond
the fragile ceasefire agreement of 1998. We
acknowledge recent developments in the peace process,
including the in-principle agreement by former
combatants to destroy their weapons during an
Australian-funded meeting on Nissan Island, agreement
on many of the practical challenges facing
Bougainville through the Kuri Resolution on
Implementation of Autonomy, and the recent
delegation of policing powers. We look forward to
more progress at this week's meeting of the Peace
Process Consultative Committee.

The peace process has now reached a point at
which the parties are talking about moving beyond
immediate post-conflict issues to the issues involved in
restoring democratic good governance. Peace is now
becoming self-sustaining. In consultation with our
regional partners, and with the support of parties to the
peace process, we will therefore withdraw the
Bougainville Transition Team at the end of the year.
We will remain involved, but our support will now
flow more directly through our bilateral cooperation
with Papua New Guinea.

Australia notes the final extension of UNPOB's
mandate granted by the Security Council last year, and
we agree that UNPOB should now be brought to an
end. The international community must, however,
remain involved. In particular, we note that the United
Nations was recently asked by the parties to remain
engaged in Bougainville and that it has a clear role
under the Bougainville Peace Agreement in verifying
and certifying the weapons disposal process.

We endorse Papua New Guinea's requests for a
smaller, more focused United Nations presence. Such a
presence could support the conclusion of the weapons
disposal process; facilitate the finalization of
Bougainville's constitution; and encourage planning for
early, free and fair elections. It should be transitional in
nature and could, in the first instance, be headed by
UNPOB's current director, Noel Sinclair.

In the period ahead, Bougainville will face
serious challenges - challenges that Australia remains
committed to helping the parties overcome. Over the
next four years, our development assistance will focus
on good governance and on helping the parties to
establish a viable and affordable autonomous
administration for Bougainville. Our aid will also
maintain support for essential services and economic
growth. We hope to open that programme to other
donors, and we will invite interested States to
contribute.

We are particularly aware of the challenge of
maintaining law and justice, including an effective and
credible police force. On 11 December this year,
Australia and Papua New Guinea entered a new era of
cooperation, through which Australian police and
officials will work side by side with Papua New
Guineans to help the Government of Papua New
Guinea to address its key challenges. As part of that
package of enhanced cooperation, Australia has offered
to send a police team of up to 20 personnel to
Bougainville. They are available to start work on
Bougainville within weeks. Those personnel will work
alongside members of the Royal Papua New Guinea
Constabulary to help to restore confidence in the police
force on Bougainville, to enhance its policing capacity
and to assist with the future training and development
of new recruits. We will also provide some basic
policing equipment, and we will work closely with
New Zealand to strengthen other key components of
the law and justice sector, including improved police
training, courts, correctional services and community
policing.

Australia urges all parties to remain seized of the
serious challenges facing Bougainville and to move
swiftly to conclude the peace process and to prepare
for free and fair elections. Australia remains committed
to providing the parties with continued support. We
hope that the international community, and in particular
the United Nations, will also stand ready to assist in
those endeavours.
