Mrs. Nakamitsu: I would like to congratulate the Belgian presidency on convening this meeting and building on last year's initiative by Germany. The Council's continued attention to nuclear weapons and to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), in particular, are testament to the role of both in international peace and security. It is entirely fitting that this organ consider the achievements and the future of the NPT. After all, the NPT is a pillar of international peace and security. Few multilateral treaties, let alone security treaties, can lay claim to the record of success that the NPT can. For 50 years now, it has provided collective security benefits to all its States parties. It remains an enduring example of the value of disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation measures as supporting pillars of international peace and security, no matter the climate of the day. The Treaty continues to successfully constrain the proliferation of nuclear weapons through a verifiable safeguards system that is almost universally subscribed to. We should not forget that at the time of the NPT's negotiation, it was estimated that by 1975 there could be some 20 nuclear-armed States. The success of the NPT should not be taken for granted. In addition to the legally binding disarmament commitments under article VI of the Treaty, the NPThas also functioned as a de facto negotiating forum for nuclear disarmament. It has produced important confidence-building and transparency measures, including an unequivocal effort to totally eliminate nuclear arsenals, leading to nuclear disarmament. The 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the NPT - marking both the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty's entry into force and the twenty-fifth anniversary of its indefinite extension - presents both a symbolic and a practical opportunity. It is the perfect occasion to celebrate the NPT's many achievements and the role that it has played in making the world a safer place. It is also an opportunity to ensure that the Treaty remains the lynchpin of the disarmament and non-proliferation regime and continues to enhance all States parties' security. Failure to secure a successful outcome in 2020 would not doom the Treaty or the non-proliferation regime. It would, however, serve to undermine the value that so many United Nations Member States place on it and, in turn, devalue the review cycle as a way to strengthen not only the implementation of the NPT, but the regime as a whole. It could further entrench divisions within the Treaty, with long-term ramifications. Consequently, I continue to encourage all parties to approach the Review Conference with a spirit of flexibility and a willingness to engage in real dialogue in order to create an atmosphere conducive to success. Success at the Review Conference faces many challenges, not least of which are the varying definitions of what success entails, as well as the geopolitical context in which we find ourselves. We cannot skate over the fact that the world is a very different place than it was in 2015, let alone in 2010 - the last time a Review Conference produced a forward-looking outcome document. Relationships among States - especially nuclear- weapon States - are fractured. So-called great-Power competition is the order of the day. Division, distrust and a dearth of dialogue are increasingly the norm. The spectre of unconstrained nuclear competition looms over us for the first time since the 1970s. We are witnessing what has been termed a qualitative nuclear arms race - one based not on numbers, but on faster, stealthier and more accurate weapons. Regional conflicts with a nuclear dimension are worsening and proliferation challenges are not receding. Having said that, I do not believe that the issues necessarily preclude success at the Review Conference. In fact, I hope that those issues can be discussed constructively and in ways that can move them forward, as part of the full implementation of the Treaty. In terms of a forward-looking outcome, obviously that will depend on dialogue at the Conference itself. However, I think that there are several issues that should form a part of any consensus document. Let me mention some of those today. First, a high-level reaffirmation of commitment to the Treaty and to all obligations undertaken as a party to it seems fitting at its half-century mark. Secondly, there must be a recommitment to the norm against the use of nuclear weapons. The recent increase in rhetoric extolling the utility of nuclear weapons is dangerous and destabilizing. We should return to the logic of President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev that a nuclear war cannot be won and must not be fought. Thirdly, the development of a package of risk- reduction measures that can help the world avoid the prospect of nuclear-weapon use and move it towards nuclear disarmament would be a significant confidence-building measure. Fourthly, States should recognize that challenges to non-proliferation are not static and that, therefore, the regime cannot be either. At a minimum, I would hope that States parties are able to endorse the additional protocol as the safeguards standard. Fifthly, as I noted earlier, we cannot hide from the fact that the world has changed. As the Secretary- General has said on several occasions, such an environment requires a new vision for disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control. I hope that the Review Conference can serve as a springboard for thinking on how to address the nuclear weapons challenges of our time. The current Security Council includes many States that will be key players at the Review Conference. I believe, therefore, that a reaffirmation of Council members' support for the Treaty and an expression of commitment to securing success in May would provide a significant boost to the Review Conference's prospects. Given the stakes, I hope that they will work towards achieving that goal.
