Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you, Sir, for having organized this
important debate. I also thank Mr. John Holmes for his
objective briefing today.

In 2005, the World Summit endorsed the principle
of the responsibility of protect civilians against the
carnage of war, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. The Summit affirmed that the
principal responsibility to protect their citizens lies
with the States concerned, and that the international
community is responsible for assisting them in that
task, as is the Security Council through its resolutions,
in particular resolution 1674 (2006). That affirmation
has allowed us to identify measures to protect civilians
in armed conflict. Such measures must, however, be
strictly implemented.

Despite the progress that has been made in the
codification of international humanitarian law and in
the adoption of general principles on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the international community
can hardly be pleased with the inadequacy of that
progress at the practical level. The lack of progress is a
source of great concern and, in some case, of
disappointment. A large gap has opened between our
words and our deeds. The number of casualties in
armed conflict, including under foreign occupation, has
not declined, and no one can doubt the suffering of the
victims of armed conflict, famine, torture and similar
types of prohibited behaviour, sexist and sexual
violence, violence against children, the recruitment of
children, human trafficking, the problem of refugees,
internal displacement and lack of access to humanitarian
assistance.

A living example of this is the Gaza Strip, where
1.5 million Palestinians are deprived of all the basic
needs of life and of humanitarian assistance, including
United Nations assistance. Gaza has become a large
prison that one cannot get out of or into. The Israeli
occupying authorities are not satisfied with that but
have conducted military actions against Gaza for 22
consecutive days. The authorities used all means of
destruction, including internationally prohibited
weapons - white phosphorous most specifically. The
Israeli authorities struck at everyone; they did not
discriminate among civilians and military. The Israeli
occupation deliberately targeted civilian installations -
schools, hospitals, United Nations infrastructure,
property. We all know that record, and United Nations
officials have been clear in this regard.

More than 1,300 martyrs have been noted, more
than a third of them children, and more than 5,300
people have been wounded. This is in addition to the
almost total destruction of infrastructure in Gaza and of
more than 24,000 buildings or living units.

In today's world, States and groups are murdering
civilians in ways that appear deliberate or are adopting
strategies that are probably going to be targeting
civilians. We would recall that wars have been launched
on behalf of counter-terrorism or in so-called self-
defence, to the detriment of the rules and principles of
international humanitarian law. The majority of
casualties have been civilians. This applies to the
Israeli aggression in Lebanon in 2006 and to the war in
Iraq, as well as the invasion of Afghanistan.

We should not forget the victims of internal
conflicts. For example, the majority of the population
of Somalia have been victimized, become refugees or
homeless, are hungry and without the basic necessities
of life. In the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, civilians are still suffering from daily
violence and violation of their rights and from armed
conflicts. The list is long. Everyone knows that list, so
I do not need to repeat it.

The international community, represented mainly
by this Council, not only has the right to take measures
but has the responsibility to act if the parties directly
concerned have not managed to protect civilians or
have shown a lack of will to do so, or if it is proven
that the parties in question are the aggressors. We do
not understand how the Security Council would remain
mute, would not go after the perpetrators of war
crimes - the Israelis, especially for the crimes
committed in Gaza, crimes that have been proven and
reaffirmed in the summary of the investigation group
established by the Secretary-General to look into the
damage and losses to United Nations facilities in Gaza.
It was published, but no measure was taken in this
area, for a very simple reason: States that have the
right of veto in the Council want the aggressor to be
above the law and not to be subject to accountability.

We are awaiting the results of the investigation
by the group that was established by the Human Rights
Council to investigate the crimes committed in Gaza.
We hope the international community will take
measures on the basis of those results.

Thousands of Palestinians have been killed or
wounded in Gaza without any mercy. Everyone has
seen it. The international community has seen it.
Internationally prohibited weapons were used against
civilians. Justice demands that the perpetrators of those
crimes be pursued by the International Criminal Court.
The Security Council must understand that this is
extremely important for its credibility.

This debate should be important and effective.
Civilian protection is a problem that needs to be
managed according to a comprehensive approach, and
we must see the causes and effects. In this area we
must reaffirm these matters.

First, we need to pay special attention to
preventing armed conflicts and the expansion of armed
conflict. This requires internationally coordinated
efforts to deal with the hunger, poverty and injustice
that victimize many populations throughout the world.
We need to reactivate preventive diplomacy and come
up with early warning mechanisms to prevent conflicts
and the expansion of conflicts.

Secondly, we need to promote the protection of
civilians as a priority of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. It falls under resolution 1674 (2006). These
missions must have the means and resources that will
enable them to carry out their missions.

Thirdly, the Security Council must be able to take
measures in a balanced and transparent way, and not
according to double standards. Everyone must comply
with their accountability and punishment obligations.
We must prevent violations of international
humanitarian law.

Fourthly, we must prohibit the production of
certain weapons whose victims are mostly civilians,
especially cluster munitions. The use of cluster
munitions has created many casualties, especially after
military conflicts have ended.

Fifthly, we reaffirm the importance of implementing
the proposals contained in paragraphs 37, 59 and 60 of
the report of the Secretary-General. I reaffirm the
importance of those paragraphs.

This Council has been clear, in its resolution
1674 (2006) regarding humanitarian access without
any impediments for people who need such assistance.
The Council needs strict measures for access to civilian
populations and for staff access to those people. That,
in turn, requires the opening of crossing points on the
part of Israel to allow the free flow of individuals,
goods and funds from and into Gaza. The opening of
those passage points is necessary to take into
consideration the needs of the blockaded population
and is extremely important for rebuilding and for
erasing the traces of the Israeli aggression.

We hope that these discussions will be successful
and that we will take the necessary measures, because
this question is extremely important for humans and
human dignity.

