Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Ambassadors Wittig, Hardeep
Singh Puri and Sangqu for their briefings. I also wish
to express my appreciation for their leadership as the
Chairs of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities,
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
and resolution 1540 (2004), respectively.

The Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee is an
important counter-terrorism body of the Security
Council. Recently, the Committee has made substantial
and sustained efforts to review the procedures for
listing, de-listing and updating the sanctions list and
has made extensive efforts to comprehensively
implement resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011).
China supports the Committee's efforts to regularly
review the sanctions list, as planned, and to strengthen
its contact with the relevant States. China welcomes
the support provided to the Committee by the
Monitoring Team. We note the effective work
undertaken by the Office of the Ombudsperson to
safeguard the fairness and transparency of the
sanctions regime. We hope that Member States will
actively cooperate with the Committee's work in order
to preserve the authority and effectiveness of the
sanctions regime.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) has
also undertaken significant work in terms of
implementing resolution 1373 (2001) and other
relevant resolutions. China would like to express its
appreciation for such efforts. China supports the work
of the CTC in organizing regional workshops and in
providing technical assistance through the CTC
Executive Directorate. We hope that the Committee
will continue to engage in dialogue with Member
States and to help them to strengthen their counter-
terrorism capacity.

China is pleased to see that the 1540 Committee
has successfully completed its first annual review
(S/2012/79, annex), and has made encouraging
progress in terms of promoting the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) by providing assistance and by
undertaking outreach activities. China supports the
Committee in continuing with its sound and steady
work to further achieve the various goals of resolution
1540 (2004) in a comprehensive, balanced and
effective manner, and in assisting countries in fulfilling
their obligations under the provisions of the resolution.

The Committee's current priority is to officially
establish a group of experts. China supports the Chair
in undertaking consultations with all relevant parties
and in promptly reaching consensus on outstanding
issues. China is ready to work with all parties to
promote the international non-proliferation process.

Terrorism is the common enemy of the
international community. As a victim of terrorism,
China is opposed to terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and to the practice of double standards
with regard to counter-terrorism. China supports the
United Nations and the Security Council playing a key
role in international counter-terrorism cooperation, as
well as enhanced cooperation and coordination among
the relevant bodies.

We support the presidential statement on counter-
terrorism recently adopted by the Council
(S/PRST/2012/ 17), and hope that the international
community will continue to strengthen its cooperation
in preventing and combating terrorism.

