Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I would like to
begin by thanking the Secretary-General, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Chad and the members of the
Security Council for their condolences and sympathies
regarding the horrendous terrorist attack on a school in
Peshawar this morning. It was aheinous, unconscionable
act of savagery that has been universally condemned.
The Government and people of Pakistan are committed
to fighting terrorism and promoting and protecting the
right to education. Families in Pakistan are devastated,
and the entire nation is in a state of shock. The words of
sympathy, condolence and solidarity of those here today
have touched the hearts of the people of Pakistan. We
are a resolute nation. We will overcome this menace.

The partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU) is an important constituent
of the United Nations-led peacekeeping operations. It
conforms to Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, which creates space for cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations in
maintaining and bolstering peace and security. Today's
debate, convened by you, Mr. President, comes at an
opportune time, since what we discuss here today will
feed into the ongoing strategic review of peacekeeping
operations commissioned by the Secretary-General.
We welcome the strong institutional linkages
established in recent years between the United Nations
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union, aimed at determining causes and
drivers ofviolence, resolving conflicts, supportingjoint
planning exercises and developing United Nations-AU
operational models.

Financing for AU peacekeeping operations should
be predictable and sustainable. In that regard, we agree
with the President that the recommendations of the
Prodi United Nations-African Union Panel of Experts
should be seriously considered for implementation,
and that a fresh drive should be launched to generate
indigenous resources. The United Nations-African
Union partnership becomes most critical in managing
drawdowns and transitions. Successful transitions
usher in peacebuilding and pave the way for national,
subregional and regional ownership. The African Union
brings with it complementary resources, expertise and
insight. The Secretary-General's initiatives, such as the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, and
the integrated strategy for the Sahel, have built on such
complementarities.

It is important to have clearer mandates and take
preventive measures to stem fragile States' relapses into
conflict. Moreover, the African Union's involvement
at early stages of the Security Council's deliberations
on conflict resolution and management would help
to ensure that the right course of action is adopted.
The Council is increasingly mandating peacekeeping
missions in volatile security environments. In View
of the fast-developing crises and conflicts in the past
year, rapid response and deployment have become
imperative. Pakistan has recently decided to deploy a
rapid-deployment battalion within the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is also important to improve
and harmonize the working methods of the two Councils
through better communication.

It is true that the more the African Union is
politically involved with African countries, the more
they will contribute to security initiatives, as the
President's concept paper (S/20l4/879, annex) argues.

In this debate, we should also bear in mind the
following general points.

First, when authorized by the Security Council,
African peacekeeping operations should be supported,
from planning and funding to equipment, logistics and
training. Regional organizations and countries bear part
ofthe responsibility for securing resources. In addition,
resourceful countries and regional organizations should
contribute more to the African Union's capacity-
building projects and programmes.

Secondly, lessons learned from recent transitions
must be collated and utilized for future missions.
Interoperability is a major priority. We encourage the
Secretariat to continue to develop exercise and training
policies with regional organizations aimed at improving
interoperability.

Thirdly, Africa is the locus ofthe bulk of the United
Nations regional and hybrid missions. Communication,
consultation and coordination between the Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council
should be enhanced to further build mutual trust and
confidence.

Fourthly, increasing regional capacities should not
lead to parochialism or regionalization ofpeacekeeping.
While drawing upon regional expertise, focus should
remain on peacekeeper training, professionalism and
performance. Emphasis on regional deployments
raises the risk of peacekeepers becoming prone to
taking sides and the United Nations subcontracting
its responsibilities. Regions and subregions should not
be removed from the international mainstream simply
because they are not of strategic interest.

Fifthly, regionalization should not lead to disparity
in professional levels and standards. The United
Nations should strive to develop and maintain uniform
standards in training, equipment and technology.

Sixthly, to cement their partnership, both the United
Nations and the African Union should invest heavily in
peacebuilding.

Pakistan is deeply committed to collective efforts to
strengthen peacekeeping through regional partnerships.
Since 1960, Pakistan has consistently demonstrated a
strong commitment to peace and security in Africa.
The bulk of our troops are deployed in the continent.
Our experience in Africa has further enhanced our
appreciation of the value of regional partnership and
cooperation. We will remain a steadfast partner of the
African Union.

