Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.

China has listened closely to the statements made
by the representatives of Palestine and Israel. This year
marks the seventieth anniversary of the adoption of
General Assembly resolution 181 (II), on the partition
plan for Palestine and Israel. Seventy years on, the
Palestinian people are still seeing their legitimate
rights and interests denied and continue to be subjected
to unfair treatment, a situation that must be rectified
without delay.

The Palestinian question remains at the heart of the
Middle East issue and is of fundamental importance to
the region. The latest developments on the ground are
testimony to the fact that the Palestinian question, if
left unresolved, will undermine security and stability
in the region and beyond. In this connection, the
international community should shoulder collectively
the responsibility of defending the legitimate rights and
interests of Palestine with a renewed sense of urgency.
There is a pressing need for both Palestine and Israel to
observe restraint and to take concrete action to revive
the peace talks.

First and foremost, both parties should implement
in earnest resolution 2334 (2016) by stemming
the violence against civilians. Israel should cease
settlement expansion, lift restrictions on humanitarian
access to Gaza and demonstrate goodwill so as to
enable renewed peace talks. Meanwhile, the legitimate
security concerns of regional countries must also be
respected and addressed.

Secondly, both Palestine and Israel should resume
talks at the earliest opportunity and make strategic
choices that serve the interests of their peoples.
Resolving the question through peace talks is the best
way to serve the interests of all parties. The use of force
offers no solution. The earlier the talks resume, the
sooner the peoples of both sides and of the wider region
will benefit. Both parties should respect each other's
right to statehood and survival. Talks must begin, and
breakthroughs can be made along the way. Efforts should
be made to achieve an early harvest of positive results
and gradually to rebuild and strengthen confidence. It
is crucial to sustain dialogue in preparation for a final
and comprehensive solution. China supports efforts to
resolve the question on the basis of, inter alia, the two-
State solution, the Arab Peace Initiative, the principle
of land for peace and relevant Security Council
resolutions with a view to establishing a fully sovereign
Palestinian State within the pre-1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

Thirdly, we must build international consensus and
engage all forces actively working to de-escalate the
situation. China welcomes the fact that the League of
Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and countries with influence are playing a more
affirmative role and stepping up their efforts with
respect to Palestine and Israel in order to consolidate
the will for peace talks and to foster synergy. The lead
role of the United Nations must be fully leveraged.
Any outcome of such efforts should be endorsed by the

Security Council.
Apart from the intractable question of Palestine,
other hot-spot issues in the Middle East have also dragged
on for years and defied solution, and are compounded
by the rampant presence of terrorist forces, resulting in
a dire peace and security situation in the region. The
Middle East is now at a crossroads. It faces the risk of
rising instability and at the same time raises hopes for
peace. The countries of the region and the international
community should work more rigorously to de-escalate
tensions and seek a fundamental way forward.

First, we need to remain committed to dialogue and
consultation and pursue a political settlement to hot-spot
issues. The countries involved are unsurpassed in their
knowledge of local realities and the underlying causes
of conflict and tensions. The international community
must fully respect their sovereignty, territorial integrity
and independence, recognize and promote the political
processes that they have led and own in a way that
meets their aspirations to achieving a viable solution
that accommodates the interests of all parties.

Secondly, all countries of the region and beyond
must play a constructive role. The United Nations
remains a main mediator of the Middle East peace
process. Countries with influence inside and outside
the region can give significant momentum towards
peace. International cooperation must be coordinated
in helping the countries concerned to build their
capacities, working more with the conflicting parties
and to settle differences peacefully through talks and
negotiations. All parties should at all times remain
true to the principles and purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations and other basic norms governing
international relations. Attempts to resolve conflicts by
non-peaceful means are inadvisable.

Thirdly, we must strengthen our counter-terrorism
campaigns. Terrorism is the common enemy of
humankind and a venom spreading across the Middle
East, to the detriment of efforts to restore peace and
stability in the region. The international community
should forge a united front against terrorism, make use
of all means at its disposal and enhance cooperation
in curbing the spread of terrorist materials via the
Internet through exchanges of intelligence and law
enforcement. We must cut off the channels of terrorist
financing and arms supplies, block the spillover and
back-flow of terrorist fighters, curtail the spread of
terrorist ideologies, and root out the underlying drivers
of terrorism.

China is well prepared to continue playing
a constructive role, alongside the international
community, in seeking a way out of the current
conundrum in the Middle East so as to achieve peace
and stability in the region and benefit its peoples.

