Mr. Adom (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Allow me at the outset to congratulate China, your great country, Mr. President, on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of March and to thank it for organizing this debate on terrorism and violent extremism in Africa, two of the main challenges to peace and security on the continent. I would also like to commend Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Mr. Abdoulaye Mar Dieye, Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed and all those who have spoken before me for the quality of their statements and the relevance of their recommendations. In recent years, the African continent has been confronted with an intensification of the threat of terrorism and violent extremism, which are sowing desolation among civilian populations and undermining the stability and development of States. In that regard, 2019 was one of the most tragic years for West Africa and the Sahel owing to the increase in terrorist attacks, which have resulted in many human casualties and massive internal displacement of persons. Despite the efforts made by African Governments to combat those phenomena, with the support of the international community, terrorist organizations and their fundamentalist ideology continue to thrive in the unfortunately fertile soil of some States' fragility and of recurrent communal conflicts. Similarly, youth unemployment, weak security systems, lack of basic social infrastructure and corruption create an environment conducive to the entrenchment of terrorism and extremism with proven resilience in West Africa and the Sahel, in particular.In the face of those security hazards, it is important to move from ad hoc solutions to responses based on a multidimensional, better coordinated approach and on strategies that address the root causes of terrorism and violent extremism. Cete d'Ivoire therefore calls for greater mobilization and stronger commitment on the part of the international community to support States in investing in the building of more resilient societies. For their part, those States, which bear the primary responsibility, must respond to the many concerns of their populations by developing policies that take security imperatives and humanitarian and development needs into account. Prevention is also a priority task in strategies to combat terrorism and violent extremism and should be based on the decisive role that civil society and the media can play. With particular regard to the media, social networks can be used to raise awareness of all forms of violence, to combat radical ideology and rhetoric of terrorist groups and to help spread messages of peace, tolerance and social cohesion. Leveraging education can likewise help to prevent those scourges. Indeed, the idleness of young people and a lack of education make them vulnerable to fundamentalist discourse. Furthermore, the transnational nature of terrorism and violent extremism requires enhanced cooperation among States and at the regional and subregional levels in the fields of security, defence and economic and social development. In recognition of that need, five West African countries - Benin, Burkina Faso, Ghana, Togo and Cete d'Ivoire - launched the Accra initiative in September 2017 to respond to the spread of terrorism and violent extremism. The initiative has led to the creation of a platform for the exchange of information and intelligence among the police, gendarmerie and security services of those countries. In the same vein, the Heads of State and Government of the Economic Community of West African States and the West African Economic and Monetary Union made financial commitments of $1 billion on 14 September 2019 in Ouagadougou and of $100 million on 1 December 2019 in Dakar, respectively, to strengthen the capacity to combat terrorism. Furthermore, the imperative of effective regional cooperation has led to the establishment of such organizations as the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the Lake Chad Basin Commission. In that regard, Cete d'Ivoire reiterates its plea for increased support for the operationalization of the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel and the Multinational Joint Task Force, as well as for development initiatives in areas affected by terrorism and violent extremism. In addition to its strong involvement in the subregional initiatives mentioned earlier, Cete d'Ivoire is resolutely committed to fighting terrorism through a strategy focused on prevention, the strengthening of logistical and human resources and the promotion of social cohesion. Thus, with the support of France, an international anti-terrorism academy focused on the region is being established near Abidjan. Intended for the actors in the fight against terrorism, the academy will seek to promote a comprehensive handling of the phenomenon, from intelligence gathering to specialized force operations and judicial procedures. In addition, the Government is introducing various measures to address the social needs of vulnerable populations, particularly in the areas of education and health. In view of the serious threat posed by terrorism and extremism to peace and security in Africa and the rest of the world, it is important to pool all our logistical, material, financial and intelligence resources. My delegation welcomes the commitment of the United Nations, in particular the Security Council, in that regard and calls for the effective implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the relevant Council resolutions. It also calls on the international community to support the Silencing the Guns initiative with a view to ending conflict on the African continent. In conclusion, Cete d'Ivoire reiterates its call for a global, coordinated and sustainable strategy for the prevention of terrorism and violent extremism. It also reiterates its plea for the strengthening of States' operational and intelligence capacities and, lastly, urges the Security Council to find a rapid and lasting solution to the Libyan crisis, which would, if not eradicate, then at least improve the state of marked insecurity in Africa.
