Mr. Ramos Horta: I have appeared before the
Security Council on numerous occasions in the past,
but on another subject matter, namely, the situation in
my country. This is the first time that I participate in a
discussion pertaining to an issue other than my own
country. I do so with a sense of friendship and
solidarity with the people of Guinea-Bissau, with
whom we share centuries of common history.
It was with a sense of humility and weighty
burden that I accepted the responsibility bestowed upon
me by my colleagues, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries,
meeting in Coimbra in July 2003 to act as Special
Envoy in assisting with the preparations for elections
scheduled for 12 October and to promote national
dialogue in Guinea-Bissau in order to ensure that the
elections are held in a climate of tranquillity and faith
in the system.

I spent a total of one week in Guinea-Bissau,
where I met with the now former President Kumba
Yala, many Government ministers, all parliamentary
leaders, all the top leaders of the armed forces, the
police, the diplomatic corps - in particular the
representatives of Portuguese-speaking countries and
of Guinea-Bissau's neighbours - church leaders, the
private sector, union leaders, students and academics. I
had two private discussions with President Kumba
Yala. The day I left Guinea-Bissau, 16 August, I left
without the certainty that I had wanted to obtain,
namely, that there would be no military intervention. In
my discussions with all political parties, members of
the church - including protestant and Muslim
leaders- and the private sector, I encountered a
general, profound disappointment with the governance
of Guinea-Bissau. In addition, everyone had the
expectation that there should be changes.

Even though President Kumba Yala assured me in
my private discussions with him that he would honour
whatever result the elections produced, were the
elections to be held on 12 October they would not
necessarily produce a better relationship between the
presidency and a new Parliament. Instability would
therefore continue. I left Guinea-Bissau with the
conviction that military intervention would take place
in a matter of days, that is to say, that such an
eventuality was not a question of "it" but, rather, a
matter of "when".

It seems that the military intervention that
brought down President Kumba Yala was welcomed by
all of Guinea-Bissau's society. The Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the Community of Portuguese-
Speaking Countries - like the Security Council, the
Secretary-General and the international community -
regretted the event that brought about the changes in
Guinea-Bissau. However, as the Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs has quite eloquently
reported, conditions in Guinea-Bissau were conducive
to the situation that did in fact take place. We can only
be pleased about the fact that there was no violence,
that not a single shot was fired and that there are now
formal pledges by those in charge that there will be a
return to normalcy and constitutional arrangements and
the holding of elections for a new legislature and
President.

What I was able to observe in Guinea-Bissau,
which was most heart-breaking and very touching, was
an extraordinary sense of dignity and pride among the
people of Guinea-Bissau. For over a year, thousands of
civil servants had been working without receiving their
salaries. Soldiers and officers also did not receive their
pay for many months. It was raining inside the barracks
of the military officers I visited. Ironically, in the West
African region, which has been very much shaken by
violence, Guinea-Bissau was an oasis of tranquillity
and of the absence of hatred, including even towards
those who had mismanaged their country. The people
of Guinea-Bissau have displayed enormous strength,
tolerance and a spirit of solidarity.

I wish to congratulate the United Nations for the
outstanding job it has done in Guinea-Bissau as a
mediator, conciliator and focal point to which many
political leaders of differing persuasions could turn to
either voice their complaints against one another or
against the Government, and vice versa. That was a
very useful role by the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau, whose mandate I
hope will be extended. If for no other purpose, the
mere presence of the United Nations in Guinea-Bissau
as facilitator and conciliator will help create the
conditions for elections that we hope will take place.

As has happened in conflict situations, such as
those in my country and many other countries, the
electoral process is only one step. The country is in
dire need of economic assistance. The Bretton Woods
institutions must show more pragmatism and
compassion, and maybe even observe a moratorium on
payments to the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and other institutions by the treasury of
Guinea-Bissau in order to give the country breathing
space while the economy recovers. The country has
tremendous potential. God has blessed it with
enormous rainfall and enough land. If properly
managed and given an opportunity to develop, it could
be a breadbasket for the entire region.

I congratulate the Security Council for remaining
seized of the matter and keeping the situation under
review, as well as for giving the military and others
who are today in charge in Guinea-Bissau the benefit
of the doubt. I must say that I have the fullest
confidence that the people - the military leaders -
whom I met in Guinea-Bissau do not wish to remain in
power. They are not people who staged a coup in order
to gain the spoils of victory. They were genuinely
motivated by social and economic conditions that had
profoundly affected all of them. They deserve our trust,
they deserve credit and they deserve an opportunity.

The Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries (CPLP) will remain closely supportive of the
process in Guinea-Bissau, working with the United
Nations and Guinea-Bissau's neighbours. I understand
that the CPLP Foreign Minister will soon appoint a
senior envoy from Angola who will more closely
follow the events in Guinea-Bissau on a full-time basis,
to provide whatever assistance is necessary. I also
remain available at the service of my colleagues in the
Portuguese-speaking community within the United
Nations to help in whatever limited way I can - as a
gesture of gratitude to Guinea-Bissau for its many
years of helping us and in gratitude to the United
Nations for its many years of helping East Timor. If in
some way Timor-Leste can help to contribute to
normalization and democratization in Guinea-Bissau, it
will be our little bit of reciprocity to the international
community.

