Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this open debate on the Council's working
methods. It has been a year since the Council, under
Portugueuse presidency, held the most recent debate on
this issue (see S/PV.6672). That debate demonstrated
yet again the great interest that this issue raises among
the wider membership. Council working methods
are indeed a matter of interest to all United Nations
Members.

Open debates are held so that we can listen to the
wider membership. Indeed, the debate last year was very
useful, with many relevant inputs by Council members
and non-members alike, focused on ways to enhance
transparency, efficiency and the interaction of the
Security Council with the general membership. They
were instrumental in feeding the Council's work on this
area during the months that followed. As a follow-up,
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Matters, which I have chaired since
January, met to discuss the set of measures proposed
during the debate in order to identify areas of future
work. In that same vein, members of the Informal
Working Group exchanged views with members of the
group of five small nations on the proposals put forward
by that group, which reflect many of the ideas floated
during the debate.

To improve the working methods, we have to start
by improving the way the internal work of the Council
is done.A significant part of the Council's work is done
in consultations. While the Council has made an effort
to meet more often in public - a trend that should be
encouraged,inparticularbypresidencies-consultations
are indeed useful in helping the Council prepare its
decisions. However, questions of transparency and
inclusiveness remain important within the Council, to
Council members, as was noted in several interventions
at the debate last year. There is indeed work to do in the
internal aspects of the Council's work.

Following consultations organized by the Council
in March, during the United Kingdom presidency, a
discussion was held on further measures to improve
interactivity, better planning of work and better use
of conference resources. Those same aspects were
further developed in the Informal Working Group and
later on condensed in a note issued by the President
in (8/2012/402). The underlying idea is to stress the
informal aspects of consultations - such as abolishing
pre-organized lists of speakers and avoiding reading
out lengthy statements by briefers and Council
members - better organization of resources to allow
more space for subsidiary bodies to meet, more use of
video teleconferences to avoid the costly presence of
briefers, and better planning of work by readjusting
mandates and reporting cycles with a View to evening
up the workload throughout the year, thereby leaving
more time for the Council to prepare decisions and
discussion of conflict prevention.

Another aspect that was mentioned in several
interventions at the last debate was the practice related
to the work of pen-holders and the process to appoint
the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies. The Informal
Working Group is now concluding the consideration
of this question in a draft note that deals with issues
of enhanced participation, inclusiveness and exchange
of information among Council members. These are
crucial elements to enhance the Council's efficiency
and ultimately help promote the necessary consensus-
building within the Council. I hope, with the support
and flexibility of all members of the Working Group,
to conclude the work on this within the coming weeks.

On the external aspects of the Security Council's
work, the Working Group is considering further
measures to improve transparency and interaction
with the wider membership. A draft note is now being
discussed on ways to improve open debates by enhancing
the interactivity of council members with non-council
members in debates; by ensuring a better follow-up of
open debates, including by reflecting relevant inputs of
non-members in the outcome of an open debate, when
there is one; and by improving their efficacy through
the use of concept papers, shorter interventions and
summaries of the debate, whenever possible. We are
also considering measures to improve the annual report
by reinforcing aspects related to the interaction with
non-Council members prior to the preparation of the
report and by providing more substantive information
in the report and in its presentation to the General
Assembly on the work of the Council.

Monthly assessments by Council presidencies are
very important documents. When circulated early after
the end of the respective month, they can be particularly
useful instruments to elucidate on the work done. Also
very useful in this regard are informal briefings to the
general membership by Council Presidents once they
finish their presidencies, which could be done as a
matter of practice, adding to the briefing that is already
done at the start of each presidency.

These are all aspects that have been discussed in
the Informal Working Group and are being considered
through a draft note we expect to adopt in the coming
weeks. They include several ideas and proposals that
were highlighted last year at the open debate. This is
why we think that regular open debates on working
methods, such as this, are important. They provide
the necessary stimulus to the Council by signaling the
areas of concern and avenues to improve its working
methods that are very helpful to the Council in taking
this work forward.

The note by the President of 26 July 2010
(S/20lO/507) remains a landmark. It represents an
acquis of Council practice that can always be improved,
guided by the goals of transparency, inclusiveness and
enhanced interaction with the wider membership, the
General Assembly and other relevant bodies. As in the

past, presidential note 507 shall be updated regularly in
the future with subsequent agreed measures aimed at
developing and improving the Council's practice.

This debate is yet another opportunity to look to
our future work to improve the working methods. In the
concept paper prepared jointly by India and Portugal
(8/2012/853), some other ideas are included in the bullet
points that could assist us in focusing this debate. In
addition to the measures that I have alluded to, many
others can be addressed, such as ways to enhance
interaction with regional and subregional organizations,
to better interact with troop-contributing countries in
order to ensure a more substantive exchange of views
and more fruitful and focus discussions at meetings with
troop-contributing countries, to improve the Council's
interaction with the chairpersons of the Peacebuilding
Commission and its country-specific configurations,
or ways to further improve the work of the subsidiary
bodies in terms of transparency and interaction with
States, regional and subregional organizations, and
relevant United Nations bodies in order to increase
their efficacy.

It is also important to underline the existing
trend in the Council of a more flexible use of meeting
formats, such as the Arria Formula meetings and the
informal interactive dialogues, which are clearly an
evolving trend revealed by the significant number of
such meetings last year. They are proving to be very
useful as practical ways for the Council to interact
informally with individuals and other relevant actors,
with clear benefits to Council members in the course of
preparation of Council's decisions.

Prevention is a key aspect of the Council in
performing its role under the United Nations Charter.
Horizon-scanning meetings, also referred to at the
last debate, can be very useful in helping the Council
to enhance awareness of situations with potential to
develop into conflicts. Last year, several presidencies
continued to organize such meetings. They can indeed
be important opportunities for Council members
to exchange views with the Secretariat on new
developments in different situations and regions of
the world with deterrence potential and to help settle
conflicts at an early stage. In our View, this type of
informal meeting to promptly gather information and
allow space for the Council to act preventively should
be promoted. We therefore encourage further reflection
on this issue to allow the horizon-scanning concept
to be perfected and thereby help dissipate existing
reservations towards a tool that can be truly relevant
insofar as prevention is concerned.

We look forward to this debate. I am sure it will
be productive and enjoy contributions by all, Council
and non-Council members alike. I am also sure that
the Council will listen and follow it up in the months
to come, in particular in the Informal Working Group.
I must say that it has been particularly gratifying for
me to Chair the Working Group. I have counted on
the support of all members and the diligence of the
Secretariat, and I am sure that we will take the work
under way to a successful conclusion.

Next year, the work of the Informal Working
Group will continue, building on the work in course,
the discussions held in the Working Group and the
ideas and proposals coming out of this debate. And we
will, I hope, assess the improvements achieved next
year when the Council holds the next open debate on
working methods and the implementation of note 507.
It is indeed crucial, bearing in mind the importance
attached to this issue by the wider membership, that
the Council keep organizing these debates on an annual
basis.

We must recognize that some improvements have
been made in recent years, but there is always room
for improvement. Working methods are always a work
in progress and never completed, and the generalized
interest in this issue, manifested by the high level of
participation here today, is proof also of the relevance of
the Council as a principal organ of the United Nations.

In conclusion, have one last word to say in
connection with the transparency aspects, the
outstanding work of the Secretariat in making available
more information on the web, including on mandates
and reporting cycles, and the analytical and statistical
overview of the Council over the past year, which
are indeed very important contributions to promote
understanding of the Council's work and the new trends
and developments in the area of international peace and
security. As Chair of the Informal Working Group, I
commend the efforts of the Secretariat in preparing this
new set of informative tools, and I welcome the new
capacities offered by the Council's web page, which I
invite all interested delegations to access and navigate.

