Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for holding this
important meeting. Our thanks also go to the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, Ms. Zerrougui, as well as to Ms. Yoka
Brandt, Ms. Julie Bodin and Mr. Junior Nzita.

I would like to emphasize the importance oftoday's
debate on children who are victims of non-State armed
groups and their fate in times of conflict. A lot of
progress has been made in improving the criteria and
legal frameworks for protecting children in armed
conflict, and in the international community's efforts
to protect them during and after such conflict. Despite
such improvements, however, we are still seeing an
unprecedented increase in violations and in the number
of child victims around the world, particularly in the
Middle East and Africa. The exploitation of children by
non-State armed groups has reached dangerous levels,
particularly owing to the increasingly modern methods
used to recruit them and to how easy it is manipulate
them, particularly owing to children's ignorance about
the dangers they are facing.

Many extremist groups have committed horrendous
crimes and violations against children, exposing them to
scenes of violence and encouraging them to participate
and make such crimes their own. Girls and boys are
forced to work as combattants, suicide bombers or
even executioners. They are reduced to sexual slavery
or to working as miners. They may even be paid after
their abduction - $1,200 a month in some conflict
regions. Daesh recently opened special centres to
recruit children in an organized and systematic manner
so as to entrench its ideology and extremist ideas in
the heads of these children. The main danger posed by
terrorist groups like Daesh is that they are training a
generation to champion their extremist ideology, which
will complicate the eradication of such thinking in the
future.

Among the methods used by extremist non-State
actors to recruit children is the dissemination of
social media on the Internet in order to mobilize them
intellectually to join these groups throughout the world,
and not just in conflict zones, either by interacting with
them directly on certain websites or by other means. It
is important to encourage those sites to find effective
ways to counter terrorist propaganda and advertising,
and to establish guidelines to identify content that can
be published on social media pages so that they cannot
be used as forums for the recruitment of children.

One of the most pressing challenges facing the
international community today is how to constrain
non-State groups to respect international humanitarian
law and inalienable right, and to impose on them a
sense of responsibility for fighting the impunity of
those who use abuse children's rights. There is no
magic wand that we can wave, I know, but we have
to establish a mechanism and preventive strategies
to address these challenges. That will require greater
cooperation between the Security Council and the rest
ofthe United Nations in using the means at our disposal
to prevent conflicts more effectively, including through
early warning mechanisms and preventive diplomacy.
Pressure must be brought to bear on parties to conflict
to sign on to plans of action for the protection of children
and commit themselves to such programmes.

The United Nations entities need access to such
pockets of conflict so as to provide necessary support
to children and stop them from joining armed groups
in order to earn money to support themselves. We must
also focus our efforts on educational and reinsertion
programmes for children who have already been
recruited, which will help build a foundation for the
protection of children in armed conflict. It is essential to
launch awareness-raising campaigns to inform children
of the dangers of j oining armed groups in conflict areas,
and to create special commissions to identify violations
committed against children by non-State armed groups
in order to ensure that their instigators are brought to
justice. The names ofthese criminals, particularly those
who perpetrate sexual violence and mass abductions of
girls, should be included in sanctions lists.

Jordan is working to provide children in Syria with
a better future and to prevent them from participating
in the ongoing conflict. We are giving them educational
and health-care services of the highest quality, to
the fullest extent of our capacities. International
organizations have supported Jordan in the provision
of such services, including through coordination
with the United Nations specialized agencies and
non-governmental organizations. With the help of
UNICEF, a care centre has been established for refugee
children that offers an educational and preventive
framework, in addition to psychological and social
support. Jordan has opened public and private schools
to Syrian refugee children. The number of school-age
children in and outside the camps now exceeds 120,000,
yet despite such efforts it has been recognized that the
current funding of programmes targeting children in
armed conflict is neither sustainable nor sufficient. The
international community must work in earnest to find
adequate funding to fill the gap so as to guarantee the
provision of such services.

Finally, we are forced to ask: How many violations
of children's rights will have to be committed, and
how many children will have to endure the most
odious abuse before everyone signs the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict and
before States can find the common resolve to fight the
recruitment of children in armed conflict?

