Mr. Msosa (Malawi): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 15 States members of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC). SADC
wishes to align itself with the statement delivered by
the Permanent Observer of the African Union on behalf
of the African Group.

Today Africa is home to nine ofthe 16 active United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Nowhere is the
growing importance for United Nations peacekeeping
of partnership with regional organizations more
visible than on the African continent. Partnership
with the United Nations has long been a hallmark of
peacekeeping operations in Africa. The foundation of
that cooperation lies in Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations, which attests to the role and scope of
regional actors in furthering the Organization's ideals.
This partnership was born out of recognition that the
United Nations and regional organizations have unique
and complementary capacities that can contribute to
conflict prevention and resolution. Clear testament to
that partnership are the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali.

In this context, we welcome the peace agreement
reached in the Central African Republic on 25 July.
We also emphasize the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union through the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau and the Economic Community of West African
States, which led to the recent general elections and
the restoration of constitutional order in that country.
These missions, together with the African Union
Mission in Somalia, attest to the continued partnership
and mutual commitment of both the United Nations and
the African Union. It is a partnership that will certain
characterize the future of peacekeeping in the African
continent.

The cooperation and operations underpinning
the relationship have served to advance the goals of
the United Nations, and particularly of the Security
Council, in the maintenance of international peace
and security. They have also provided the framework
for a stronger cooperation with Africa that has also
advanced the objectives of the African Union Charter
in promoting peace, security and stability on the
continent. This partnership has not been static. It has
evolved, widened and strengthened. It has encompassed
mediation, peacemaking and humanitarian support.
As a result, one of the contemporary realities is that
peacekeeping in Africa is no longer the sole prerogative
and responsibilty of the United Nations.

This evaluation has taken place in a challenging
environment. Its roots go back to 1990 when the
Economic Community of West African States first
intervened in Liberia. It crystallized with the formation
of the African Union Standby Force and was further
consolidated by the adoption of specific subregional
arrangements, such as the SADC Mutual Defence
Pact. The Mutual Defence Pact, which was developed
in 2003 to operationalize the SADC mechanisms and
for mutual cooperation in defence and security matters,
has contributed to peacekeeping and the stabilization of
the region, particularly in the Democratic Republic of
Congo, as well as to the training of defence forces and
security in that country.

It is in this regard that SADC welcomes this open
debate, for we attach great importance to the issue of
peacekeeping. We also see the evolving relationship
as key to building a more meaningful and sustainable
framework for peacekeeping. We believe that the future
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations depends on
the ability to harness national and regional capacities
in affected countries to strengthen coordination and
build mutual understanding of operational imperatives
for regional commitments. Therefore, it is desirable and
necessary that respective regions have a greater voice
in the formulation of peacekeeping mandates impacting
their regions because, as recognized by this body in its
previous resolutions, regional organizations are well
placed to understand the root causes of armed conflict
and well positioned to influence their prevention and
resolution.

The nature and complexity of contemporary
conflicts suggest, in certain instances, another
approach. In that sense, the structure and scope of
peacekeeping must necessarily respond to the reality
on the ground. The Council should be flexible in
meeting this challenge and correct past failures. The
Council should intervene when serious crimes, such as
atrocities against civilians, are being committed. The
Council should also be ready to reach out to partners
willing and able to take responsibility to restore and
maintain peace in conflict-affected countries.

Peacekeepers need a greater readiness to cooperate
with other actors that may be introduced in the field.
This collaboration is particularly necessary with the
increase of interfaces and synergies between United
Nations peacekeeping and regional organizations. This
would not only deepen the partnership but also enhance
the possibilities for a successful mission. Therefore, it
is critical that the mandate be clear. This approach will
reduce enduring uncertainties and occasional tensions
between the United Nations mandate responsible
for international peace and security and regional
organizations, such as the African Union, which plays
a supporting role.

Acting in accordance with the African Union
Protocol on Peace and Security, SADC has established
a standby brigade whose mandate includes, among
other things, undertaking interventions for peace and
security restoration in a conflict situation, at the request
of a member State. We are grateful that the Council has
shown willingness to work with the bloc to address the
instability in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo
through the Force Intervention Brigade.

SADC also welcomes the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region, signed on 24 February 2013
and supported by resolution 2098 (2013), whose goal is
not only to address the instability in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, but also to create enabling
conditions for political dialogue and peacebuilding.
Had the Council ignored our calls, the situation might
have deteriorated further, with dire consequences for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and beyond.

In conclusion, we wish to underscore the
significance of close consultations and cooperation.
This alliance should also manifest itself in improving
mutual understanding of each other's structure
and organization, and in improving channels of
communications. SADC also wishes to stress the
need to enhance the predictability, sustainability and
flexibility of financing regional organizations when
they undertake peacekeeping under a United Nations
mandate.

We call on the United Nations and regional
organizations to continue investing in conflict-
prevention, including through mediation, which is less
costly than peacekeeping. Efforts already undertaken
to assist the African Union, including in the context
of its Ten-Year Capacity Building Programme, and
subregional blocs in building subregional blocs to
build capacity to deal with security challenges are
appreciated and encouraged.

