Mr. Kogui N'Douro (Benin) (spoke in French): I
would like first, Mr. President, to renew the
congratulations of your friend and brother, His
Excellency Mr. Boni Yayi, President of the Republic of
Benin, on the outstanding election of your country, the
Togolese Republic, to the Security Council as a
country of West Africa and on its assumption of the
presidency for this month. President Boni Yayi was
unable to travel to New York in response to your
invitation, for his high-level commitments as current
Chairman of the African Union obliged him to remain
in Africa. He asked me to represent him at this historic
debate, which is of vital importance for security in
Africa.

The collapse of the old regime in Libya has
resulted in massive population movements and the
dispersal of the arsenal of the former Libyan army.
Those phenomena have considerably intensified the
challenges facing West Africa, and the Sahel in
particular, with respect to combating organized
transnational crime. They have been destabilizing
factors, increasing the strength of existing rebellions in
certain States of the Sahel and leading to their
radicalization. They have also led to the resurgence of
pernicious forms of coordinated criminal activities,
such as kidnapping with ransom demands and gun
battles with security forces that are sometimes limited,
due to the superior firepower of the insurgents. We
must also be concerned by the infiltration of dirty
money, which brings great risks to our young
democracies.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
high quality of the background document your country
prepared to inform this debate on problems whose
complexity you have highlighted (S/2012/83). The
Government of Benin agrees with the analysis in the
report and in this Council urgently appeals to the
international community to properly assess what is at
stake for international peace and security due to the
situation in West Africa and the Sahel.

Our Governments are being sorely tried in the
exercise of their governmental functions with respect
to protecting people and property within our territories.
It is difficult for them to guarantee satisfactory
conditions for survival within their borders. That
situation holds considerable threats not only for the
inhabitants of border regions and isolated areas, who
are daily exposed to increasing hardships, but also for
the large urban centres. Acts of armed aggression are
on the rise.

National security forces on constant alert have
undertaken effective measures to combat criminal acts,
including trafficking in drugs and counterfeit
medicines and money laundering. To that end, the
Government of Benin has just established a canine unit
with sniffer dogs. Benin has adopted a systematic
policy of burning all confiscated material to eliminate
the risk of dispersion. The public security forces are
supported by the national defence forces whenever
such intervention is considered necessary for
appropriate and determined measures to combat
criminals in their corners. Thus, recently some
godfathers of transnational crime were identified and
expelled from Benin.

In that regard, Benin enjoys fruitful cooperation
with its immediate neighbours, in particular with the
Federal Republic of Nigeria, in coordinated efforts at
the subregional level and beyond. Among the measures
taken at subregional, regional and international levels,
we note in particular the establishment of various legal,
political and security measures and the implementation
of coordinated operational activities.

Aware of existing risks, President Yayi has
launched a determined fight against corruption and is
promoting reforms in various areas. In order to restore
respect for ethics and good professional practices, the
Government has adopted a law against corruption and
related misdemeanours. The law has largely been
implemented throughout the entire territory by
ministerial teams. Those actions are based on United
Nations conventions to which Benin is party, such as
the United Nations Convention against Corruption and
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime.
I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
important contribution of United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, in particular the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in supporting

efforts of Governments to strengthen relevant national
institutions, including judicial structures, and to
enhance synergies necessary for the efficacy of policies
implemented and of resources mobilized to reach that
goal.

The Government of Benin welcomes the attention
given to strategic relations between the Security
Council and the African Union, in view of the security
challenges faced by the African continent, and in
particular the Council's adoption of resolution 2033
(2012), which contains relevant provisions to make
possible significant improvement in interaction,
cooperation, consultation and the regular coordination
of activities at various levels.

The Government of Benin believes that the
international community must devote greater attention
to issues of public security in Africa and give greater
support to individual and collective efforts of States to
counteract transborder organized crime. In particular,
the illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons
must be combated with greater determination, in close
liaison with the African Union and subregional
organizations. Particular attention should be given to
the essential linkage between security challenges,
developmental challenges and challenges linked to the
fragility of our State institutions, in order to enable the
implementation of coherent regional strategies.

An integrated approach is also necessary to
address the problems of resident migrants and those in
transit, unemployed citizens and scattered armed
combatants. Their disarming and productive reinsertion
into the economic life of their host country must be
supported with appropriate measures. It is important to
prevent that distressed population from being won over
by armed groups that seek to destabilize States in order
to take control of their resources. That is imperative to
ensure effective conflict prevention.

Before I finish, I must refer to piracy and armed
robbery at sea, an aspect of organized transnational
crime. We welcome the Security Council's intention to
allocate a special meeting to this issue during the
current month. In that regard, I wish to express the
thanks of His Excellency Mr. Boni Yayi, President of
the Republic of Benin, to His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, Secretary-General of the United Nations, and
to all members of the Security Council for the
appropriate measures they have taken to assist Benin
and other countries of West Africa that are facing those
serious threats of criminality in our States.

My country, Benin, is particularly grateful for the
effective and efficient support of the Nigerian naval
forces, alongside their Beninese brothers, in carrying
out joint patrols. We also express our profound
gratitude to France, the United States, the European
Union, China and other States for the active solidarity
they have demonstrated towards Benin and for their
substantial contribution to national capacity-building in
countries of the subregion.

The Government of Benin hopes that the meeting
of the Security Council to deal with the report of the
assessment mission that visited Benin and some other
West and Central African countries in 2011
(S/2012/45) will lead to concrete measures aimed at
ensuring an adequate response to existing threats.

