Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like warmly to welcome to the Council
table the Minister for External Relations of Angola,
Mr. Miranda.

The draft resolution that we will be adopting today
reaffirms the Security Council's determination to ensure
effective implementation of the sanctions against UNITA.
Today, through this draft resolution, the Council will once
again send a clear and firm message to Mr. Savimbi and
UNITA to put an immediate end to hostilities and to
finally fulfil their obligations under the Lusaka Protocol.
My country fully endorses that message. Jonas Savimbi's
overwhelming responsibility for the continuation of civil
conflict in Angola and his refusal to take account of
Council resolutions must be most seriously condemned.

We welcome the fact that, barely a month after the
report of the Panel of Experts was issued, the Council
will adopt a draft resolution taking on board more than
three quarters of the recommendations made by those
experts. The draft resolution covers a particularly wide
range of issues, including the delivery of arms, fuel,
trafficking in diamonds, financial resources and the travel
of UNITA leaders. The recommendations put forward in
this text are addressed first and foremost to Member
States. But they also call for the active cooperation of a
variety of players in a number of different arenas,
including international and regional organizations,
enterprises, professional organizations and experts. This
is especially true for the provisions relating to the
international diamond trade, the monitoring of financial
resources and air transport. The effective implementation

 

of these measures is the responsibility of Member States,
but they will have to ensure, in exercising their
competency, the cooperation of all the actors concerned.

Each of us will have to support this effort. It will
require not only the will, but the means. In many instances,
the means are lacking. This is particularly the case with
regard to the implementation of certain recommendations of
the Panel of Experts, to be endorsed by the Council today,
which are addressed in particular to the Southern African
Development Community and its member States. The
efforts of the countries concerned, especially those in
Africa, will therefore have to be supported by the
international community. If we are serious in our
determination to ensure respect for sanctions, we must not
confine ourselves to highlighting violations of sanctions.
Naming and shaming is not enough. We must also provide
tangible aid wherever it is needed.

The draft resolution would provide for the
establishment of machinery for monitoring sanctions. It
would also provide for the Council to assess the situation
in six months on the basis of the work of the sanctions
Committee. We hope that the sanctions Committee will
engage in sustained dialogue with the member States in
monitoring the implementation of sanctions, exchanging
information and receiving their comments. Here again, our
goal must be greater efficacy. If the noose around Jonas
Savimbi and UNITA is truly to be tightened, we need
cooperation and information from everyone. Only a united
effort of the international community will allow us to block
UNITA's revenue resources and supply of arms.

Since the report of the Panel of Experts was published,
several States have announced steps taken to further
investigate shortcomings and, in some cases, correct them.
The French delegation welcomes these initiatives, which
have clearly already begun to bear fruit. We hope that the
Council and the sanctions Committee will be able to
acknowledge these efforts in due course. If the embargo has
been violated in the past, it is indeed essential that these
failings no longer occur and that the sanctions Committee
be apprised in real time of any fresh sanctions busting.

We feel that this constructive, pedagogical and united
approach, built entirely around the central objective of the
full international isolation of Jonas Savimbi and UNITA,
will ultimately prove far more productive than a repressive
one. In this context, it does not appear to us that the
creation of new sanctions against countries that have
allegedly violated the old will provide a real solution. It is
not by increasing the number of pariah States that we will
encourage them to reform their ways, nor would the
exponential growth in the number of existing sanctions
regimes fail to create management problems at the very
moment when we are already having enough trouble
enforcing the nine embargoes currently in place. The
criteria for choosing violator countries could be subject to
numerous challenges. The authority of this Council could
well emerge reduced. The draft resolution before us today
holds out no such prospect, of which we are glad.

Finally, we hope that the sanctions Committee will,
in cooperation with the monitoring machinery, manage to
build on the work of the Panel of Experts and to clarify
certain information contained in the report submitted by
Mr. Mollander. Last March, my delegation raised the
issues that we felt needed to be actualized. It would be
equally useful for the sanctions Committee better to
appreciate the respective importance of UNITA's various
supply networks. This, again, is in the interests of
achieving efficacy. If we wish to strengthen the
implementation of sanctions, we must do so first and
foremost by identifying the main channels through which
UNITA receives its arms and acquires its resources.

