Mr. Mashkoor (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate the People's Republic
of China on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April. We would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
I would also like to congratulate Angola for its wise
leadership of the Council last month.

The policies of Israel, the occupying Power, rely
heavily on building more settlements on lands that have
been confiscated from their Arab owners, on extracting
the natural resources and on subjecting the Palestinian
economy and market to the laws of the occupying
Power. The end purpose is to control the future of
the Palestinian people and prevent their sustainable
development. Settler colonialism can be considered to
be the strategic, military pillar of the policy to Judaize
the occupied territories and to impose a fait accompli
on the Arab States and the Palestinians in negotiations.
While there was a sincere intention on the part of the
Arab party to end this long-standing dispute and to
achieve a just peace, those policies have undermined
peace efforts in the region.

The demolition of Palestinian homes by the

Israeli occupation authorities will not bring peace to
Israel. It is an inhumane act that runs counter to the
right to housing. Israel also violates the standards of
criminal law, which calls for the punishment of those
who commit the crime in question. As such, criminal
law cannot impose collective punishment on family
members. Israel uses a policy of collective punishment
that was prevalent in the Middle Ages. The siege on
Gaza, the detentions, the increasing rate of violence and
the imposition of collective punishment, as well as the
provocations by Jewish extremist settlers, serve only
to exacerbate tensions in Palestine and the Middle East
region in general. Iraq calls on the Security Council
to provide international protection for the Palestinian
people in all of the occupied Palestinian territories, in
accordance with the relevant international conventions
and international humanitarian law, in order to put an
end to the unprecedented violations committed against
the sacred shrines in Jerusalem, including Al-Aqsa
Mosque. We also call on the Council to ensure the
complete withdrawal of Israel from the occupied
territories to the borders of 1967, in accordance with
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

Iraq welcomes the French initiative on the
convening of an international conference on the
Palestinian question and the peace process. We would
hope that the initiative would lead to tangible results
by providing an international political impetus for the
peace process and by addressing all the issues that have
made it difficult to arrive at a peaceful solution to end
the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories. We
would also hope that it would ensure the establishment
of a viable Palestinian State that can exist in peace
and assume its place in the international community.
However, as a result of the intransigence of Israel,
which does not believe in the Palestinian right to self-
determination or to recovery of the usurped territories,
Iraq does not expect that any international conference
can succeed. The experience of past conferences
does not encourage us to expect anything more than
diplomatic courtesies, which do not really respond to
the suffering of our Palestinian brothers living under
occupation.

We would like to express our solidarity with our
brothers in occupied Palestine and their struggle, which
is legitimate under the rules of international law, for
the establishment of an independent, contiguous and
viable Palestinian, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
based on the 1967 borders. We urge the relevant
international parties to move faster and overcome the
impediments that have made it difficult to achieve the
two-State solution.

