Mr. Gillerman (Israel): First, let me congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. Let me also express to you my regret
that your first meeting should be of this nature and take
place on this day.

I wish also to express to Sir Emyr Jones Parry my
great appreciation for his able and fair stewardship of
the Security Council last month.

This meeting of the Security Council is being
convened within hours of Yom Kippur, the Day of
Atonement, which is the holiest day of the Jewish
calendar. I deeply regret that the Council could not
meet after this most important religious day so as to
allow Israel to participate fully in the debate. I will,
unfortunately, have to leave this meeting after I make
my statement in order to observe this holy day.

Yesterday, a Palestinian suicide bomber entered a
crowded beachfront restaurant in the port city of Haifa,
murdering 19 innocent civilians and wounding at least
60 others. The restaurant - a symbol of Arab-Israeli
coexistence, as is the city of Haifa - was frequented
by Jewish and Arab citizens of Israel alike, and among
the victims were four Israeli Arabs, three children and
a little baby girl. Five victims were members of the
same family and three were members of another family.
Whole families were wiped out by that horrendous act,
taking place on the Jewish sabbath on a quiet, peaceful
beachfront in the city of Haifa.

Islamic Jihad, a terrorist organization that
operates freely from Palestinian Authority territory and
has headquarters in Damascus, Syria, proudly claimed
responsibility for this massacre. Islamic Jihad is an
organization committed to the destruction of Israel
through holy war and which engages in the deliberate
and widespread murder of innocents to that end. It
opposes moderate Arab Governments and actively
supports terrorist attacks against Western targets. There
could not be a more obvious example of a terrorist
organization.

The massacre in Haifa is the latest of over 40
terrorist atrocities committed by Islamic Jihad in the
past few years. Among the attacks perpetrated by that
organization were the massacre of 21 teenagers at a
discotheque in Tel Aviv on 2 June 2001; the bombing
of 5 June 2002 at the Meggido Junction, which killed
18 Israelis; the bombing of a commuter bus on 21
October 2002, which killed 14 Israelis; the attack on a
shopping mall in the Israeli town of Afula on 19 May
2003, in which three civilians were killed and over 70
wounded; and the attack on 30 March 2003, in which a
suicide bomber detonated his explosives at a cafe in
Netanya, wounding 58 civilians.

The encouragement, safe harbour, training
facilities, funding and logistical support offered by
Syria to a variety of notorious terrorist organizations is
a matter of public knowledge. Among the many
terrorists group that operate and benefit from the
auspices of the Syrian dictatorship are Islamic Jihad,
Hamas, Hizbollah, and the Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine. It is well known that the
Secretary General of Islamic Jihad, Ramadan Abdallah
Shallah, is one of several terrorist leaders who operate
freely in Damascus and receive immunity and support
from the Assad regime.

Allow me to briefly detail, for the benefit of
Council, the extent of support that Syria, as well as the
regime in Iran, afford to terrorist organizations such as
Islamic Jihad, which are engaged in the deliberate
massacre of innocent civilians.

Safe harbour and training facilities are provided
throughout Syria for terrorist organizations such as
Islamic Jihad, Hamas and Hizbollah, both in separate
facilities and in Syrian army bases. The Ein Saheb
base, which was targeted in Israel's measured defensive
operation today, is just one of those facilities sponsored
by Syria and Iran. Recruits at camps such as Ein Saheb
come from Islamic Jihad, Hamas and other terrorist
groups. They are taught how to assemble bombs,
conduct kidnapping, prepare suicide belts, gather
intelligence and establish terrorist cells. Some have
also received aviation instruction. Recruits training at
those camps are slated to return to Palestinian
Authority territory and other areas to set up cells and
conduct terrorist operations.

Syria has itself facilitated and directed acts of
terrorism by coordination and briefings via phone and
Internet and by calling activists to Damascus for
consultations and briefings. Three such operatives -
Tarek Az Aldin, Ali Saffuri and Taabat Mardawi -
have been identified under investigation as specifically
designated liaisons for relaying instructions between
officials in Damascus and terrorist cells in the West
Bank and Gaza. Mr. Mardawi himself has admitted
involvement in many attacks, including a bus bombing
in Haifa in May 2001, a suicide attack at a restaurant in
Kiryat Motzkin in August of that year and an attack on
a bus near Nazareth in March 2002.

Another example comes from an intelligence
report provided by the Head of the Palestinian
Preventative Security Apparatus on 31 October 2001,
which asserts that Hamas, Islamic Jihad and Hizbollah
were meeting in Damascus "in order to increase their
joint acitivity with the aid of Iranian money".
Instructions are also given to halt terrorist activity
when it suits Syrian or Iranian interests to avoid the
spotlight, such as following the terrorist attacks of 11
September in the United States. It is very strange that
Syria decided to be in the spotlight today and actually
put itself in the dock on this very day, after these
actions.

Iran, through the use of the Syrian and Palestinian
banking systems, sustains a systematic money transfer
system, and large sums of money have been transferred
to Islamic Jihad as well as other terrorists organizations
through Damascus for the planning and perpetration of
attacks. Mr. Shallah himself, the Secretary-General of
Islamic Jihad, is known to have transferred funds in the
hundreds of thousands of dollars from Damascus to the
individual accounts of Islamic Jihad operatives such as
Bassani ak-Saadi, who is responsible for Islamic Jihad
financing in Jenin.

Syria uses its State-run media and official
institutions to glorify and encourage suicide bombings
against civilians in restaurants, schools, commuter
buses and shopping malls. To mention but a few
examples, Radio Damascus - far from being a free
radio - in a broadcast on 9 May 2002 lauded "the
wonderful and special suicide attacks which were
executed by some of the sons of the Palestinian
nation". In another State-run announcement on 1
January 2002, Damascus Radio declared "The entire
world knows that Syria, its political leadership and its
Arab people...have turned Syrian Arab soil into a
training camp, a safe haven and an arms depot for the
Palestinian revolutionaries." And on 13 May 2002,
President Bashar Assad himself announced in reference
to so-called acts of resistance "IfI was not President of
Syria I wouldn't hesitate to participate in them." This
was not said by Osama bin Laden or by Saddam
Hussain, but by a President of a State that is a member
of this Council. Syria has also played host to a number
of conferences in which senior terrorist operatives from
Hamas, Islamic Jihad and other organizations meet.
Syria has facilitated the transfer of arms to
Palestinian terrorist organizations such as Islamic Jihad
by allowing the transfer of sophisticated weapons from
Iran to Hizbollah through Syrian territory. Hizbollah,
itself a vicious terrorist organization, has then sought to
smuggle those arms to Palestinian terrorist groups, as
was evidenced in the Karine A arms shipment and
similar incidents.

These are just a few examples of the extent and
nature of the involvement of the Syrian regime in the
deliberate murder of innocent civilians. Each and every
one of these acts constitutes a grave violation of
international law and Security Council resolutions, as
well as a threat to international peace and security.
There are few better exhibits of State sponsorship of
terrorism than the one provided by the Syrian regime.

Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), adopted
under Chapter VII of the Charter - which in act of the
highest hypocrisy Syria itself voted for - makes
absolutely clear that States must prevent acts of
terrorism and refrain from any form of financing,
support, safe harbour for or toleration of terrorist
groups. Syrian complicity in and responsibility for
suicide bombings are as blatant as they are repugnant.
The membership of this arch-sponsor of terrorism in
the Council is an unbearable contradiction and an
embarrassment to the United Nations. For Syria to ask
for a Council debate is comparable only to the Taliban
calling for such a debate. It would be laughable, if it
was not so sad.

And yet, members of the Council and the United
Nations can hardly be surprised at this shameless act of
hypocrisy by the Syrian regime. This is the same
regime that speaks so often of occupation while it
brutally occupies the neighbouring territory of
Lebanon. It is the same regime that speaks of
international law and human rights while it subjugates
its people under a repressive and primitive dictatorship,
violating countless international obligations. It is the
same regime that supported the Saddam Hussain
regime in Iraq in violation of Security Council
resolutions and that to this day facilitates the
infiltration of terrorists to attack civilian and military
targets in Iraqi territory. And it is this same despotic
regime that speaks so freely of double standards at the
United Nations. Syria would do well to take a hard
look at the mirror and count itself fortunate that it has
not yet, for unfortunate reasons, been the subject of
concerted international action as part of the global
campaign against terrorism - not yet.

The Syrian delegate speaks a great deal about so-
called resistance. Perhaps he can tell us precisely,
without his familiar diplomatic word games and
misrepresentations, how exactly the murder of children
and babies in a restaurant is an act of legitimate
resistance. Or perhaps he could tell us how the Syrians
themselves have dealt with resistance, such as in the
case of Hama, in which some 10,000 Syrian civilians
were murdered by the Syrian armed forces.

Israel's measured defensive response to the
horrific suicide bombings against a terrorist training
facility in Syria is a clear act of self-defence in
accordance with Article 51 of the Charter. Those
actions come after Israel has exercised tremendous
restraint despite countless acts of terrorism that have
claimed hundreds of innocent lives, for which Syria
bears direct and criminal responsibility. It comes after
Israel and the international community as a whole have
repeatedly called on Syria to end its support of
terrorism and finally comply with international law.
And it is designed to prevent further armed attacks
against Israeli civilians in which Syria is complicit,
with a View to encouraging Syria to resolve its dispute
through bilateral negotiations in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), as it is legally required to do. This is not a
hypothetical question. Many States members of the
Organization and of the Council have been faced with
terrorism of far less intensity and have responded with
far less restraint and far less concern for human life.
And yet the Security Council has not seen fit to
scrutinize their conduct. Indeed, on certain occasions
the Council has specifically endorsed such defensive
measures.

If there is a double standard in this Organization,
it is that while some States are afforded the right to
protect their citizens, Israel too often is sent the
message that its citizens are not worthy of protection.
If there is a double standard, it is that some States are
able to support terrorism with impunity, while those
defending against it are called to account. If there is a
double standard, it is Syria sitting at the Council table
and raising one hand to vote against terror and the
other to perpetrate and initiate terror around the world.
For the sake of peace and the reputation of the Council,
let there be no such double standard today.
In the face of the rejectionism, aggression and
terrorist sponsorship of the Syrian regime, together
with Iran and the Palestinian Authority, what would the
international community have us do? Like any State
faced with such a critical and prolonged threat, Israel
must exercise its inherent right and obligation to
defend its citizens. What can we tell the Arab and
Israeli mothers of children murdered in this weekend's
attack in Haifa? Should we say, "We could have
prevented the death of your son or daughter. We could
have stopped a terrorist from walking into your town,
your school, your home, your bedroom - but our
hands were tied"? Israel remains committed to a
peaceful solution to the Middle East conflict and is
ready to make painful compromises to that end. But no
peace can come while terrorism prospers. No
negotiations can bring progress, while our citizens die
on the streets.

Today, on the very eve of the Day of Atonement
and the thirtieth anniversary of the Egyptian-Syrian
aggression that initiated the Yom Kippur War, we call
on members of the Council to come to the aid of the
victims of terrorism, not of its sponsors. Syria deserves
no support for its complicity in murder, and the
Council would commit an unforgivable act of moral
blindness were it to act otherwise. The time has come
for the Council, which adopted resolution 1373 (2002),
and which has been at the forefront of the global
counter-terrorism campaign, to hold to account a brutal
dictatorship that is world-renowned for adopting
terrorism as its primary tool. The world is watching.
And today, more than on any other day, God is
watching too.

