The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for his kind words addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of Bulgaria.

As a European Union country, Bulgaria also
aligns itself with the statement to be made shortly by
the Permanent Representative of Italy, on behalf of the
European Union. I would like to make some additional
comments in my national capacity.

Bulgaria supports from the very beginning the
policy of standards before status in Kosovo, based on
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). We consider
the initiative of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri, to set out more
concrete guidelines for progress to operationalize the
"standards before status" policy and to launch a
comprehensive review mechanism, to be a logical and
useful continuation of the existing efforts of the contact
group and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General under the auspices of the Security Council.

We take note that a first opportunity for an
overall review could occur in mid-2005 or earlier, if
sufficient progress is made. My country is satisfied that
the "Standards for Kosovo" document was endorsed by
the Security Council through a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2003/26) on 12 December. Bulgaria considers
the eight standards to be a sound basis for a society
built on tolerance, justice and peace for everyone. We
believe that once those standards are reached, the pace
has to be maintained and implementation further
developed. Bearing that necessity in mind, Bulgaria has
proposed including sustainable implementation of the
standards as an additional criterion in the
implementation plan. We are convinced that such a
criterion may serve as a guarantee for the accelerated
development of political and economic life in Kosovo
and as an important impetus for its emerging civil
society.

The Bulgarian Government welcomes the start of
a direct dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
focused on practical issues of mutual interest. My
country is of the opinion that that dialogue should
continue without further delay. We would be prepared
to host in Bulgaria one of the working groups set up
within the framework of that process.

Bulgaria expects that the Kosovo authorities will
adhere strictly to the principles of a democratic, multi-
ethnic, multicultural and multi-religious society and
that it will cooperate actively with the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
so that the return of refugees and displaced persons can
improve. We should like to express our conviction that
a multi-ethnic society cannot function without
participation by all ethnic groups in public and political
life. I should like to take this opportunity to stress the
need to protect and preserve all religious monuments in
Kosovo, including the Orthodox Christian monasteries,
whose cultural and spiritual value cannot be measured.

Bulgaria welcomes the beginning of the review
mechanism for Kosovo within the framework of the
Stabilization and Association Process of the European
Union. As a technical, non-political process, it will
enable Kosovo to benefit from the great opportunities
for cooperation offered by the European Union.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Serbia and
Montenegro.

