Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking you, Sir, and your team for your hard work
this month, and for your invitation to hold this wrap-
up session, which is a very welcome initiative. As your
statistics made clear, it has been a productive month in
terms ofproducts, but it has also been a challenging one
when we consider the increased threats to peace and
security around the world.

I look forward in particular to hearing the
reflections of other recently elected members of the
Council, but as I am personally a new arrival, I thought
that I would take this opportunity to offer my thoughts
on the work of the Council on the basis of my first two
months here. I want to share my impressions on three
issues: working methods, the importance of Council
unity, and the challenges ahead.

On working methods, in my first couple of months
here I have been struck by how formal our interactions
can be, whatever the format, including in Arria Formula
meetings, in so-called informal consultations and even
in so-called informal interative dialogues. In all these
forums, I want to ask everyone what we can do to be
more responsive and more interactive with each other
and with those briefing us.

This month, for instance, we met a very broad range
ofleaders, activists and specialists working in Somalia,
Syria, the Sudan. We welcomed the Force Commanders
to the Council. All of these individuals bring insights
that are invaluable for our work. But the formality of
our interactions with them can sometimes limit our
ability to draw effectively on their experience.

And I think particularly when we are meeting in
private, we need to break away from the predictable
pattern of reading prepared statements out loud, and
instead, properly engage with each other and briefers.
Maybe even - shock horror - on a first-name basis that
reflects our familiar and daily interactions. We should
ask questions; we should interject. A dialogue should
be an exchange, not a broadcast of views. If we do all
agree on a point, then why does everyone need to say it?
Why do not wejust say that we agree with someone else
and move on? Otherwise we end up reading out talking
points that have already been made by other people. I
know that others around the Council, and beyond, share
this view, and both the peace operations review and the
Office of Internal Oversight Services recommend that
we have more open and honest conversations. So to do
so, I believe we need to begin by looking again at our
working methods and making them more engaging and
interactive.

For my second reflection, I have been struck by
how the Council can make real progress when there
is unity. And we have seen such unity on counter-
terrorism and on the fight against Ebola. We are also
seeing it on some of the hardest issues we face, such as
Yemen and Libya. But as events in Ukraine and Syria
have demonstrated, when the Council is divided, our
response falters and people suffer. As we look ahead to
the next six months, we need to redouble our efforts to
find common cause on those issues too.

And there are areas where we can agree, even on
the most divisive issues like Syria. Through the Geneva
communique' (S/2012/523, annex) we were able to agree
that a transitional governing body is needed - one that
meets the aspirations of the Syrian people. A strong,
stable, inclusive Government in Syria is the only way to
counter the threat posed by Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant; the Al-Assad regime has neither the legitimacy
nor the ability to do so. And the moderate opposition
cannot do so alone. So whatever our national starting
point in that conflict, we must all come together to help
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura in his efforts to bring
about a political settlement, which is the only way to
find an end to that awful conflict. So if we can make an
extra effort to seek out common ground, if we can adopt
some slightly more engaging working practices, maybe
we will have a little bit more success in addressing the
challenges ahead.

And that is my final reflection. It is on the scale
of the challenges which the Council and the United
Nations, as a whole, will face in the coming months.
The President set out a long list - Middle East,
migration, conflicts in Africa - and one could add
climate change, conflict prevention, achieving the
sustainable development goals. It is clear that we have a
lot to do. But in addition to all of those, I want to focus
on two further issues of particular importance to the
United Kingdom: the selection of the next Secretary-
General and the review of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women, peace and security.

As I announced on my first day in April, the
United Kingdom wants to see a more transparent,
structured and inclusive selection process for the
next Secretary-General. That means encouraging the
broadest selection of credible candidates - men and
particularly women - and setting a clear timeline for
appointment. And it is the Council that must take the
lead in this process, as it is the Council that has been
mandated in the Charter of the United Nations to make
the recommendation to the General Assembly.

I think we need to accelerate our work on that, but
also think about how we can broaden out and give all
States Members of the United Nations and civil society
an opportunity to assess the candidates' credentials.
If all qualifications are equal, the United Kingdom
believes that it is high time for a woman to lead the
United Nations. Twenty years on from the Beijing
Declaration, it is time for the United Nations to show
leadership and embody the practices it encourages all
of its Members to follow.

Which brings me also to women, peace and security.
There has been too little implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) in the 15 years since it was adopted. The
United Kingdom sees the high-level review on women,
peace and security in October as a chance to begin a new
phase for this agenda; one focused on implementation
and results for women affected by conflict. We want
to see women at peace talks and real protection for the
most vulnerable. Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi will
be leading the Council when we consider the issue in
October, and I look forward to working closely with
him and the Spanish mission, and with all Council
members, to further the agenda.

Finally, let me close by welcoming that the Council
is holding this meeting in public. It is a pity that it is
the first wrap-up meeting since the French presidency
in March. These open sessions are important. And like
the working practices I have described, they can bring
greater transparency and greater engagement into our
discussions and our decisions.
