Ms. Grignon (Kenya): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you for this opportunity to speak on behalf of the
Kenyan delegation. We wish first to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. My delegation expresses
profound appreciation to the Republic of Chile for
organizing this important open debate on inclusive
development for the maintenance of international peace
and security, in connection with the agenda item on the
maintenance of international peace and security.

We wish also to express our appreciation for the
concept note on the subject (S/2015/6, annex), the
statements of the Secretary-General and the Nobel
Laureate, and the statement made by Ambassador
De Aguiar Patriota, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission. These made a significant contribution to
this debate, and we thank them for that.

We recognize that ensuring international peace
and security remains a daunting challenge that is still
elusive despite the efforts made by the Council over
the almost 70 years of the existence of the United
Nations. In fact, we are witnessing emerging new and
complex security challenges such as radicalization,
violent extremism and foreign terrorist fighters.
These emerging challenges continue to undermine our
collective efforts to ensure international peace and
security. However, it is our hope that with efforts such
as today's and a determined call to action, we shall
realize peace, security and development dividends.
In this regard, my delegation wishes to make the
following seven points, which we believe are central to
the maintenance of international peace and security.

First, there can be no lasting peace without
development. We see a close nexus between peace
and security and sustainable development. Good
governance and adherence to the rule of law also play
an important role in this nexus. Here, the conclusion of
the United Nations World Summit in September 2005,
that there is no peace without development; there is no
development without peace; there is no lasting peace
and sustainable development without respect for human
rights, is especially poignant today.

Second, inclusiveness is key to peace and security,
as it is to broad development. That is why this topic
of inclusive development for the maintenance of
international peace and security is so relevant and
appropriate. As we approach the expiry dates of the
Millennium Development Goals, in September, and as
we design the post-2015 development agenda, capped
with the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations,
we have a unique opportunity to write a new chapter
in our collective history. We can end poverty and
inequality and truly ensure inclusive development if we
want. Undoubtedly, this will significantly contribute
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
This is because disputes over resources and their
exploitation are among the key causes of conflict and
insecurity.

Third, equality within nations is central to
peacebuilding and development. Poverty and
underdevelopment remain major causes of conflict in
most parts of the world. That is amplified by inequality
and the failure to genuinely consider and apply the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities.
Therefore, peace, security and sustainable development
will be achieved only when inequalities in all their
forms and manifestations are eradicated, especially
among Member States.

Fourth, to establish sustainable peace in countries
emerging from conflict, there is a need to ensure that
there is no relapse into conflict. Therefore, the United
Nations, and especially the Security Council, need
to engage meaningfully throughout prevention and
early warning, conflict resolution, peacebuilding and
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Underdevelopment, stagnation and poverty should
be eradicated. The international community should
assist post-conflict countries by focusing on both
the root causes and the symptoms and addressing the
fundamental socio-economic, cultural and political
issues. Post-conflict reconstruction and development
should focus on peacebuilding, national reconciliation,
inclusive political dialogue and the promotion of
national cohesion and unity.

Fifth, to address the challenges of terrorism and
violent extremism, there is an urgent need to build and
promote stable and peaceful societies by taking decisive
measures to end poverty, inequality and marginalization,
as poverty is both a cause and consequence of terrorism
and violent extremism. Poverty engenders inequality,
which in turn undermines efforts aimed at creating
peaceful and non-violent societies. To create societies
that are resilient to terrorism and violent extremism,
the post-2015 development agenda must address
widespread poverty, inequality, exclusion and weak
governance institutions.

Sixth, Africa continues to partner with the
United Nations, other continental and regional
intergovernmental organizations, multinational
organizations and other stakeholders to strengthen the
rule of law, institutions of governance, human rights
and economic development. While we stress that the
responsibility for conflict prevention and mitigation
lies with each State, transnational drivers of conflicts
must collectively be addressed by the international
community. We believe that, by strengthening our
institutions of governance, we will not only enhance
inclusive governance, but also promote economic and
social inclusion and development. To a great extent,
that will help fight all forms of exclusion and inequality
and forge unity and diversity at the local, national and
regional levels.

Seventh, in conclusion, I wish to reiterate that
my delegation firmly believes that peace and security
are important prerequisites for the attainment of
sustainable development. Kenya remains committed to
the realization of peace and security, not only in Africa
but globally, through the promotion of democratic
practices, good governance, the rule of law, the
protection of human rights and the peaceful resolution
of conflicts. Conflict prevention, early warning and
peacebuilding are important components in that regard.

Kenya is greatly honoured - through its
Permanent Representative, Ambassador Macharia
Kamau, together with Ambassador David Donoghue,
Permanent Representative of Ireland 4 to co-facilitate
the intergovernmental negotiations on the post-
2015 development agenda. We want to assure you,
Mr. President, and all delegations of our full commitment
to work with other delegations to formulate a post-2015
development agenda that ensures the future we all want,
which is a just and equitable economic order free from
poverty, exclusion and human suffering.

