Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Chairs of the Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), and of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), Ambassadors Wittig, Puri and
Sangqu, for their comprehensive briefings today and
for their effective leadership of those Committees.

We have passed an important milestone since we
last met in this format. In September we marked the
tenth anniversary of the 9/11 terrorist attacks and the
subsequent adoption of resolution 1373 (2001). The
attacks of 9/11 changed the way we viewed terrorism.
It was the first time we had faced such a global
terrorist threat, and it provided an essential impetus to
strengthening international cooperation.

Much has been achieved by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee over the last 10 years. This
includes building counter-terrorism legislation,
strengthening law-enforcement bodies and helping to
create units to tackle terrorist financing. The United
Kingdom supports the Counter-Terrorism Committee's
continuing cooperation with Member States as they
build their capacity to deal with terrorism in all its
forms.

Let me now turn to the Al-Qaida sanctions
regime. The adoption of resolution 1989 (2011) in June
this year was an important step in our collective
endeavour to ensure that sanctions against Al-Qaida
remain effective, responsive and fair.

Resolution 1989 (2011) introduced important
changes in how the regime works. Most notably, it
further strengthened the Office of the Ombudsperson
by introducing the power to make recommendations on
de-listing, by urging States to provide information,
including confidential information, and by encouraging
individuals challenging their listing in courts to submit
their cases to the Ombudsperson. The United Kingdom
also welcomed innovations in de-listing processes,
particularly through the introduction of two so-called
smart sunset clauses.
We believe that these changes have helped the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime maintain its relevance.
Nimbler and more transparent de-listing procedures
mean that the regime is better placed to respond to the
evolving terrorist threat, while protecting the rights of
individuals. We believe that the procedures the Council
introduced will lead to a more targeted and focused

tool.

As we work together in combating terrorism, we
do not forget the challenges posed to our collective
security by proliferation. All countries, regardless of
whether they hold chemical, biological or nuclear
materials, have a responsibility under resolution 1540
(2004) to take action to prevent proliferation. We were
encouraged that most States have provided initial
reports to the Committee, but it is important that all
States provide updates as they make progress in
implementing the resolution. States should also
recognize that action undertaken, for example, when
improving border security, is relevant to resolution
1540 (2004), and making such linkages will enable
more effective reporting to the Committee.

I would like to close by reiterating the importance
that the United Kingdom attaches to the Security
Council's fight against terrorism, as well as our
ongoing commitment to the work of the 1989, 1373
and 1540 Committees.

