Mr. Tagle (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to commend you, Sir, on your country's
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of June and to thank you for the invitation to
participate in this important debate. I should like
also to thank the Secretary-General for his important
report (S/2012/376) on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, as well as Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Ivan Simonovic',
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights; and
Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, for their briefings. My delegation also welcomes
the presence among us today of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Guatemala, Mr. Harold Caballeros.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of Jordan, speaking
on behalf of the Human Security Network, of which
Chile is a member.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
one of my country's concerns in that it touches on the
protection of human rights and the maintenance of
international peace and security, the fundamental goal
of which must always be the preservation of the life and
well-being of the human person. Following up on the
last statement (S/PRST/2010/25) issued by the Council
in that respect, on 22 November 2010, the ninth report
(S/2012/376) of the Secretary-General provides us with
an updated picture of the situation in this area.

Regrettably, and despite the fact that some progress
has been made, the overall realities on the ground
are far from encouraging. Attacks continue on the
lives, dignity, physical and psychological integrity of
civilians, with the parties almost always lacking the
will to meet the minimum standards of respect for
civilians. That lack of will is reflected in the deliberate
killing of civilians; violence, in particular sexual
violence, against women and children; attacks against
facilities housing vulnerable groups, such as hospitals
and schools; the recruitment of child soldiers; attacks
against journalists; and the displacement of individuals,
all of which leave societies powerless and in pain.
Particular attention should be paid to the massive and
indiscriminate attacks perpetrated in densely populated
areas where, in an attempt to achieve the elimination
of one or two strategic targets, dozens of deaths can
be caused as a result of so-called collateral damage,
primarily affecting women and children.

In recent months, international public opinion has
watched in horror as densely populated cities in Syria
have come under heavy bombing by the armed forces
of that country. In turn, explosive attacks supposedly
carried out by elements of the opposition have also caused
civilian victims. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/376) speaks volumes on that point. More than
9,000 civilians have lost their lives as a result of the
excessive use of force by Syrian security forces. We have
also been informed of summary executions and torture.
Once again, my Government appeals to the Syrian
Government, which bears the primary responsibility for
upholding the safety of the peoples of its country, and
also calls upon the forces of the opposition to engage
in dialogue and political negotiation in order to bring
peace, security and progress to the noble Syrian people.
In that regard, the Government of Chile reaffirms its
support for the six-point plan of the Joint Special Envoy
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States on
Syria, Mr. Kofi Annan.

In the twenty-first century, we have witnessed the
development of a whole range of new technologies,
including in the sphere of war. Among those new areas
of progress are the so-called unmanned aerial vehicles,
or drones. According to the Secretary-General's report,
access to that form of technology is growing daily and
to date it has caused hundreds of civilian victims. No
matter how sophisticated that technology may be, it
undoubtedly jeopardizes the principle of distinction
between combatant and non-combatant, as well as the
principle of proportionality.

In that regard, my delegation supports the statement
made by the Secretary-General in his report where he
urges relevant Member States

"to be more transparent about the circumstances
in which drones are used and to take all necessary
precautions to ensure that attacks involving
drones comply with applicable international
law."(S/20]2/3 76, para. 17)

The Secretary-General aptly refers to the security
of journalists and human rights defenders, two groups
that have proven to be fundamental in order to ensure
that the international community is kept abreast of
what is really occurring in a conflict area, and for
the promotion and protection of human rights. My
country underlines the need for States and parties to a
conflict to provide due protection and prevent attacks
perpetrated against those groups, and to bring to justice
those responsible for such attacks.

Chile, a member of the Human Rights Council,
supports the commissions of inquiry that have been
established by the Human Rights Council in the cases
of Cote d'Ivoire, Libya and Syria, as we believe that
such situations require independent and impartial
investigations in order to ensure that the perpetrators
of violations of international law and international
humanitarian law are brought to justice.

Chile commends the measures that have been
adopted by the Security Council for the protection of
civilians, either by explicitly incorporating them into
the mandates given to peacekeeping operations or, in
particularly serious situations, as was the case of Libya
in the past year, through resolutions 1970 (2011) and
1973 (2011), the first of which condemns violence
against civilians and the second authorizes the adoption
of measures for the protection of civilians. However, that
case highlights the need to ensure that the application
of that principle be provided in an appropriate manner
without causing still greater harm to the civilians whom
we are seeking to spare.

In that regard, my Government recognizes the
need to establish certain common criteria for the
implementation of the authorization of the use of force
on the part of the Security Council, either through the
implementation of the principle of the protection of
civilians or the implementation of the principle of the
responsibility to protect or another principle. It also
underscores the usefulness of the criteria contained
under the responsibility to protect that were presented
by Brazil to the Council on 9 November 2011, during a
debate on this same topic (see S/PV.6650).
In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
recommendations of the Secretary-General provide
a reasonable and positive guide for the protection of
civilians in the case ofconflict and to ensure compliance
with international humanitarian law and the protection
of human rights.

