Mr. Duval (Canada) (interpretation from French): We
congratulate you, Sir, on convening this meeting on the
maintenance of peace and security and post-conflict peace-
building. Too often, those two elements have been viewed
as separate processes, while in fact they should be viewed
as complementary parts of an integrated response to
conflict. If we want to contribute to building lasting peace,
the actions we take in this area will need to be better
planned and coordinated.

In 1996 Canada launched a peace-building initiative in
order to support local efforts to build lasting peace in areas
of affected by conflicts. The objective is to support and
supplement peacekeeping efforts through active diplomacy,
by building coalitions with governmental and non-
governmental partners, and by providing carefully targeted
funding for innovative peace-building activities.

The implementation of this peace-building initiative
has taught us that, to be truly effective, peace-building
activities must address the security of individuals, including
that of women and children. In the wake of conflicts,
people need to be assured of their safety and well-being,
particularly when civilians have been deliberately targeted.
People need to be given a basis upon which to overcome
apathy, to rebuild their lives and to regain hope for the
future.

It goes without saying that not all the elements of
post-conflict peace-building are the exclusive province of
the Security Council. Nonetheless, the Security Council has
a crucial role to play in ensuring that peacekeeping
mandates anticipate, to the extent possible, the requirements
of post-conflict peace-building and reconstruction. As
appropriate, the Council mandates should incorporate
provisions: to address the devastating impact of anti-
personnel landmines on post-conflict reconstruction
activities; for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of combatants, including child soldiers; and to
counteract the destabilizing effect of the proliferation of
small arms.

The broader United Nations system must also be
engaged in post-conflict peace-building activities if we hope
to eliminate the deep-rooted - often historical and
structural - causes of conflict. Without such an
engagement, lasting peace will remain elusive. Further,
other United Nations agencies and programmes, as well
as the international financial institutions, the regional
development organizations, bilateral aid programmes,
international non-governmental organizations and the
private sector have a role to play in rebuilding the
economies and social structures of the affected countries
and in supporting and nurturing a sustainable and lasting
peace. Coordination is the crucial ingredient if we want
all these efforts to be mutually reinforcing. And we also
agree with the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, who said earlier in this debate that the Security
Council must find ways to ensure that its political
objectives and the financial recovery packages put in
place by the international financial institutions
complement one another. Otherwise we risk losing the
gains that have been achieved, often at considerable
human and financial cost, through what have come to be
called classic peacekeeping operations.

Nonetheless, the countries emerging from conflicts
retain the principal responsibility for providing for
reconstruction and for reconciliation within their societies.
If their citizens are not engaged in the effort, it is not a
legitimate peace-building process.

The Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
can play a pivotal role in building lasting peace by
encouraging effective collaboration among the various
stakeholders in a given country. We commend the
practical and relevant recommendations developed by the
forum on the Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General, organized in July 1998 by the programme for
international cooperation and conflict resolution of the
Norwegian Institute for Applied Social Science. We draw
particular attention to the recommendations that
emphasize the importance of broad cooperation among
institutions in order to enhance both the moral authority
and the effectiveness of the Special Representatives. On
questions involving a single country and on trans-border
security questions, Special Representatives can encourage
cooperation among the organizations and donors so as to
better address the needs of countries emerging from
conflicts. The United Nations Peace-Building Support
Office in Liberia, headed by the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, Mr. Felix Downes-Thomas, is a
model to be emulated. We also fully support the Kenyan
proposal, made earlier in this debate, that peace-building
support structures should be established so as to provide
effective coordination.

 

Lasting peace must also address the fundamental
human rights of conflict victims. The United Nations needs
to support local efforts to overcome the culture of impunity
which all too often characterizes conflicts and which for too
long has blocked the observance of the rights of
individuals. For this reason Canada has steadfastly
supported the establishment of a permanent International
Criminal Court. Until the Court begins work, the Council
must continue to give its full support to the ad hoc
tribunals.

Peace and the maintenance of peace are the Security
Council's fundamental responsibilities. We believe that the
Council can, and must, serve as the catalyst for the
international community's efforts to deal with post-conflict
issues and to build genuine and lasting peace. Success
requires the engagement of local actors together with
international support that is carefully planned, coordinated,
multidisciplinary and adapted to the needs of the countries
emerging from conflicts. The Security Council cannot
achieve this on its own. Just as surely, success in post-
conflict peace-building cannot be achieved in the absence
of the timely, full and active engagement of the Council.

