Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania):
Permit me at the outset to express my delegation's
delight at seeing Jamaica presiding over yet another
open debate of the Security Council on a sensitive
matter critical to the well-being of children and to
peace and security. The fact that you, Madam
President, are also chairing the preparatory committee
for the 10-year review of the World Summit for
Children makes this occasion a particularly propitious
one. My delegation is convinced that the outcome of
these deliberations will impact positively on the
outcome of the 10-year review of the Children's
Summit.

This is the third consecutive year that the
Security Council has held an open meeting on children
and armed conflict. We are gratified to note that the
Security Council has kept the children's agenda alive
year after year. At last year's open meeting on this
agenda item the Council adopted resolution 1261
(1999), which gave the Security Council the mandate
to continue to deliberate on the matter as part of its
agenda, given the relevance of this issue to
international peace and security. As we meet today, the
Council should be able to take stock of the
commitments made in that resolution and explore what
further initiatives should be taken that will enhance the
security and well-being of child victims of armed
conflict worldwide.

In an ideal world, wars would have been wished
away and the security of all assured. Unfortunately,
however, we have to contend with reality, and as we
speak in this Council wars are being fought in many
parts of the world, and children are not spared. It is
incumbent upon the Council, as the primary organ
responsible for international peace and security, to
devise, advocate and recommend ways through which
the security of children in times of armed conflict will
become a matter of course, and to ensure their well-
being even after the hostilities have ended. The report
(S/2000/712) of the Secretary-General addresses the
plethora of initiatives that are required to deal
comprehensively with children in situations of armed
conflict. We commend the report and support many of
the recommendations in it.

The Convention on the Rights of the Child is by
far the most comprehensive instrument on children's
rights to date. The Convention has been ratified by
almost all Members of the United Nations. It should
therefore be the guiding beacon to all Governments in
adhering to the rights of the child and should pave the
way for the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and all other
relevant protocols. We consider logical the suggestion
that the Council should impose stiff penalties on those
who perpetuate the gap between law and practice by
flouting internationally agreed instruments. Having
ratified the Convention in 1991, my Government is in
the process of putting in place the necessary machinery
for the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention and the Rome Statute. But ratification on
its own will not be sufficient. Ratification needs to be
complemented by concrete action, the most important
element of which is respect for children's rights. In this
connection, my Government has gone so far as to
translate the Convention into Swahili - our national
language - so as to make the Convention known to all
Tanzanians.

The Secretary-General's proposal that
corporations develop voluntary codes of conduct
concerning trade with countries or parties responsible
for gross violations of children's rights is both timely
and necessary. My delegation would go further and
suggest that there be zero tolerance for countries found
to be responsible for such violations. We hope that the
Secretary-General's proposal will be concretized and
accountability measures instituted to deter all those
who deliberately harm or target children during armed
conflict. We look forward to the conclusion of the
Council's work in this respect.

Children who have been traumatized by war are
psychologically and, at times, physically, scarred for
life. The numbers quoted in the report of the Secretary-
General compel us to sit up and examine the way we
have been conducting warfare in recent times. Behind
the disturbing statistics there are real people - people
who represent our future. There is a compelling case
for dealing with the situation of girls who have been
victimized by war. It is quite evident from the
Secretary-General's report that in times of war girls are
invariably the most vulnerable group, as they suffer
multiple abuses, such as sexual abuse, including
systematic rape, sexual slavery and, in some cases, the
trauma of trafficking.

Refugee children are the hardest hit because,
apart from being forcibly uprooted from familiar
surroundings, they lose a substantial part of their
childhood, together with their rights. The phenomenon
of HIV/AIDS has added another disturbing dimension
to the situation: girls find themselves infected with the
virus through rape. It goes without saying that the scars
left by such experiences are deep and long-term.
Special arrangements need to be put in place to take
care of such victims if we expect them to become
useful citizens who can contribute meaningfully to
society when they are adults. We are encouraged by the
synergy that we see building up in terms of
partnerships between Governments, the international
community, non-governmental organizations and civil
society. These partnerships need to be commended and
encouraged.

I would be remiss if I did not pay tribute to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
work in the field. It is largely through his reports that
we are now addressing in the Council the issue of
children in armed conflict. We are gratified to note
that, mostly because of the Special Representative's
recommendation, girls in Rwanda can now inherit
farms and other property. This is a significant step,
taking into consideration the fact that it is girls who are
mostly left to take care of their siblings when both
parents have been killed in war, or have had to leave
their homes. The Government of Rwanda should be
commended for taking timely action in response to the
recommendations of the Special Representative. We
urge other countries in similar situations to follow suit.

In the same vein, we commend the Government
of Sierra Leone for establishing the National
Commission for War-affected Children to ensure that
the needs of children and young people are taken fully
into account in priority setting, resource allocation,
programme planning and national policy-making. This
arrangement promises to address, in a coherent and
comprehensive manner, the concerns of children
affected by armed conflict.

In our statement last year, we pointed out that
poverty, among other problems, lies at the root of most
armed conflicts. That truism has not changed in this
new century. Addressing the root causes of poverty is
one of the most conclusive ways of ending the majority
of armed conflicts. It is obvious that the issue of
children and armed conflict is a cross-cutting one, and
therefore any discussion of ending armed conflict
cannot ignore the poverty dimension. It is the hope of
my delegation that these issues will continue to receive
the attention of the Council in a coherent and
coordinated manner with a view to our finding a lasting
solution to them.

I thank you, Madam President, for giving us this
opportunity to address the Council.

