Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Pakistan for organizing this open debate on an
issue that Argentina, as a country that has contributed
troops and police to United Nations operations since
1958, deems of particular importance, We currently
have more than 1,000 personnel participating in the
armed and security forces of seven peacekeeping
operations, four of which are multidimensional.

We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his statement, and we welcome the presence here of the
Foreign Secretary of Pakistan.

Argentina's participation in peace operations
reflects my country's support for the development
of a transparent and democratic collective security
system in the framework of the United Nations,
based on consolidated multilateral mechanisms and
in the service of compliance with international law.
Peacekeeping operations are an essential instrument
of the Organization in complying with its objective of
maintaining international peace and security, which
we believe must be continually improved upon and
strengthened in the future.

Another fundamental reason for our participation
in peace operations stems from the close ties between
peacekeeping and the promotion and protection of
human rights, in particular through the rebuilding of
institutions and the consolidation of democracy and
the rule of law in those countries where increasingly
complex and integrated multidimensional missions are
taking place. We believe that progress in improving
that type of mission with three components - military,
police and civilian - with different but clear and
precise mandates and rules of engagement is one of the
greatest successes ofthe past decade. We must preserve
that and improve upon it.

We welcome the draft resolution, on which we
worked together with other Council members, and
its request that the Secretary-General take account
of the developments achieved in recent years,
while underlining the broad range of peacekeeping
operations existing now, from traditional operations
dedicated primarily to monitoring ceasefires to new,
multidimensional missions that carry out time-bound
peacebuilding tasks.

Argentina supports peacekeeping operations
taking on a multidimensional character when specific
circumstances justify it, as long as their mandates
include support and assistance for Governments of
the countries in which missions are operating. Such
support must include such considerations as assistance
and cooperation to strengthen institutions and social
participation, the holding of free and transparent
elections, the establishment of inclusive political
processes, the development of the rule oflaw, the design
and implementation of effective plans for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, security sector
reform, the effective application of guidelines on the
gender perspective, and measures for the protection
of the civilian population, particularly those under
imminent threat of physical violence, including all
forms of sexual, sexist and gender-based violence.
However, we recognize that the protection of civilians
is a primary responsibility of the host country, as noted
in the draft resolution to be adopted today (S/2013/27),
which also refers to the provisions in this area in
paragraph 16 of resolution 1674 (2006).

Particular attention should be given to the fact
that, as a result of developments over the past decade,
the mandates of new, multidimensional missions can
include-as inthe case ofthe UnitedNations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti freferences to mission support for
national Governments and local human rights groups
in their efforts to promote and protect human rights,
in particular those of women and children. We believe
that such actions would contribute to ending impunity
and ensuring that those responsible for violations of
human rights and of international humanitarian law
are held accountable before justice. Such mandates also
promote the implementation of reliable mechanisms for
monitoring and reporting on human rights situations
in host countries, providing advice and assistance to
national Governments in investigating violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law so as
to ensure that perpetrators do not go unpunished.

I wish to underscore the importance of cooperation
between the United Nations and the International
Criminal Court in the context of peacekeeping
operations, in particular as it relates to the issue of
non-essential contacts with individuals subject to
arrest warrants issued by the Court. For Argentina, that
should be part of the cooperation between the Court and
the United Nations, as provided for in the relationship
agreement between them.

Argentina welcomes the fact that the draft resolution
reaffirms the commitment to address the particular
impact of armed conflicts on women and children,
underlining what is contained in resolution 1325 (2000)
and all subsequent resolutions. We reiterate the need
for the full, equal and effective participation of women
at all stages of peace processes, not only to achieve
the goal of greater gender equality, but also because
today it is clear that women taking a primary role in
preventing and resolving conflicts and in peacebuilding
guarantees better results.

Argentina understands that the actions included in
the current multidimensional-mission mandates must
be in line with the principle ofnational responsibility on
the part of the countries where missions are deployed.

Whatever the character of the peace mission in
question, it is crucial that the populations in countries
where missions are deployed have the assurance and
the evidence that the efforts of the Organization are
designed with the aim of improving their situation and
prospects for the future. It is not a question ofimposing
solutions but rather contributing so that each society, on
the basis of its own experiences and expectations, may
build the democratic foundations on which to achieve
sustainable development and pave the way towards a
just, stable and lasting peace.

We recognize that peacekeeping operations
increasingly depend on the possibility of deploying
high-level specialized personnel, especially for specific
police and civilian tasks, such as experts in the rule
of law, human rights, and security sector reform. We
underscore that the draft resolution that we will vote on
today calls on national Governments and international
organizations to put to use and increase their capacities
for cooperation in post-conflict peacebuilding. We have
noted as a positive trend in this regard the important
potential of innovation in technical cooperation and in
strengthening South-South cooperation.

Aware that peace missions are today the most
visible face of the United Nations, and aware of the new
challenges posed by multidimensional missions, the
Organization and each of its Member States have the
responsibility to step up continuous training for mission
staff in the areas of human rights and international
humanitarian law so that, as in the case of our country,
those who participate in missions can continue to play
an impeccable role in those areas.

Argentina believes that the future of peacekeeping
operations depends on their having clear and adequately
financed mandates. We need to continue relying on
consensus in the General Assembly so that the efforts
oftroop- and police-contributing countries are met with
an analogous commitment from those countries with
greatest financial responsibilities. This is not merely
a budgetary question but a political issue that affects
the work and the credibility of the Organization in an
area as important as peacekeeping, in particular when
we compare the relatively limited budget of $8 billion
available for all peacekeeping operations with the
enormity of worldwide military spending.

Finally, Argentina is pleased to be a sponsor of the
draft resolution. We do so paying tribute to the personnel
of peacekeeping operations who have lost their lives
over the past 65 years, including 26 Argentines, for
their inestimable contribution to peace, development
and the well-being of all of our peoples.

We are convinced that it must be made clear
for global public opinion that multidimensional
peacekeeping operations are not war by another name,
but a strategic instrument in the service of our peoples,
offering assistance and cooperation in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.

