Mr. Merirnee (France) (interpretation from French):
France has just supported the resolution concerning the
detention of Rwandese suspects. It has done so because
it intends to assist in the process of national
reconciliation, democratization and the establishment of
the rule of law in Rwanda. Trying criminals that have
taken part in acts of genocide undoubtedly has a role to
play in this process. By the same token, we think that
everything should be done to discourage acts of
intimidation against the refugees now living in camps
outside Rwandese territory who wish to return to their
country. The text we have just adopted might be useful
inasmuch as it constitutes a political message to all States
and, in particular, those neighbouring Rwanda, that they
should consider detaining those who have committed
genocide and other individuals who carry out criminal
acts in and around the camps.

Nevertheless, my delegation cannot hide the fact that
adopting a resolution was never, in its view, the right way
to send such a message. The priority, to our mind, is that
the International Tribunal should start work as soon as
possible, that is, now that the location of its seat has been
chosen, the judges should be elected and should start
work. When this is done and the rules of procedure have
been adopted, it will be possible for all States that need
to do so to adopt the necessary domestic legislation to

 

enable them to cooperate fully with the Tribunal. From that
moment on, the arrest and detention of those suspected of
committing acts of genocide and serious violations of
international humanitarian law will be possible, at least in
most cases. We should not close our eyes to the fact that
until that time such measures are quite simply impossible
in law in many States.

That is why a resolution under Chapter VII requiring
all States immediately to detain the suspects they have in
their territory would in our view have been absolutely out
of the question.

The most appropriate legal formula would have been
a presidential statement calling for the Tribunal to start
work soon and for States to take any measures that might
be needed to adapt their criminal law and only then
requesting States to make the necessary arrests and detain
people.

Nevertheless, a presidential statement would have
presupposed a consensus among members of the Council
and, despite our efforts, it has not been possible to achieve
one. In these circumstances, rather than risking paralysis,
we took pains to make acceptable the draft resolution that
was available to us.

Our efforts have helped develop a text that, in its final
version, makes no mention of Chapter VII of the Charter,
addresses requests to States that are not binding in nature
and specifies that any detentions will be effected in
accordance with their national law - which, in our view,
means that only those States that have domestic legislation
enabling them to act along the requested lines will be able
to do so, as the resolution cannot serve by itself alone as a
legal basis for arresting anyone. Also, the two categories of
acts - those that fall within the competence of the
Tribunal and others, i.e., serious acts of violence in the
camps - are clearly distinguished in the text and treated
separately. This is also important, since there must be no
confusion about this point.

This text is, then, in our view, not only an acceptable
but a positive one in that it can and must be understood as
a call to proceed to detentions that applies only to those
States that have the necessary legislation to be able to do so
legally in the case of alleged perpetrators of acts falling
within the competence of the International Tribunal.

By limiting instances of impunity, the resolution we
have just adopted also contributes towards the return of the
rule of law in Rwanda, and this we welcome.

Furthermore, the international community is
following very closely any initiatives taken by the
Security Council in the field of international criminal law
now that thought is being given as to what tomorrow's
international legal institutions might look like. We should
therefore be vigilant and see to it that respect for
individual freedoms in criminal legal proceedings is
properly ensured under the decisions recommended by the
Council. My delegation will continue to pay special
attention to this point in the future.

