Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First of all, let me express
our most heartfelt condolences to the people and the
Government of Afghanistan over the recent terrorist
attacks in Kabul and Parwan province. Those attacks
have demonstrated what kind of challenges the people
and the Government of Afghanistan are facing in
their struggle to achieve peace, security and stability
for their own people. They have also demonstrated
how important it is for the Security Council and the
international community to send a strong signal of
support for all the efforts of the Government and the
brave people of Afghanistan on a daily basis. That is
why Poland voted in favour of resolution 2489 (2019).
We are happy that the Security Council united today to
send this very strong signal.

Poland actively participated in the negotiations that
led to be adoption of the new mandate for the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
I wish praise the co-penholders, our colleagues from
the Permanent Missions of Indonesia and Germany,
for the tireless and, ultimately, very successful efforts.
Nevertheless, this document is not perfect.

We would have liked to have seen stronger and
clearer language on the protection of civilians and
on women's empowerment and their profound role in
peace and security. We are disappointed with the lack
of any reference to the role and significance of NATO
and the European Union in Afghanistan. And we are
particularly disappointed because more than 40 Polish
soldiers perished serving the people of Afghanistan
within the NATO-led coalition. We also hoped to
include references to climate change affecting the
security and social situation in Afghanistan.

However, we voted in favour based on our
understanding that the text reflects the compromise
required in this Chamber. We voted in favour because
we managed to achieve our primary goal, which was
to provide UNAMA with a mandate that allows the
Mission and the international community to support the
Afghan people on the path to peace and prosperity. A
technical rollover would, to be certain, not have served
that purpose.

Afghanistan is facing another important challenge
over the coming weekend. The presidential election
elections scheduled for 28 September should prove
that the country's political elite is determined to bring
peace and sustainable development to the people of
Afghanistan. We strongly believe that the election will
be held in a credible, inclusive and transparent manner
with the full and safe participation of women and other
marginalized communities.
By adopting this new resolution on UNAMA's
mandate, the Security Council has proved that we
can all unite and strike a compromise when serious
challenges must be addressed. We believe that in the
future negotiations members of the Security Council
should seek to reach such a compromise without
postponing it to the last minute. But I cannot agree
more with Ambassador Meza-Cuadra: better late than
never. Nevertheless, we should do our best to be more
predictable and renew mandates before the very last
minute, as such an approach would strength trust and
cooperation among Council members.

