Mr. Campbell (Ireland): I am grateful for this
opportunity to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The following associated countries align themselves with
this statement: Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Hungary, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Romania, the Slovak
Republic and Slovenia. Iceland has also aligned itself with
this statement.

Mines and the scale of human destruction which
they cause are an issue on which public concern is
growing around the world. Most recent estimates suggest
that there are up to 110 million unexploded land-mines
spread in almost 70 countries around the world. More
alarming still is the number of new mines being laid
every year: between 2 and 5 million. Even where peace-
keeping operations are in force, parties to the conflict
continue to lay mines, thereby increasing the risk to
peace-keeping personnel, for whom mines often constitute
the most significant danger. The human scale of the
destruction is horrific, with, at times, more than 800
people, mostly civilians, being killed each month and
thousands more being maimed.

The European Union welcomes the decision by the
Security Council to hold an open debate to consider the
important issue of demining with particular reference to
United Nations peace-keeping operations. The human and
material costs associated with land-mines are a matter of
increasing international concern. The subject is under
ongoing consideration in the General Assembly. Given the
responsibility of the Security Council for peace-keeping
operations, debate here is timely on ways to deal more
effectively with these problems in the context of
peace-keeping operations and their mandates, which are
of special concern to members of the Council and all
troop contributors.

 

The problem of land-mines has a threefold dimension:
it is a grave humanitarian problem; it is and must be a
disarmament priority; it is also a development problem.
Only by tackling the problem in all its dimensions can the
international community and the United Nations take
decisive steps to address the terrible scourge of the
indiscriminate use of land-mines.

The States members of the European Union are
collectively the largest contributor to peace-keeping
operations in terms of personnel, as well as the largest
contributor to the overall budget of peace-keeping
operations. Members of the Union have participated in
operations over the past 10 years in which the removal of
land-mines and other types of mines have derived solely
from the specific nature of the peace-keeping operation.

It is valuable to consider the degree to which mine
clearance activities have been adequately addressed in
peace-keeping mandates. A particular concern is that the
enormity of the mine clearance task and the costs attached
to it have often resulted in the issue being inadequately
addressed even where the seriousness and scale of the
problem were well known to the United Nations from the
outset. The case of Cambodia provides just one example of
this.

We welcome therefore the increased importance which
the relevance of demining in peace-keeping operations is
being given within the United Nations Secretariat, and we
strongly encourage the efforts being made to improve
coordination between the relevant departments in this
regard. Effective and timely coordination must be assured
between the Department of Peace-keeping Operations
(DPKO) and the Department of Humanitarian Affairs
(DHA). Other relevant departments and agencies of the
United Nations should also be closely involved. We also
attach importance to this coordination being fully reflected
in the field structures through the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General. Due regard should be given to the
long-term responsibilities of DHA in demining activities.

Other steps should also be considered. These could
include ensuring that when a peace-keeping mandate is
being prepared, the responsibilities for mine clearance
programmes of DPKO, DHA and the parties to the conflict
are clearly defined, with more attention being given to
timetables and the allocation of specific tasks from the very
conception of the operation. It is important that the level of
financing likely to be required is taken into account at the
start of the operation.

Due care should be taken in establishing the
delineation within the United Nations system of
responsibilities. This applies to the establishment of mine
clearance priorities. This would be essential in responding
to the need to open or establish vital infrastructure,
thereby enabling the early resettlement of refugees and
the recommencement of the process of economic
rehabilitation and regeneration.

It also applies to the implementation of mine
awareness programmes at the local level, and it applies to
the creation of in-country mine clearance training
programmes. United Nations experience in mine clearance
activities in many afflicted areas has shown that
development of an indigenous demining capacity is the
most successful way to tackle large scale mine clearance
operations. The first step in this process is the production
of a national de-mining plan and an organizational
structure to put it into effect. Schools can then be
established to train local field staff in standardized mine
clearance, survey, communications and paramedical skills,
and to provide a source of feedback on local problems so
that techniques can be improved.

The European Union will study with interest the
views which will be put forward by other speakers at
today's important meeting. Where appropriate, we will
support initiatives which will lead to a more effective
integration of mine-clearance activities into the mandates
of peace-keeping operations. Our objective should be to
ensure that there is as much clarity and precision as
possible given to the respective roles and functions of the
various agencies of the United Nations system. The ideas
that emerge from this debate could be further developed
in the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations.

The aftermath of mine deployment must continue to
be given the utmost importance. Assistance in mine
clearance and efficient and effective demining
programmes, including the establishment of national
mine-clearance capacities by afflicted countries, are issues
to which the international community is devoting very
significant human and financial resources. But much more
remains to be done.

It should not be forgotten that the primary
responsibility for demining lies with the parties
responsible for the laying of the mines. These are, of
course, not always in a position to honour this obligation.
The extent to which the United Nations will have to bear
responsibility must depend on the capacity of the parties
to take this obligation upon themselves.

 

The European Union has been to the fore in initiatives
in this matter. The European Union Joint Action on Anti-
Personnel Land-Mines, adopted in May 1995, contained
important elements on assistance in mine clearance. In
addition, for the past three years we have introduced a
resolution on assistance in mine clearance to the General
Assembly. Last year's resolution was sponsored by 56
Member States and, like those of previous years, was
adopted by consensus. The resolution sets out in clear and
unambiguous terms the range of political and practical steps
to be taken by the international community, but especially
by afflicted countries, to carry out mine-clearance
operations.

The European Union and its member States have
contributed significantly to mine-clearance efforts. In
particular, they have already contributed $9 million to the
Voluntary Trust Fund established by the Secretary-
General - by far the largest contribution. To this can be
added the $80 million spent over the last four years on
clearance projects, often as part of the Union's wider
development, rehabilitation and humanitarian programmes
in which a clear and beneficial working relationship has
been established with the appropriate United Nations
agencies. Most recently, the European Union has funded
mine-clearance operations directly or with non-
governmental organizations in Afghanistan, Cambodia,
Angola and Mozambique. The Union and its member States
are playing a major role in the military and civilian
implementation of the Peace Accords in the former
Yugoslavia. The Council of Ministers of the Union has
adopted a decision to contribute $4.6 million to finance the
work of the United Nations Mine Action Centre in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Croatia. Also, the Western European
Union is considering the contribution it can make to
demining.

The first and foremost need is that of prevention -
the elimination of anti-personnel land-mines through a
complete ban worldwide.

The European Union draws some hope from the
increased resolve being shown by the international
community to seek solutions for the detection and ultimate
destruction of land-mines. The recent Conference on Mine
Clearance Technology, hosted by the Government of
Denmark, with the joint support of the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of Peace-keeping
Operations, has shown that the development and use of
new, specialized equipment which will considerably
enhance the mine clearance technology of mine affected
countries is not far off.

The European Union seeks the broadest possible
support in all relevant forums, including the upcoming
session of the General Assembly, for the very positive
recommendations of the Conference on Mine Clearance
Technology, especially regarding the elaboration of
international standards for humanitarian mine-clearance
operations. Similarly, the European Union urges
Governments, non-governmental organizations and the
private sector to cooperate in the development and
application of appropriate technology for the low-cost,
effective and safe clearance of land-mines.

The eradication of land-mines has now emerged as
an international priority. The European Union will
continue to play its full role in ensuring that every
opportunity is taken to combat and end the indiscriminate
use and spread throughout the world of anti-personnel
land-mines and to contribute to solving the problems
already caused by these devices.

