Mrs. Chaimongkol (Thailand): On behalf of the
Government and the people of Thailand, I wish to
warmly congratulate the delegation of Uganda upon its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July. I would like also, Sir, to express
our sincere appreciation for your leadership in
convening this timely Security Council debate on the
very important issue of post-conflict peacebuilding.

Like other delegations that took the floor earlier,
the Government of Thailand shares the commitment of
the international community to this critical issue and
stands ready to work with partners to advance the
agenda for the benefit of people on the ground. In this
connection, my delegation would like to take this
opportunity to share our views on the issue with the
Council.

First, Thailand welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304) and would like to
thank the Peacebuilding Support Office for its
commendable work. We agree with the emphasis of the
report on early action and national ownership in the
peacebuilding process. The report highlights critical
gaps in peacebuilding efforts and provides useful
recommendations on ways and means to strengthen the
United Nations response as well as international
cooperation on this matter.

Secondly, Thailand supports the strengthening of
United Nations leadership and coordination on
peacebuilding. As the largest intergovernmental
organization, with specialized agencies spanning a
comprehensive set of issues and a close partnership
with a variety of civil society organizations on the
ground, the United Nations is, we believe, in a unique
position to bring all relevant actors on board to ensure
more effective coordination and a more coherent
response at both the policy level and on the ground in
support of the priorities and strategies of all countries
concerned. With a common vision and a coherent
coordination mechanism among the United Nations
agencies, donors and other relevant actors, country-
specific needs and priorities would have a better
chance of being fulfilled and limited resources would
be better utilized.

Thirdly, Thailand is of the view that security and
economic challenges must be addressed simultaneously
and given equal weight when priorities for
peacebuilding are being determined. Security and
development are interconnected and cannot be tackled
in isolation. It is important to keep in mind that there is
no one-size-fits-all solution or formula for rebuilding a
society that has undergone conflict. Every situation is
unique and the particular dynamics of each case, as
well as the competing demands and interests of all
parties concerned in a given society, should be taken
fully into account when setting a country's priorities
and strategies. In other words, the process must be
bottom-up to be durable.

Fourthly, to promote national ownership and
sustainable peace in the long run, Thailand believes
that local expertise and resources should be fully
mobilized, while the country's resources management
capability should also be strengthened. When
international experts are called on to deliver advice and
services on the ground, geographical balance and
representation should be taken into consideration. And
at the start of a peacebuilding process, the relevant
actors should have an end goal in sight. It is important
to stress that peacebuilding is not a perpetual process,
but a supportive beginning to sustainable peace and
development.

Fifthly, Thailand believes that regional actors can
significantly influence the peace process and that
engagement with such key players in peacebuilding
efforts is indispensable. Therefore, we encourage
closer and more systematic consultations, as well as
sharing of experience, between the United Nations and
relevant regional partners throughout the peacebuilding
process, from the very outset.

We also recognize the potentially positive
contribution of South-South cooperation and trilateral
partnerships in assisting countries emerging from
conflict, bearing in mind the comparative advantage of
the sharing of experience between developing countries
or those with similar social, cultural or political
structures, with the support of the donor community.

Sixthly, Thailand strongly supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the Security Council
should proactively consider how to more actively
utilize the advice of the Peacebuilding Commission in
its consideration of post-conflict situations. We also
support the Secretary-General in his view that, for
countries on the Security Council's agenda, the
respective roles of the Council and the Commission
need to be seen as complementary and parallel, rather
than sequenced in a manner that could diminish the
Commission's role during earlier phases where it could
add significant value.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Thailand's firm
commitment to peacebuilding and our strong support
for a holistic approach to the issue of peace and
security. We believe that in the present age of
globalization and increasing interdependence, it is
imperative to address conflicts comprehensively -
both upstream and downstream. Conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding should always be
looked at in their totality. We are committed to
supporting the work of the United Nations in this
regard. We look forward to constructive consultations
leading to the review of the arrangements of the
Peacebuilding Commission in 2010, with the goal of
strengthening its contribution to the effects of
peacebuilding.

