Mr. Tayel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, whose tireless
efforts are facilitating the Middle East peace process,
containing the deteriorating humanitarian situation in
Gaza and fostering Palestinian reconciliation efforts.

The Palestinian cause has existed since the
creation of the Security Council. We have followed
all developments concerning the issue, and we have
witnessed a decline in the international community's
ambition to reach a just solution to end the occupation
of Palestinian and Arab territories and restore the
Palestinian people's inalienable rights, including their
right to live in dignity in an independent State, as other
peoples of the world do.

Let me reaffirm here that the means of achieving a
just and lasting solution to this question is well known
to all. Over the past 70 years, we have held debates,
adopted resolutions and concluded agreements that
have all led to one clear-cut result in responding to the
aspirations of these peoples and addressing the issue
of Jerusalem, namely, the two-State solution based on
the 1967 borders. Contrary to what some may believe,
such resolutions and agreements have rarely been
implemented, due to a lack of genuine political will.
Transition periods have led to crises and palliative
temporary measures that have clouded the political
process. I repeat, that is not due to shortcomings in
international law; rather, it is due to a lax attitude in the
implementation of agreements and resolutions.

As we have always said, we are not trying to impose
solutions on the parties. That is not our intention and
would be illogical. Neither are we rehashing theoretical
positions. However, we believe that the issue must be
settled with immediate action. Over the past decade,
we have witnessed the ongoing deterioration of the
situation on the ground. That reality will not change
unless international law is applied.

We have spoken of the Arab Peace Initiative,
which continues to be ignored by the authors of various
resolutions, despite the fact that it clearly answers many
questions and provides realistic solutions, in accordance
with international law and Council resolutions, while
also responding to the realities of the Palestinian and
Israeli peoples and their aspirations.

I therefore call on the international community
to avoid political speculation, which is prone to bias,
and to take the Arab Peace Initiative seriously, as it
demonstrates flexibility. I am convinced that, if the
parties demonstrate genuine political will, the Initiative
will accommodate the aspirations ofthe Palestinian and
Israeli peoples and, indeed, all the peoples ofthe region.

