Mr. Valle (Brazil): I would like to start by
thanking and congratulating Ambassador Mufioz for
his comprehensive presentation of the first quarterly
report on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al
Qaeda and the Taliban, as foreseen in resolution 1526
(2004), which was adopted in January. As has been
pointed out, resolution 1526 (2004) brought changes to
the work and structure of the Committee that resulted
in a more demanding conceptual and substantive
framework for its activities, with particular effect with
respect to the newly established Monitoring Team. The
Committee and the Monitoring Team are well into the
process of taking the procedural measures to capacitate
them to fulfil the new functions entrusted to them.

The establishment of direct contact with Member
States is a very valuable asset in the work of the
Committee. In this regard, I am pleased to refer to
three different positive developments resulting from
the adoption of resolution 1526 (2004), as registered in
today's briefing.

The first is the increase in the submission of
reports by Member States, pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 1455 (2003), represented by the 33
additional reports, and the submission of letters from
15 other Member States in justification of their
inability to submit reports as requested. Even if those
letters do not constitute compliance with the reporting
requisite, they allow for the establishment of important
direct channels of communication with the Member
States in question.

The second positive development is the direct
contacts being conducted by members of the
Monitoring Team. Through those contacts, not only
will the Team be more capable of improving its
analytical capacity, but it will also be able to increase
the level of cooperation extended to States that
encounter difficulties in implementing the provisions
relevant to combating the Taliban and the Al Qaeda
network.

Finally, the useful visits by the Chairman of the
Committee to specific countries and regions, as
encouraged by resolution 1526 (2004), also constitute a
key element, as they increase the awareness of our
work directly with the governmental authorities
involved in the combat of terrorism and allow the
Committee, through the Chairman's reports, to benefit
from the feedback of people with direct experience in
this field.

Terrorism continues to be a major threat to
international peace and security. The international
community is, indeed, aware of that challenge, as
reflected in the work of the Security Council
throughout this year. In the course of a few months, the
Council has reinforced the Committee with resolution
1526 (2004), restructured the Counter-Terrorism
Committee with resolution 1535 (2004) - which
created the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate - and approved resolution 1540 (2004) on
non-State actors and weapons of mass destruction,
which also contemplates the creation of a committee.
The parallel establishment of structures to capacitate
all three new or restructured committees to perform
their functions creates a unique opportunity, which
should not be missed, to ensure synergy and
complementarity.

I would like to conclude by expressing the
recognition of the Brazilian delegation for the tireless
commitment and dedication of Ambassador Mufioz and
his team to the advancement of the work of the
Committee, the efforts of the Monitoring Team -
which is fulfilling the roles entrusted to it by resolution
1526 (2004) - and the valuable support extended by
the Secretariat to the work of both the Committee and
the Monitoring Team.

