Mrs. Telalian (Greece): Greece, too, would like
to thank the Presidents and the Prosecutors of the two
ad hoc tribunals - the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) - for their detailed
reports to the Security Council and their hard work and
dedication in challenging impunity and strengthening
the principles of international justice.

Greece welcomes the significant progress made
by both Tribunals during the past six months towards
the implementation of their completion strategies under
Security Council resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534
(2004).

We note with satisfaction the measures taken by
the ICTY to speed up trials and appeals and to increase
efficiency so as to complete its work within the time-
frame set out in the completion strategy. The
possibility of adding a fourth courtroom in order to
facilitate a seventh trial is a positive measure in that
direction that should be supported.

We are encouraged by the fact that the number of
indictees and fugitives who have appeared before the
Tribunal has increased considerably during this period.
However, this development, as the President of the
Tribunal has indicated, will have an impact on the
completion strategy, as trials will have to run into
2009.

We believe that the Security Council should give
serious consideration to this factor so as to assess the
need to adjust the time-frame mentioned earlier in
order to facilitate the accomplishment of the Tribunal's
mandate.

The inauguration in Sarajevo on 9 March this
year of the War Crimes Chamber was a major event.
We took note with great interest of the fact that this
Chamber has already started its work as regards the
prosecution of local crimes. In our View, the referral of
cases involving lower- and intermediate-ranking
officials from the ICTY to national courts of the former
Yugoslavia and, more specifically, to the Sarajevo War
Crimes Chamber, pursuant to rule 11 bis of the
Tribunal's rules of procedure and evidence, will
contribute to the consolidation of justice, reconciliation
and peace in the region.

We took note with great interest of the fact that
one case has already been transferred to the Sarajevo
Chamber under that procedure. It is important to note
that the Referral Bench, in deciding to refer this case to
the domestic authorities, reviewed the existence of
certain conditions, such as the compatibility of the
laws of those authorities - those of Bosnia and
Herzegovina - with the Tribunal's Statute, and the
prospects for the accused to receive a fair trial and for
his human rights to be respected, including the non-
imposition of the death penalty.

With respect to the International Tribunal for
Rwanda, we welcome the significant progress and the
efforts it has made to increase its efficiency so as to
implement the completion strategy. We also note with
interest the addition of a fourth courtroom, which will
help to speed up trials.

The President of the Tribunal, Mr. Mose, has
indicated that, in the coming months, as the workload
of the Trial Chambers decreases, a drastic increase in
the work of the Appeals Chamber is anticipated. He
also emphasized that, at some stage, there will be a
need for more judges in the Appeals Chamber. We
believe that the Council should seriously consider
those concerns, with a View to facilitating the effective
functioning of that Tribunal.

One of the most serious obstacles preventing the
Tribunals from keeping their completion strategy on
course is the fact that some indictees remain at large.
We firmly believe that the Tribunals will not be able to
accomplish their important task of ending impunity
until the principal indictees have been arrested and
transferred to the Hague and Arusha, so that justice can
be done.

In that connection, the full cooperation of all
States with the Tribunals is of great importance. We
welcome the fact that, in some cases, that cooperation
has improved. However, we urge States to make further
efforts in assisting in the arrest and transfer of fugitives
and in the provision of missing documentation and
access to witnesses. Furthermore, we urge all Member
States to meet their financial obligations and to support
the Tribunals in order to enable them to accomplish
their tasks.

As both Tribunals have entered the most critical
and productive stage of their existence, it is important
that the Security Council spare no effort to ensure that
they accomplish their missions and fulfil their
mandates in the most effective way possible, so as to
contribute to the accomplishment of international
justice.

