Mr. Liden: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to participate in today's meeting on Burundi in my
capacity as the Chair of the Burundi country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. The
close collaboration between the Security Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission is essential. Not least is
that so in the case of Burundi, a country that now
seems to be on the right track towards the
consolidation of peace, but that is situated in a very
volatile region and needs the sustained support of the
international community to prevent it from relapsing
into armed conflict.
The conflict in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo - massacres and ethnic tension - can
easily spill over into neighbouring countries with
similar experiences of the past. At the same time, peace
and stability in Burundi are the key building block for
peace and stability in the region as a whole.

The implementation of the Comprehensive
Ceasefire Agreement is a first crucial step in order for
effective peacebuilding to take place in Burundi. In late
October, I had the opportunity to visit Burundi to
discuss with Burundians their priorities among the many
priorities for peacebuilding. There was no doubt -
peace and security were referred to as the number one
priority. For example, I met with women's groups on
the outskirts of Bujumbura who had suffered badly
from war and lack of security, and now struggled to
make a decent living for themselves and their children.
Their first wish was for the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement between the Government of Burundi and
the Parti pour la Liberation du Peuple Hutu-Forces
Nationales de Liberation (Palipehutu-FNL) to be fully
implemented. They needed security to move on with
their lives and to believe in the future, so to hear about
the breakthrough last week in the talks between the
Government and the Palipehutu-FNL was indeed very
good news.

We commend the leaders of the Regional Peace
Initiative and the South African Facilitator for having
brought about that breakthrough. We also congratulate
the Government of Burundi and the Palipehutu-FNL on
having shown the necessary flexibility. The declaration
signed last week should bring an end to the conflict,
giving the Palipehutu-FNL the opportunity to enter
political life in Burundi as a political party under a new
name and to be integrated into State institutions.

The agreement is a window of opportunity for
Burundi and for the region. We now need to support
the Burundians to ensure that this time around the
agreement can be fully implemented. If we fail to do so
and allow things to fall apart, the consequences for
Burundi and the region could be devastating. With that
in mind, the African Union and the Regional Initiative
should be encouraged to remain fully engaged and to
continue to play their important role as guarantors of
the peace process for as long as necessary.

The Peacebuilding Commission's Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding in Burundi and the
conclusions of the biannual review of June this year
provide a strong call for the Commission's support for the
peace process and the implementation of the Ceasefire
Agreement. The Commission will hold a country-specific
meeting on Burundi tomorrow. The purpose is to hear
from regional actors, the Burundian Government, the
United Nations and other interested parties about their
most urgent needs with regard to the implementation of
the ceasefire, as well as to call for international
political and financial support to address those needs.

The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) process urgently has to move on, and with speed.
The Peacebuilding Commission has been supportive in
ensuring that there is an immediate World Bank
programme in place and ready to deliver. Further
support needs to be mobilized for other priorities,
including for the process to transform the Palipehutu-
FNL into a political party ready to participate in the
elections of 2010, and for the regional engagement to
remain on the ground.

International involvement, in particular through
the African Union and the Regional Initiative, will
continue to be crucial to ensure that the right
conditions for the implementation of the DDR process
and other aspects of the Ceasefire Agreement are in
place. A sense of security and trust between the parties
will be needed for a successful conclusion of the DDR
process. Mutual trust and confidence in the institutions
of the State will also be necessary to prepare for the
electoral process. It is of utmost importance that the
process that is to culminate in the elections in 2010 be
considered to be free and fair. That will be an
important test for peacebuilding in Burundi. The
Peacebuilding Commission, the United Nations and the
international community must stand ready to support
Burundi in that process.

Peacebuilding in Burundi is a long-term partnership
for peace and development. It requires sustained
resources and capacity, as well as coordination. The
implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement will
provide the conditions needed to move ahead with the
priorities of the Peacebuilding Commission's Strategic
Framework, which include security, justice and the rule
of law, land reform, socio-economic recovery and
gender issues.

The Commission's biannual review in January
2009 will provide an opportunity to review progress in
those areas and to call for further international support
and attention where needed. Our joint efforts to

consolidate peace in Burundi will lay the foundation
for full-scale implementation of the Government's
poverty reduction strategy for long-term development,
to the benefit of all Burundians.

In conclusion, allow me to commend the
Government of Burundi and all actors involved for
their constructive engagement and their commitment to
peace in Burundi. Let me use this occasion to thank the
United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB)
for cooperating with the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Government so ably in that regard. BINUB is
very important for the Commission and for broader
peacebuilding efforts. Further enhancing the integrated
structure of BINUB and the United Nations country
team, under the continued strategic leadership of the
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General,
will be necessary for effective United Nations support
for peacebuilding in Burundi. The Peacebuilding
Commission in New York will not be able to prove its
relevance without the effective coordination and
involvement of all stakeholders on the ground in
Bujumbura.

