Mr. Sach: As the designated representative of the
Secretary-General on the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board (IAMB), I should like to thank the
Council for giving me the opportunity once again to
brief it on the work of the Board.

In my December 2007 briefing (see S/PV.5808) it
was recalled that the IAMB was established to fulfil
the mandate set forth in resolution 1483 (2003). This
mandate has subsequently been extended under
resolutions 1546 (2004), 1637 (2005), 1723 (2006) and
1790 (2007). Resolution 1790 (2007) also extended the
immunity of the Development Fund for Iraq (DFI) until
31 December 2008.

The Development Fund for Iraq, established
under resolution 1483 (2003), holds the proceeds of
petroleum export sales from Iraq, as well as the
transferred balances from the United Nations oil-for-
food programme and other frozen Iraqi funds. From
inception to 31 December 2007, the IAMB has been
informed that approximately $106.3 billion has been
deposited in the Development Fund for Iraq from the
sale of oil and oil products. The sum of $10.4 billion
has also been deposited with the DFI from the balance
of the oil-for-food funds held under escrow by the
United Nations, and a further $1.5 billion has been
deposited as proceeds from frozen assets.

The IAMB helps to ensure, first, that the DFI is
used in a transparent manner for the benefit of the
people of Iraq and, secondly, that export sales of
petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas from
Iraq are made consistent with prevailing international
best market practices.

The IAMB provides independent and
international oversight of the operations of Iraqi oil
export revenues and of the use of the Fund resources.
Thus the IAMB functions as the audit oversight board
of the DFI and has as its members representatives from
the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development,
the International Monetary Fund, the Government of
Iraq, the United Nations and the World Bank. The
IAMB continues to involve the Iraqi Board of Supreme
Audit (BSA) and the Committee of Financial Experts
(COFE) in its work to ensure continuity.

Since my last briefing to the Council, the IAMB
has met two times, making a total of 23 meetings since
its inception in December 2003. It has approved the
appointment by the Government of Iraq of independent
public accountants as the external auditors. It has
reviewed the periodic audit results and requested and
approved special audits. The results of the work of the
IAMB are available on its website at www.iamb.info.

Under its mandate, in 2007 and 2008 the IAMB
oversaw two audits of the DFI, covering the calendar
years 2006 and 2007. Those audits were conducted by
an international accounting firm, Ernst & Young, and
covered oil export sales, the accounting for the
proceeds from oil export sales, DFI financial
statements and disbursements procedures for DFI
resources, to ensure that funds are used for the
purposes intended.

At its meeting held in May 2008 in Kuwait, the

IAMB received a presentation on the draft audit report

of the DFI. That presentation, which covered the audit

period 1 January to 31 December 2007, is also posted
on the IAMB website.

While highlighting some improvements in
various areas, especially in access to spending
ministries, the report also highlighted again the
previously identified weaknesses in internal controls.
Those weaknesses include incomplete record-keeping
at the Ministry of Finance, the lack of a comprehensive
oil metering system, the sale of oil and oil products
outside of the DFI, incomplete contract information
associated with the United States agencies' contracts
and bartering.

During the May 2008 meeting the IAMB was also
briefed by the auditors on the status of the
implementation of the previously identified
recommendations. Less than a 15 per cent
implementation rate of audit recommendations was
reported with respect to the spending ministries. The
IAMB was concerned at the rate of implementation of
the prior recommendations and urged the BSA, with
the help of the COFE, to set up a concrete plan of
action to ensure the implementation of the
recommendations.

The Iraqi representative to the IAMB, the
President of the BSA and the COFE all briefed the
IAMB throughout 2007 and during the last two
meetings in 2008 on progress in implementing earlier
IAMB recommendations and in strengthening the
overall framework for public financial management in
Iraq.

The IAMB welcomed the progress made in 2007
to strengthen the financial and administrative controls
over the use of DFI resources in the spending
ministries. The IAMB also noted that some progress
had been made with the establishment, in 2007, of an
Iraqi committee to address external audit management
letters in cooperation with the BSA. However, there
continued to be a lack of substantial progress in
internal control matters in Iraq. The IAMB found that
further measures to strengthen the internal control
framework were necessary.

The IAMB recommended, in March 2004, the
expeditious installation of a comprehensive oil
metering system in Iraq in accordance with standard oil
industry practices. Oil metering is a key factor in

achieving financial transparency and accountability
over oil resources in Iraq. While the Government of
Iraq supports oil metering, progress has been slow.
Some metering has been installed at some oil
terminals, but there continues to be no metering in the
oil fields. In its previous reports, the IAMB welcomed
the key steps taken to curtail smuggling. It believes
that a system of metering, as recommended earlier by
the IAMB, would go a long way towards improving
overall controls. At its meeting in Kuwait, the IAMB
was informed orally of the steps being taken to address
the matter. The IAMB continues to View this matter as
urgent, especially in the light of the auditors' report
that showed unreconciled differences related to
production, export sales and internal consumption.

The IAMB continued to be concerned that barter
transactions were not accounted for in the DFI as
required under resolution 1483 (2003). While some
reduction in bartering occurred since 2004, following
the allocation of Iraqi budget funds to import light
petroleum products, the Iraqi State Oil Marketing
Organization continued to undertake bartering in 2007.
The use of barter transactions makes it difficult to
determine whether fair value has been received for
Iraq's oil export revenues. Moreover, as no revenues
are generated from such barter or other in-kind deals
and the notional value of such transactions are not
recorded against the DFI, the IAMB is of the view that
they could be inconsistent with the provisions of
resolution 1483 (2003), which requires that all Iraqi oil
export sales be deposited into the DFI and the United
Nations Compensation Fund. The IAMB reiterated its
concerns that barter transactions have not been
accounted for in the DFI as required by resolution 1483
(2003). All of that notwithstanding, I am pleased to
note that the IAMB was informed that the particular
barter arrangement that had been taking place with a
neighbouring country had ceased as of 31 December
2007.

The results of the audits in 2007 indicate that,
while many efforts are being made, sometimes at great
personal sacrifice, the overall financial system of
controls in place in the spending ministries, in the
United States agencies' handling of outstanding
commitments using DFI resources and in the Iraqi
administration of DFI resources remain deficient
overall, and financial management reforms need to be
pursued further.

At its twenty-third meeting, in May 2008, the
IAMB was provided an update on the status of the
procurement for the 2008 audit of the DFI. Given the
satisfactory work performed by the current auditors,
the representative for Iraq sought the IAMB's approval
for the Government of Iraq to negotiate with the
current auditor, Ernst & Young, for a third term. The
IAMB unanimously approved the recommendation.

I would now like to refer to the previous request,
made at the Security Council's 5808th meeting, for a
briefing in Washington, D.C., of the representatives of
the Council's member States. That matter was put
before the IAMB, and the IAMB reiterated its earlier
position that, as has been the practice, individual
representatives on the Board should brief their
respective organizations in an individual capacity. The
IAMB therefore agreed that such a briefing be done by
the Secretary-General's representative to the Security
Council in New York.

That completes my briefing on the work of the
IAMB. I will be happy to respond to any questions by
members of the Council.

