Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): Let me begin by
expressing Pakistan's condemnation of the dastardly
terrorist act in Abuja. We offer our deepest condolences
and commiseration to the bereaved families, the
Government and people of Nigeria and all members of
our United Nations family.

The Pakistan delegation congratulates you,
Mr. President, on your able steering of the work of the
11-48209

Security Council this month and for convening this
very important open debate today. Your concept paper
(S/20ll/496, annex) has flagged important issues
relevant to the subject and set precise parameters for a
productive debate.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Morocco on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Unlike any other mechanism for maintaining
international peace and security, United Nations
peacekeeping enjoys universal acclaim, cost-
effectiveness and professional precision. An
indispensable tool in the hands of the Organization for
maintaining international peace, peacekeeping offers us
hope amid violence and conflict.

The success of United Nations peacekeeping in
recent years is the fruit of the concerted interplay
between the Member States, with their faith in and
commitment to peacekeeping; the troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), with their provision of specialized
and trained manpower for areas of conflict and war;
and the United Nations Secretariat, with its overall
coordination and field support. Our collective interests
would be best served by building synergy.

The success of United Nations peacekeeping has
raised expectations for maintaining the trajectory of
past achievements in the face of ever-changing
political, operational and security environments.
Consequently, increasingly complex and
multidimensional peacekeeping mandates are being
laid down to address diverse and volatile conflict
situations. At least 13 peacekeeping missions are
currently undertaking complex and multidimensional
peacekeeping mandates, and the number is set to grow.

Complex peacekeeping mandates are now a norm,
not an exception, and implementing them is
challenging, due to at least three underlying factors.
First, they involve important legal questions,
particularly on varying interpretations of the United
Nations Charter, State sovereignty, international
humanitarian law, and so forth. Secondly, the
operational challenges of peacekeeping have been
exacerbated by the prevailing financial and resource
constraints felt by the entire peacekeeping architecture.
Thirdly, an agreed narrative has yet to develop on
achieving a seamless transition from a peacekeeping
environment to an exit phase, focusing on, among other
3
aspects, the settlement of disputes and peacebuilding
strategies.

Pakistan believes that the guiding principle for
meeting those challenges and ensuring the long-term
success of peacekeeping operations must be adherence
to the United Nations Charter and the concept of
collective security. The Charter gives legitimacy to
United Nations peacekeeping. Respect for the Charter
and judicious interpretation of its provisions are
essential for maintaining the credibility and neutrality
of peacekeeping operations. This cannot and must not
be compromised on the altar of political expediency.
Recent events have proved that peace operations
conducted unilaterally or by different coalitions are
poor and costly substitutes for United Nations
peacekeeping.

The question of resource gaps is also a central
challenge for existing and future missions alike.
Despite their scope and extent, United Nations
peacekeeping operations are largely underfunded and
underresourced. In many missions, the scarcity of
troops and vital resources remains a critical issue,
threatening the Organization's ability to operate
effectively and safely. While expenses and
remuneration for other United Nations activities are
adjusted for inflation and cost-of-living fluctuations,
peacekeepers are expected to work at fixed and archaic
rates.

It is no longer sustainable for TCCs to subsidize
United Nations peacekeeping, and the recent report of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
(A/65/ 19) highlights this sustainability factor. In that
regard, the progress made by the Fifth Committee in
the last session will remain a temporary, stop-gap
measure if it is not backed by an institutional
mechanism for regular review of troop costs.

The third major challenge, concerning exit
strategies and seamless transitions to long-term
peacebuilding, also merits close consideration. We
believe that it is essential to dovetail such strategies
with the broader objectives of a peacekeeping mission.
Early investment in national institution-building,
together with the peaceful settlement of underlying
disputes, can only facilitate sustainable peace and
avoid relapses into conflict.

The role of peacekeepers in the early stages of
peacebuilding is crucial, especially in the areas of
combating organized crime, supporting local law
enforcement, medical outreach, epidemic control,
managing refugees and assisting humanitarian relief
efforts. However, the delicate and multidimensional
peacebuilding process requires civil expertise and a
focus on improving local capacity, political dialogue
and institution-building. The Peacebuilding
Commission, with its unique composition, is better
placed to contribute to developing such cross-sectional
synergies.

For clear, realistic and achievable mandates,
greater understanding is required between the sanitized
confines of the Security Council, where mandates are
written, and the dusty fields of the conflict zones,
where those mandates are implemented. It warrants
regular consultations among the Security Council, the
TCCs, and the Secretariat. Such consultations with
TCCs can be held informally and more frequently, not
just within the Council's Working Group on
Peacekeeping.

Greater emphasis on inclusiveness is essential at
all stages of peacekeeping missions, including in the
formulation and review of peacekeeping mandates.
Similarly, the evolution of United Nations
peacekeeping from its traditional form to more
complex mandates is driving the discourse on
peacekeeping reforms, which, like other aspects of
peacekeeping, must also remain transparent and
unpoliticized.

We hope that today's open debate will enrich the
discourse on modern-day peacekeeping and its future
challenges with the objectivity that the subject
deserves.

