Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
I would like to start by conveying my gratitude to
Mr. Wang Yi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of China, for
having organized today's debate. The theme proposed
for discussion today is a very timely one on the eve of
the seventieth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations, and it allows us to critically assess the state of
international relations and discuss ways of overcoming
its accumulated systemic problems.

The Charter of the United Nations is the fruit of the
great victory over Nazism and remains the cornerstone
of the entire international system. Its list of purposes
and principles and the rules internationalt contains
represent a substantial source of international law, the
basis for the code of conduct of States on the world
stafe and the foundation for the ever-growing system of
international agreements and treaties.

Of course the United Nations is not perfect, but
as Dag Hammarskjold said, it was not created to take
humankind to heaven, but to save it from hell. The
Charter of the United Nations set out for the first time
the principles for an operationally viable mechanism for
global governance on the basis of agreement among the
positions ofleading States. In other words, it enshrined
key elements for a polycentric world order. For the
first four decades, the United Nations operated under
difficult conditions of bipolar confrontation. At the
same time, after the end of the Cold War, no objective
reasons remained to prevent the Security Council
from becoming the effective platform for elaborating
and crafting the collective will of the international
community. Unfortunately, the path to implementing
that objective has turned out to be a great deal more
complex and tortuous than it seemed it would be a
quarter of a century ago.

We have before our eyes many examples of
violations of the fundamental principles of the United
Nations, such as the independence and sovereign
equality of States, non-interference in their internal
affairs and the peaceful settlement of disputes. Suffice
it to recall the bombing in Syria, the occupation of Iraq
under obviously false pretences - the consequences of
which continue to take a heavy toll on the population
of that country - and the brazen manipulation of the
Security Council's mandate that led to the destruction
and ongoing chaos in Libya. All of those were the result
of attempts to dominate global affairs, to rule over
everyone everywhere, to use military force unilaterally
and to push and advance singular interests.

Such approaches are in no way in keeping with the
principles on which the United Nations is based, and
ignore the clear and increasing threat of the spread of
hegemonic economic and political might. In the search
for an illusory global dominance, unsavory methods
are employed, including mass pressure on sovereign
States and attempts to impose one's own decisions and
political, economic and ideological standards on them.
For those not wishing to play ball, various methods are
employed, including regime change, as was the case
with the open support for the unconstitutional State
coup in Ukraine a year ago.

Persistent efforts have been undertaken to turn the
Security Council into a body that would rubberstamp
the decisions of the leader, and as that is simply not
working, they are attempting to move the Security
Council away from elaborating policies on major issues
within its competence, namely, the maintenance of
international peace and security. In doing so, the lessons
of the unilateral use of force from the very recent
past are being ignored. Those actions have plunged
the Middle East and North Africa into instability and
chaos and, to a large extent, created a breeding ground
in which extremists thrive.

The sanctions mechanisms established pursuant to
the Charter are the exclusive purview of the Security
Council. Unilateral restrictive measures and attempts
at the extraterritorial use of national legislation are
nothing more than the manifestation of an archaic
way of thinking. They have led to an increase in
confrontations and tensions in international affairs and
complicated the joint quest for solutions to emerging
problems.

An element that is seriously poisoning international
relations is the unfolding war for the use ofinternational
media, the Internet and social networks. I am
convinced that the freedom of expression and thought
is not something that should justify the manipulation
of information, brainwashing and efforts to undermine
States and their policies, or that should be used to fan
the flames of religious enmity.

The time has come to respond to a simple
question: do we want to see the Security Council as
an effective, influential instrument for the maintenance
of international peace and security, or are we prepared
to allow it to become a forum for propagandistic
confrontation. In the latter case, the Council will be
excluded from the search for international solutions.
That will have a negative impact on other international
regional platforms and will further weaken our
prospects for resolving current problems.

We believe there is a need to immediately take
decisive measures to eliminate double standards
from global policy and allow the Security Council
to resume its role as a leading body in the search for
collective solutions based on respect for the cultures
and civilizations of today's world and for democracy in
international relations.

We must all recognize that people have the right to
independently decide on their future without external
interference. In that respect, I propose that we think
about strengthening and adopting relevant provisions set
out in what was adopted in 1970, namely, the Declaration
on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations. In doing so, we
should focus in particular on the fact that support for
unconstitutional coups is unacceptable.

We must reach agreement on how we are going to
achieve, on the basis ofthe Charter, ajoint management
of risks in the context of an increasingly complex
system of international relations. At the beginning
of the 19905, the Secretariat prepared a guide on the
peaceful settlement of disputes between States. Perhaps
the time has now come to update that publication to
take into account the experience that has been gained
since then.

Positive results will be achieved only when
members of the Security Council pool their efforts
to find consensus positions. It is on that basis that
we were able to resolve the main issues surrounding
the elimination of chemical weapons in Syria and to
elaborate measures to counter the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters. A few days ago, upon Russia's
initiative, the Council adopted resolution 2199 (2015),
which is aimed at suppressing the financing of terrorist
groups through the proceeds of the illegal oil trade.
Recent examples in this regard include the deployment
of new peacekeeping presences in Mali and the Central
African Republic. We are now closely tackling another
hotspot issue in Africa: suppressing the terrorist
threat posed by Boko Haram. We expect that useful
recommendations on how to render the United Nations
peacekeeping operations more effective will result
from the Secretary-General's special high-level group.

On the whole, it would be useful to list the global
challenges and threats that can only be effectively
countered jointly. Among the main priorities on that
list is an issue that has become a huge threat, namely,
terrorism, especially in the Middle East and North
Africa and spreading in the direction ofSouthern Africa,
Asia and Europe. Unilateral actions in that respect are
without any great prospect. That much is clear. The
problem must be resolved within the framework of the
United Nations and on the basis of its Charter. We are
against attempts to move the counter-terrorist fight out
of the intergovernmental arena and to enforce plans
of action that have been elaborated in limited formats
upon the international community. I hope that today's
debate will serve as a serious discussion on the future
of our universal Organization as the most important
mechanism for governing international relations today.

