Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank you, Sir, for convening today's meeting.
The Security Council has had a very busy programme
of work this month. It has convened open debates on
the Middle East (see S/PV.7222) and on peacekeeping
operations (see S/PV.7228), and considered hot spot
issues in Syria, Lebanon, the Middle East, the Central
African Republic, Libya, Iraq and Cyprus. It has
adopted resolutions on United Nations cooperation
with regional organizations in peacekeeping (resolution 2167 (2014)), on the humanitarian situation in Syria
(resolution 2165 (2014)), on the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-l7 (resolution 2166 (2014)) and on
the extension of the mandates of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (resolution 2169 (2014))
and the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
(resolution 2168 (2014)).

China highly appreciates the efforts of Rwanda,
as President of the Security Council for this month, in
facilitating the successful conclusion of the Council's
work.

On the matter of Syria, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2165 (2014), which
identified priority areas for Syrian humanitarian rescue
efforts, thereby restoring international consensus on
the Syrian humanitarian situation, and reiterated the
importance of a political settlement in Syria. China
hopes that the parties concerned will maintain close
cooperation, comprehensively and conscientiously
implement resolution 2165 (2014) and previous Security
Council resolutions and presidential statements, and
effectively improve the humanitarian situation in Syria.
In the meantime, the parties concerned should hew to
the overall direction of political settlement by stepping
up efforts to relaunch the Geneva peace talks as soon
as possible and to seek a comprehensive political
settlement of the issue on the basis of the 2012 Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex). They should blaze
a middle path that is consistent with Syria's national
conditions and accommodates the interests of all
parties. China stands ready to play a constructive role
in that regard.

On the issue of Palestine and Israel, the Gaza
conflict has caused massive civilian casualties and
destruction, leading to a severe humanitarian crisis. We
urge all parties to implement an immediate ceasefire.
We condemn all acts of force against innocent civilians.
We urge the parties to stop answering violence with
violence and to implement a sustained ceasefire. China
has consistently held that peace talks represent the only
way to achieve peaceful coexistence between the two
countries. We urge the parties to create the conditions
necessary to a resumption of talks. We appreciate the
efforts of Secretary-General Ban ki-Moon, Egypt and
the other Arab countries, as well as the international
community, to improve the situation. China's special
envoy on the Middle East has also been conducting
shuttle mediation between Israel and Palestine. China
stands ready to work with the international community
to promote a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to
the issue of Palestine in order to end the current crisis
in Gaza as soon as possible.

