Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would add our
voice to those of colleagues around the table who have
thanked the Presidents and Prosecutors of both
Tribunals for their presentations. I would like to join
others in congratulating in particular Judge Patrick
Robinson on his election as President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and extend a welcome to him on
his first appearance before the Security Council.

I would like to begin, if I may, by commending
both Tribunals for their continued efforts to implement
their completion strategies. It is regrettable that the
projected dates for completion of the Tribunals' work
indicate that the 2010 deadline set out in the
completion strategies will not be met. Nevertheless, we

do recognize the hard work and commitment of
Tribunal staff and acknowledge that the slippage in
completion deadlines is in part due to factors outside
their control, such as the late transfer of fugitive
indictees and difficulties in obtaining access to key
evidence.

Therefore, my Government urges both Tribunals
to continue their efforts to complete their work as
speedily as possible, consistent with the interests of
justice. We congratulate them on the measures that they
have taken to reform their internal procedures in order
to expedite their work further, and we encourage them
to explore any possibilities for additional reforms. In
the case of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), we would encourage the Tribunal to
work closely with Rwanda to facilitate the transfer for
national prosecution of lower-level cases.

A number of speakers this morning have referred
to the question of transfer to national jurisdiction. I
would just like to set out the United Kingdom's view
on that subject, which is that it is suitable, whether in
the case of the ICTR or the ICTY, for lower-level
cases. It is absolutely not suitable for the highest-level
fugitives, including Mladic'.

The full and active cooperation of States is
essential to enable the Tribunals to complete their
work. We would like to take this opportunity once
more to remind all States of their obligation to
cooperate with the Tribunals under Security Council
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).

A number of speakers have also referred to the
arrest of Radovan Karadzic. That arrest, together with
the arrest of Zupljanin, was a milestone for the ICTY,
and their capture was the result of the coordinated
efforts of key authorities in Serbia. My Government
applauds this success, and we salute those modernizers
in Serbia who have brought this change about. We also
welcome the Prosecutor's assessment in his report that
Serbia has made substantial progress in cooperation
since the last report. We urge Serbia to step up this
cooperation in the areas that the Prosecutor has
identified, and obviously and in particular, to increase
efforts to locate and capture Ratko Mladic and Goran
Hadzic. I just want to stress that this will mean needing
to ensure that each and every part of the relevant
Serbian bodies are doing their utmost and are tasked to
do their utmost to this end.

Turning to the case of Croatia, we also applaud
the work in 2005 that went into the arrest of one of the
high profile indictees, Gotovina. We recognize that the
majority of requests for assistance have been met, as
the Prosecutor has said, but we do regret that Croatia
has been unable to provide all the documents sought by
the Prosecutor related to the Gotovina trial. We
welcome the fact that, since the report was written, the
Croatian authorities have recently provided additional
material, but it is also true that key documents remain
untraced or unaccounted for. We strongly urge Croatia
to redouble its efforts to meet the Prosecutor's
requirements. Cooperation with the Tribunal is not
only mandated by this Council under its Chapter VII
resolutions, but it is also a key condition for all the
countries of the western Balkans for their successful
integration into the European Union.

Turning to the ICTR fugitives, it is an issue of
concern to us that so many individuals remain at large.
We are disappointed in particular that there has been no
significant progress in tracking the whereabouts of
Felicien Kabuga. We urge Kenya and other States in
the region to cooperate fully with the ICTR's efforts to
secure the arrest and surrender of the fugitive indictees.
It is vital that all remaining fugitive indictees from
both Tribunals be brought to trial.

As we approach the end of the completion
strategies, it is important to focus on preserving the
legacy of the Tribunals for future generations. We
commend the work of the Tribunals and the
international community to strengthen the capacity of
domestic judicial institutions in the regions. A high
priority is to reach agreement on the establishment of a
residual mechanism, which will be necessary to carry
out certain essential functions of the Tribunals in the
post-completion phase. These functions include the
prosecution of remaining indictees, the protection of
witnesses, the enforcement of sentences and the
management of the Tribunals' archives to ensure the
widest possible accessibility.

I would like to join others in thanking Belgium
today for driving this work forward, as Chair of the
Security Council Informal Working Group on
international tribunals. We have made some progress,
but there is much more work to be done. It is important
that we maintain the momentum on this issue with a
View to the adoption of a resolution in the coming
months.

Finally, I would like say for the record that we
associate ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of France on behalf of the European
Union. I would also like to commend those European
Union and NATO forces that have been helping in the
search for the fugitive indictees in the Balkans.

