Mr. Ould Abdallah: At the outset, I would like to
thank all those who have had such kind words of
support for my Office and me and, in particular the
Permanent Representatives of the United Kingdom and
France, who I am meeting today for the first time.

Everyone agrees that in order to address the issue
of piracy, land security needs to exist. There is no
dispute on that point. However, how do we achieve that
goal? To do so, first of all, donors must, in my opinion,
deliver financial and other assistance to the Somali
Transitional Federal Government, as pledged in
Brussels last April. The difference between pledges and
effective delivery is stark. We have to deliver what has
been promised.

Secondly, it is vital that the salaries of police
officers be paid. The police in Somalia have not been
paid in 16 months. That is a fact, so there is little point
in training more officers if we are not sure of being
able to provide them with salaries, equipment and the
means to make their living. If we cannot do that, they
will take it from the streets. They will turn to extortion.
I have to be honest with the Council - this is a
problem. How can we train if we are not sure we can

pay to equip?

Thirdly, training without stipends will simply
make them, as I said, more effective and violent on the
street. We have to help the Government to be capable
of delivering, to take responsibility vis-a-vis its
population and to be able to be our partner.

To be fair, the burden of providing security in
Somalia, especially in Mogadishu, should not be left to
AMISOM. alone, and I mean to the troops from Uganda
and Burundi. They are doing a great job under difficult
circumstances. Pledges made in Brussels to support
them should be fulfilled without delay. And we must
acknowledge the role played in this regard by the
African Union Commission and its Chair, Libya, with
which my Office has an excellent working relationship.

I offer many thanks for something new: countries
that have initiated and put into effect a mechanism -
not to analyze the crisis in Somalia, to say that it is bad
or good and so on - but to pay effectively and to help.
Working with an international auditing firm, they help
with the mechanism.

But very few countries - China, Libya, Norway
and the United States of America - have contributed.
They have contributed, not with analyses but by
helping the Government to deliver. Other countries -
Algeria, Djibouti, Kenya and Yemen - have
contributed in their own way. That is how the
Government has been able to resist armed and funded
external aggression.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
encourage the millions in the Somali diaspora in
Europe, America and Australia to do all they can to
help bring peace and security to their country of origin,
so that they can have a place that they would happily
call home.

Finally, in terms of the political situation and
peace in Somalia, I would like to remind all those who
advise - and they should advise, as advice is always
important - that the Government is legal and
legitimate and has, on its own, survived armed and
foreign-supported aggression for two months.
AMISOM. has helped, I should add. It needs to be
strengthened, and this is why I am grateful to the
countries I mentioned earlier, which have provided
immediate assistance, not only humanitarian, but with
cash to pay police. That can strengthen the Government
and help it continue the dialogue it is having with the
opposition.

The Secretary of State for Defence is from the
opposition. Many members of the Government are
from the opposition. We have to continue our work -
as we did in Burundi, Liberia and everywhere else -
implement the Djibouti agreement and call for new
reconciliation. A new conference could weaken the
Government and encourage the radicals and the
business around them. By that, I mean piracy.

Our problem is that many people are against
peace. It prevents them from enjoying lucrative profits.
So there is a need for more discussion among Somalis
in Somalia, but the so-called panacea of international
conferences held externally could do more harm than
help. We must always operate first and foremost under
the principle of "do no harm". Reconciliation efforts
should be done in Somalia. That is what is good for the
country and good for the United Nations.

I thank the presidency of the Council, as well as
its embassy in Nairobi with which we work very
closely, as we do with the Council here.

