Mr. Mahmoud (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me, at the outset, Mr. President, to pay special
tribute to the historic traditions and ties between my
country, Lebanon, and yours, France, as well as to
France's traditional policy of defending the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of
Lebanon.

The Security Council is meeting today in the
shadow of the widespread and barbaric aggression
being waged by Israel up until this very moment
against my country, Lebanon. That aggression is
destroying Lebanon's infrastructure and causing the
deaths of innocent civilians in full View of the
international community, which is today called upon to
curb Israel's aggression and immediately bring it to an
end.

The ongoing operations of destruction and killing
that have been undertaken by Israel since 12 July will
not resolve the problem; they will further complicate it.
The Israeli Government has held the Lebanese
Government responsible for certain acts, even though
the Lebanese Government issued a statement on
12 July whereby it declared that it was not aware of the
incident that occurred on the Blue Line on that date,
that it did not take responsibility for it and that it did
not endorse that act.
The Israeli forces have launched widespread
military operations, deliberately bombing vital
installations. Most major bridges have been destroyed.
Fuel storage tanks at electrical power plants have been
destroyed. The three runways at Beirut International
Airport have been destroyed. Many civilian
installations and residential buildings have been
destroyed, causing the death of many Lebanese
civilians, causing grave material losses and stranding
innocent tourists. They subsequently bombed and
disabled the airfields of Rayak and Qulayat. An air and
sea blockade has been imposed against Lebanon to
isolate it from its surroundings and to cut off all means
of communication between it and the outside world.

Israeli forces have not shied away from targeting
innocent civilians, thereby violating all human
rights - most importantly the right to life. Their forces
have bombed peaceful villages and residential areas,
bringing homes down on the heads of their inhabitants.
More than 60 martyrs have fallen to date, most of
whom were civilians. Hundreds of persons have been
injured.

My Government condemns and denounces this
Israeli aggression, which is a flagrant violation of all
international resolutions, laws, norms and conventions.
I need not explain to the Council who is the victim and
who the aggressor. What Israel is committing is an act
of aggression and devastation aimed at bringing
Lebanon to its knees and at undermining it by any
means.

In its statement of 13 July, the Lebanese
Government once again stressed its responsibility for
the protection of the nation and its citizens and for
their safety and security. It also affirmed its right and
duty to exercise its sovereignty over all of its territory,
as well as to take its national decisions freely, both
internally and externally. For more than a year, the
Lebanese have worked tirelessly to conclude the efforts
aimed at regaining independence and rebuilding
institutions, in cooperation with the international
community and with full commitment to the
resolutions of the Security Council. Israel's aggression
hampers the efforts made towards fostering democracy.
It also undermines Lebanon's sovereignty as it
endeavours to exercise its authority over its entire
territory.
My Government welcomes the initiative of the
Secretary-General to dispatch a high-level delegation

that will work to reduce tensions, re-establish stability,
call for respect for international humanitarian law and
the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure
and address the root causes of the current conflict.

Israel's disregard of the calls made by the
Lebanese Government expressing its complete
willingness to negotiate through the United Nations
and other parties to resolve the developments that have
taken place, the consequences of those developments
and the reasons that led to them is incontrovertible
evidence of the intention of the Israelis to escalate the
situation.

The international community, as represented by
the Security Council, is called upon to take an
immediate clear decision calling for an immediate
comprehensive ceasefire, the lifting of the air and sea
blockade imposed against Lebanon and an end to
Israeli aggression. The Council is also called upon to
take up the root causes and consequences of the current
crisis along the Blue Line.

