The Secretary-General: This is a historic
moment - a moment offering a fresh start towards a
new future. I extend a warm welcome to President
Obama. We salute his leadership.

This is the first Security Council summit on
nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament. I have long
advocated a stronger role for the Security Council. This
was a major element of the five-point nuclear
disarmament plan I announced in October last year.

The need for action is clear. Thousands of nuclear
weapons remain on hair-trigger alert. More States have
sought and acquired them. Nuclear tests have
continued. And every day, we live with the threat that
weapons of mass destruction could be stolen, sold or
slip away. As long as such weapons exist, so does the
risk of proliferation and catastrophic use, as does the
threat of nuclear terrorism.

Now, some might dismiss the goal of nuclear
disarmament as utopian. The cynics say, "Stop
dreaming. Be realistic." They are wrong. Nuclear
disarmament is the only sane path to a safer world.
Nothing would work better towards eliminating the
risk of use than eliminating the weapons themselves.
The Russian Federation and the United States are
leading by example.

I urge the Security Council to make the most of
this moment. This should not be a one-time event. We
must sustain the momentum.

First, we need new ways to increase transparency
and openness regarding the weapons programmes of
the recognized nuclear-weapon States. I urge the
Council to start consultations on this matter. The
Secretariat is ready to serve as a repository.
3

Secondly, we must make the best use of the
United Nations disarmament machinery. I hope, for
example, that the Conference on Disarmament can
advance the programme of work it adopted this year,
including negotiations on a fissile material cut-off
treaty. For its part, the Council could promote universal
membership in key treaties, work to improve
compliance, and assess the need for new agreements,
including a nuclear weapons convention. It could also
strongly reaffirm the need for early entry into force of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.

Thirdly, disarmament and non-proliferation must
proceed together. I encourage nuclear-weapon States
here to consider additional measures to enhance
security as a way of leading to total elimination. These
could include, for example, ways to achieve the
effective verification of the disarmament process. At
the same time, we must ensure that the International
Atomic Energy Agency has the resources and support it
needs to implement its growing safeguards
responsibilities.

For too long, a divided international community
has lacked the will, vision and confidence to move
ahead. Together, we have dreamed about a nuclear-free
world. Now we must act to achieve it. That starts now.

I congratulate the Council on convening this
summit. I welcome the adoption of today's resolution,
and again salute the leadership of President Obama. I
pledge my continued support and look forward to
future meetings on these vital issues here in this
Council and beyond, including the crucial 2010
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. This summit
truly adds a new page to the history of this Council.
Let us now write a new chapter of peace, security and
safety for all.

