The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the second
report of the Secretary-General on security in the Rwandese
refugee camps, document S/ 1995/65.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document 5/1995/127, which contains the
text of a letter dated 1 February 1995 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security Council,
and document S/l995/103, containing the text of a letter
dated 1 February 1995 from the Permanent Representative
of Rwanda to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the second
report of the Secretary-General, dated 25 January
1995, on the security in the Rwandese refugee camps
(S/ 1995/65), particularly those located in Zaire, and
his letter dated 1 February 1995 (S/l995/127) on this
subject.

"The Security Council agrees with the
Secretary-General's assessment that the present
situation in many of the refugee camps remains
dangerous for both refugees and relief workers and
that the situation is also potentially destabilizing for
the subregion as a whole. It is gravely concerned at
reports of continuing intimidation and security
problems in the camps, particularly in Zaire, and
reaffirms its condemnation of actions of former
Rwandese leaders living in the camps, and of former
Government forces and militias, to prevent, in some
cases by force, the repatriation of the refugees. It also

remains concerned at the security threat to
international relief workers. It welcomes the steps
taken by some of the host countries concerned to
improve the security situation in the camps. The
Council remains concerned at the obstacles posed by
the former civil and military authorities and militias
to effective local administration by the host countries
and the discharge by UNHCR of its mission.

"The Security Council attaches great
importance to the earliest possible action to address
the security problems in the camps. In this context
it welcomes the decision that UNHCR, under its
refugee protection and humanitarian assistance
mandate, conclude appropriate arrangements with the
Government of Zaire to enhance security in the
camps. It welcomes the agreement between UNHCR
and the Government of Zaire of 27 January 1995 to
deploy 1,500 Zairian security forces and a UNHCR
liaison group. It also welcomes the agreement
reached between the Governments of Zaire and
Rwanda on the return of refugees and property and
urges its full implementation. The Security Council
urges Member States to provide UNHCR with the
resources needed in the context of the agreement
concluded between it and the Government of Zaire.
It stresses the importance of close coordination of all
operations with UNAMIR. The Council endorses the
efforts of UNHCR, in cooperation with the United
Republic of Tanzania, to put in place security
arrangements in the Tanzanian camps, and
encourages UNHCR also to address the situation in
Burundi. The Council requests the Secretary-General
to report to it on a regular basis on the
implementation of operations carried out by
UNHCR.

"The Security Council stresses the importance
of ensuring that accurate information about the
situation inside Rwanda is disseminated to the
camps. In this respect, it reaffirms the importance of
UNAMIR Radio commencing its broadcasts as soon
as possible.

"The Security Council encourages efforts to
provide security in the camps and notes that they
have to be accompanied by further efforts in
Rwanda to ensure that refugees can return to their
homes without fear of retribution or persecution. In
this regard it acknowledges the achievements of the
Government of Rwanda, despite the difficulty of the
task and the lack of resources. It encourages the

 

Government of Rwanda to continue to provide a
framework for the action to be taken to repatriate the
refugees, to promote national reconciliation and to
reinvigorate the political process, and calls upon the
international community to continue to support the
Government of Rwanda in its task. The Council
reaffirms its View that such a framework should also
include an appropriate mechanism for sustaining a
dialogue between the Government of Rwanda, the
refugee community and the United Nations. It
welcomes the conclusions of the summit meeting of
leaders in the subregion, held in Nairobi on 7 January
1995. The Council encourages the International
Tribunal for Rwanda established in resolution 955
(1994) in its work, as well as efforts to rebuild the
local Rwandese judicial system to facilitate the
maintenance of law and order. The Council welcomes
the commitments made at the recent Round-table
Conference on Rwanda and in response to the
consolidated inter-agency appeal that will assist the
Government of Rwanda in its efforts to rebuild the
country and to promote national reconciliation.

"The Security Council looks forward to the
regional conference on assistance to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons in the Great Lakes
region, to be hosted by the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and UNHCR in Bujumbura from 15 to
17 February 1995. The Council expresses the hope
that this conference will lead to further progress in
creating the conditions necessary for the refugees
and displaced persons to return to their homes and
that it will facilitate the identification of long-term
solutions to promote and ensure peace, security and
development in the subregion, those issues to be the
subject matter of a further and broader conference of
a political nature.

"The Security Council underlines that the
presence of the refugee camps should only be
temporary and that the return of the refugees to their
homes in Rwanda remains the ultimate goal. It
requests the Secretary-General to continue his
exploration of all options and to make any further
recommendations necessary for ensuring security in
the camps as soon as possible and to submit a
further report on this subject in the light of the
outcome of the conference in Bujumbura.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter and will keep it under close review."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/7.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda. The
Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 12.15 pm.
