Mr. Skinner-Klee Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to congratulate your delegation,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on a
critical topic, particularly for the Security Council. We
welcome the concept note (S/2018/444, annex) prepared
by your delegation. We also thank the Secretary-
General, the Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Yves Daccord, and
Ms. Hanaa Edwar for their informative briefings.

Protecting human life and the safety of all civilians
is at the heart of any Security Council mandate.
However, while there are many relevant resolutions of
the Council, especially under Chapter VII ofthe Charter
of the United Nations, with a strong international legal
basis, a significant part of civilian populations in
armed conflicts continue to be innocent victims. We
have often witnessed flagrant and deliberate attacks
targeting civilian targets, as well as the indiscriminate
use of explosive devices, and even chemical weapons,
in clear violation of the Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols.

Although many Council decisions have been
taken on the basis of resolutions 1265 (1999) and 2286
(2016), to which the Ambassador of Spain referred, the
reality is that there is a need to develop national and
international regulatory frameworks that clearly govern
the foundations and institutional responsibilities for the
protection of civilians, which will promote respect for
the law and, most important, put an end to impunity for
such atrocious and despicable actions.

With regard to peacekeeping operations, Guatemala
reiterates that it is essential for the Council to bear in
mind that its primary and exclusive responsibility is
to forge peacekeeping operations with realistic and
succinct mandates whose key objective is the effective
defence of civilian populations. Unfortunately,
the reality on the ground tells another story. Some
mandates are not adapted to the specific context of
the mission in question, while others do not match the
challenges of the situation. Often mandates are not in
line with operational challenges on the ground, or are
insufficiently supported by political, financial and,
especially, human resources.

With regard to the civilian protection mandate
in the framework of peacekeeping operations, my
delegation regrets that, within the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations, Member States have not
been able to reach a minimum consensus to define
what is meant by protecting civilians. We look forward
to the new policy proposal being prepared by the
Secretariat for the effective protection of civilians, to
be presented in September, with the understanding
that it will include the input and opinions of the entire
membership, including troop-contributing countries.

We also reiterate the important contribution of
peacekeeping operations to the comprehensive strategy
for sustaining peace. Promoting the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts in the context of such
operations has a direct impact in the implementation of
the sustaining peace agenda on the ground.

Finally, my delegation welcomes the recommendation
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/462)
regarding the most effective way to protect civilians,
which is through prevention. The preventive approach
is a priority that we fully share with the Secretary-
General because it is coherent and based on respect
for international law and full observance of human
rights, which in turn will result in better performance
by peacekeeping operations. In that regard, we must be
aware that, by defending and prioritizing the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, we are sending not
only a message of hope but also a clear signal of the
firm commitment of the political will of the Council.
The best way for the Council to act is through shared
decisions that prioritize the responsibility to protect
civilian populations. Otherwise, this principal organ
of the United Nations will not only be prevented from
fulfilling its fundamental mission but will continue to
be criticized worldwide for its contumacious behaviour.

