Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this very important
meeting on the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
are grateful to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for his
briefing. Like others, I wish to thank Mr. Ngongi for
his presence here and for his briefing. I take this
opportunity to express our sincere appreciation for his
recent role as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; we wish him well in the future. We also
welcome the appointment of Mr. William Swing as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General. It
is a pleasure to welcome Mr. Javier Solana to the
Chamber. We thank him for his briefing on his recent
visit to the region. We welcome the commitment of the
European Union to the rehabilitation and
reconstruction of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has been long and bloody. It has claimed the
lives of an estimated 3 million people. Millions have
been rendered homeless and destitute. That conflict has
rightly been called the greatest tragedy of our times.
The crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
complex one and is compounded by competing
political domestic and foreign agendas, inter-ethnic
rivalry and hatred and the rampant and illegal
exploitation of the rich natural resources of that large
and strategic country. While the war has not produced
any clear victors, millions of innocent civilians in the
Congo have clearly become its victims. It is they who
have suffered and continue to suffer as long as the
conflict continues.

This month we witnessed the first real sign of
hope with the inauguration of the Transitional
Government of national unity. We hope that this is the
culmination of a long and painstaking process of
negotiations. It is, indeed, a bold step taken by all those
who have chosen to participate in it, and we hope that
all will participate in it.

Pakistan hopes that the formation of this
Government will not only open the way to real political
reform in the country but also bring to an end the
conflict and fighting that has ravaged the eastern parts
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is now the
responsibility of those who have agreed to share power
to do their utmost to end the fighting and to peacefully
resolve the issues which underlie the conflict.

In addition to making peace at the national level,
there is need to support peace at the local level,
especially through the Ituri Pacification Commission,
and to support the process of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and, where appropriate,
resettlement or repatriation of combatants in the
provinces of North and South Kivu. It is necessary to
support those peace initiatives through the provision of
appropriate security. The presence of a robust
peacekeeping force is necessary to create the political
space for the peace process to take root and sustain
itself. We welcome the deployment in Bunia of the
Interim Emergency Multinational Force under French
leadership. That temporary arrangement should be
replaced with a more sustainable force, and in good
time. My delegation supports the expansion of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to a
ceiling of 10,800 troops, Chapter VII cover for Ituri
and, if required, for the Kivus, and the presence of a
brigade-size force in Ituri, with a clear, realistic and
robust mandate. We support the draft resolution on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that is close to
finalization, which includes all those elements.

The expanded presence of MONUC must be
accompanied by a strong message to the warring
factions and those who back them that further
hostilities, which undermine the peace process, will no
longer be tolerated. In that regard, my delegation
supports the imposition of an arms embargo on all the
warring parties. However, in doing so, we urge the
Council to make this embargo credible, effective and
implementable. If we do not do so, the very
unworkability of the arms embargo will undermine the
Council's credibility in the future. An appropriate
mechanism, therefore, should be set up to monitor and
implement such an arms embargo.

In making the arms embargo more effective, the
Council must consider ways and means to track the
illegal exploitation of resources to the sources of the
funds, as well as to the points where those resources
and funds are converted into arms. It is at those source
points that the embargo should be designed to be most
effective. The Pakistan delegation will revert to this
point in the near future.

For durable peace, the countries in the region
must support the peace process and refrain from
contributing in any way to the continuation of
hostilities. Pakistan fully supports the convening of a
regional conference to promote peace, security and
development. We also support calls for the conclusion
of agreements on good-neighbourly relations between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its various
neighbours. It goes without saying that peace in the
region would immeasurably help peace in the country.
Improvement in socio-economic conditions through,
inter alia, international assistance, would help
considerably to establish peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The improvement of socio-
economic conditions is also essential for sustainable
peace there and in the region.

Finally, the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is an integral, not a
subsidiary or auxiliary, part of the conflict. The
humanitarian plight of the common people in the war
zones of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is truly
heart-rending. They have suffered previously. Their
suffering is a blot on the collective conscience of
humanity. These crimes bring to mind the telling
remark of Joseph Conrad in his memorable novel set in
the Congo 100 years ago, The Heart of Darkness. He
wrote: "The belief in a supernatural source of evil is
not necessary; men alone are quite capable of every
wickedness."

The culture of impunity, which has prevailed in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo thus far, must
come to an end. There can be no genuine peace without
justice. The crimes committed must be punished. That
should be done either through existing mechanisms or
through specially created mechanisms, as in Rwanda.
Pakistan remains ready - both in its capacity as a
member of the Council and as a major contributor of
United Nations peacekeeping forces - to support all
possible efforts on the part of the United Nations and
the international community to restore peace and
justice in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

