Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): We
would like to wholeheartedly thank Under-Secretary-
General Jeffrey Feltman for his valuable briefing on the
preliminary report on the crash of MH-17. We would
also like to welcome the presence of Mr. Franciscus
Timmermans, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Netherlands, at this meeting and thank him for his
valuable briefing.

Jordan would like to express its appreciation to
the Dutch authorities for their efforts in investigating
the MH-17 crash in eastern Ukraine and in drafting
the preliminary report on the incident. The technical
findings make clear that the aircraft was struck from the
outside by a missile and that further investigations must
be carried out to know who is responsible for launching
the missile and whether or not the launching was
deliberate. Many other questions must be answered. We
therefore stress the need to continue the investigations
in order to arrive at a definitive understanding and to
prepare the final report.

In that regard, we call on all parties to cooperate
and to allow unfettered access to the crash site so
that the investigation may be completed and the
parties responsible for the crash may be identified,
brought to justice at the international leve and held
accountable for their criminal act. This issue should
be given priority because any complacency will result
in direct consequences for the safety and security of
civil aviation and would encourage targeting flights in
different parts of the world. The investigation is a legal
matter and should not be viewed or addressed as a way
to achieve political advantages by any party.

Jordan welcomes the ceasefire agreed at a meeting
of the contact group in Minsk on 5 September, and in
particular its provisions on the importance of continued
national dialogue over the release of all prisoners,
the withdrawal of illegitimate armed groups and the
disarming of those groups. In that context, we urge all
armed groups to respect the conditions and provisions of
the ceasefire to end to the violence and show credibility
in the implementation of its provisions. We would
also like to stress Ukraine's right to its sovereignty,
territorial integrity and stability.

We would like to stress once again the importance
ofa political and diplomatic solution to the crisis. We do
not believe that a military solution is the means to realize
peace and security. Rather, it would lead to destruction,
division, social disintegration and an exacerbation of
the humanitarian, economic and political situation in
the Ukraine. Guaranteeing the rights of all the citizens
of Ukraine, including the rights of minorities, is the
only way to bring about an honourable exit from the
cr1s1s.

We call on the Ukrainian Government to develop
sustainable solutions that respond to the legitimate
demands of all groups. We call on all parties to assist
Ukraine in implementing political, legal and social
reforms and to work on enacting a sustainable ceasefire
so that we can agree to and arrive at a sustainable
solution.

