Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to express our thanks and appreciation to all the
members of the Security Council, with whom we have
been communicating since the United Kingdom first
proposed resolution 2263 (2017), which extends the
mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). I should also like to
extend my thanks to the Secretary-General and to the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for their
recommendations in their joint report (S/2017/437)
on UNAMID.

Developments in the five states of Darfur over the
past reporting periods cannot be denied or overlooked.
We have consistently conveyed in all our statements
and letters to the Security Council and to the Secretary-
General that, since 2015, Darfur has been enjoying
great security and stability, and that the humanitarian
situation is completely stable. In assessing the political,
humanitarian and security situation in Darfur, we do
not rely on documents that have been produced for
various forums. We possess sufficient evidence of
our own in that regard. We fully rely on the reality on
the ground, which was acknowledged by the Council
in resolution 2340 (2017), adopted in February. This
continuous improvement prompted our Government to
call on the Secretary-General to develop and implement
a progressive and phased withdrawal strategy

Darfur today is completely devoid of any armed
groups, which had wreaked havoc in Darfur beginning
in 2003. The military operations ofthe Sudanese Armed
Forces and other actors launched in May have shielded
Darfur against all attempts threatening security and
peace there. We therefore stress our readiness, through
our various institutions, to protect the security and the
stability of our citizens and safeguard our gains.

As members know, the international community
has been sharing a great burden with us in the Sudan
so as to consolidate internal peace. We had therefore
hoped that the resolution would stress the holding
of an international donor conference on Darfur as
recommended by the African Union Council for Peace
and Security on 12 June, so as to complement the donor
conference held in Doha in April 2013.

The rebel forces' attempts to undermine security
and stability in Darfur through planning attacks on the
northern, western and southern borders must not be
repeated. Such attacks remain the only threat to peace
in Darfur.

Members will have noted our efforts to make the
resolution coherent and responsive to the situation on
the ground in Darfur today. That is reflected in the
special report of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General of the United
Nations on the strategic review. In fact, it focused on
the return of peace and security in Darfur. The very
clear statement issued on 12 June by the African Union
Peace and Security Council highlighted the same
conclusions reached during our consultations with all
of the members of the Security Council. We stress the
fact that resolution 2363 (2017) to renew the mission's
mandate was adopted by consensus. Allow me to take
this opportunity to thank all of the members of the
Council for giving us the time to explain our position.

The difficulties faced by our Government to
restore stability and security in the region requires
immediate action by the international community to
provide support in all its forms to solve the problem.
We have reminded the Council, time and again, that
our Government has designed a three-phase plan to
address the issue of displacement and that it requires
the support of the international community. I would
also like to point out that there is some confusion about
the definition of the term "displacement". That term,
which is familiar to all, does not apply to the majority
of displaced people in Darfur. Those people are now
productive members of society and do not require
urgent humanitarian assistance. With a bit of effort,
we can turn displaced people who were formerly in
need into a productive labour force that supports our
economy.

We are all well aware of the importance of
providing UNAMID with the capacity for mobility
and access after the Council mandated a 44 per cent
drawdown of Operation forces so that the mission
could shoulder its responsibility effectively. I therefore
stress our determination and readiness, through all our
institutions, to cooperate with UNAMID and enable
it to fully deliver on its mandate. The sacrifices and
efforts made by UNAMID in Darfur to anchor peace and
stability have always been appreciated by our people.
This uniquely structured mission has contributed to the
return of normalcy and security in Darfur, which were
made possible by the great efforts of its soldiers.I would
also like to thank all the troop- and police-contributing
countries that assisted in carrying out the mandate.

I hope, Mr. President, that the Council will heed
my words when it comes to this important phase of
implementing the mission's exit strategy, which is
clearly based upon the return of security and peace in
Darfur.

With regard to the ongoing review to be conducted
in short intervals, I believe that justice and fairness
call for that review to be completely transparent. It
must include the participation of the Joint Special
Representative of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the two mechanisms
that were established and agreed upon - the Joint
Working group and the Tripartite Mechanism. On
this occasion, I should like to express my support for
resolution 2363 (2017) and would like to thank His
Excellency Ambassador Kingsley Mamabolo, Joint
Special Representative and Head of the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel.

In conclusion, the Security Council, the main
organ with the primary responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security, has the right to
celebrate today's joint achievement. It was initiated
by my Government, which played a major role by
prioritizing its responsibility to protect civilians,
while preserving our national sovereignty. At this very
difficult time, marked by heightened regional tensions,
desertification, the spread of small arms and light
weapons, human trafficking and terrorist attacks, we
must commend what has been achieved.

The African Union has reaped the fruit ofits efforts.
It has paid great attention to the issue of peace and
security on the continent. We may recall the wisdom
of the Government of the Sudan, prior to the adoption
of resolution 1769 (2007), when it sought to make
the peacekeeping mission a United Nations-African
Union hybrid mission, with Africa making the greatest
contribution. The African component of the mission
constitutes the majority of the peacekeeping force.

Once again, we reiterate our gratitude to you, Sir,
and, through you, to all of the members of the Council.
I underscore that we will remain committed to serving
the cause of peace in my country and throughout the
world.

The meeting rose at 3.45 pm.
