Ms. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, for organizing this open debate and
welcome the presence this morning of your Secretary
of Foreign Affairs. We also welcome the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/181) and thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Coomaraswamy, for her invaluable work.

Switzerland appreciates the fact that the
Secretary-General's report has broadened the criteria
for including parties to armed conflict in its annexes,
which now include not only those parties responsible
for killing or maiming children, but also those
responsible for rape or other forms of sexual violence
against children. This is an important step. At the same
time, more efforts are necessary to make these new
provisions effective and to implement resolutions 1612
(2005) and 1882 (2009).

I would like to comment on some of the report's
recommendations. First, the 16 persistent violators
must be the subject of the Security Council's strongest
and most urgent action. The Council should also
consider including provisions relating to the
recruitment and illicit use of children in the mandates
2

of all its sanctions committees. In this context, we
welcome the precedent set by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Secondly, the capacities of the mechanism for
monitoring and reporting information on the two
additional violations must be strengthened. The
relatively low reported incidence of sexual violence
against children does not reflect the extent of that
practice; rather, it demonstrates the challenge of
collecting relevant information. Consequently, the
documentation of incidents and trends should be
improved and cooperation must be strengthened among
entities working to implement the relevant mandates.
In particular, gender advisers should have greater
involvement with the monitoring and reporting
mechanisms at the field level.

Thirdly, the Security Council should encourage
concerned Member States to authorize contact between
the United Nations and non-State actors to ensure the
effective protection of children. Such contact would
have no impact on the legal status of non-State actors.

Fourthly, since June 2009, peacekeeping mission
policy has been to systematically include the protection
of children affected by armed conflict in all stages of
mission planning, design and implementation. In this
context, Switzerland also supports the deployment of
child protection advisers to relevant peacebuilding and
political missions, as provided for under resolution
1882 (2009).

I wish to add the following comments to my
remarks on the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report. Attacks on schools and
hospitals are an unfortunate and persistent reality.
There is a need to improve the monitoring and
reporting of information in that respect. The Secretary-
General should provide additional information on
effective prevention and accountability strategies. The
triggers of the monitoring and reporting mechanism
could be expanded to include attacks on schools and
hospitals. Furthermore, the Security Council should
consider the issue of children and armed conflict more
systematically, especially in its gender dimensions
pursuant to resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009) and 1889 (2009) on women, peace and security.

Finally, Switzerland encourages the Security
Council to open to non-member States the factual
10-40838
briefings of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on country-specific situations.

