Mr. Oshima (Japan): While the talks on the
future status of Kosovo are drawing much of the
international community's attention, the issue of
standards implementation also needs to be closely
monitored by the Security Council. We thank
Mr. Jessen-Petersen, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing.
Japan appreciates the initiatives undertaken by
Mr. J essen-Petersen and by Prime Minister Ceku of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to promote
standards implementation. We welcome the presence of
the delegation of the Provisional Institutions, led by
Prime Minister Ceku, in this Chamber today. I also
thank Ms. Raskovic-Ivic, representative of the
Republic of Serbia, for her detailed statement.

Japan sent an expert-level mission to Kosovo in
March, followed by the dispatch in May of Vice-
Minister for Foreign Affairs Yamanaka to the region in
order to be apprised of the political, social and
humanitarian situation on the ground - including the
progress being made in the standards implementation
plan - and to reaffirm to the authorities of the
Provisional Institutions the importance we attach to
standards implementation.

We are encouraged by the good progress being
made in this regard, as the Secretary-General has noted
in his latest report. We appreciate in particular the
important initiatives taken by President Sejdiu and
Prime Minister Ceku to visit and talk with
municipalities and minority communities, as concrete
attempts at confidence-building among communities.
The standards implementation plan itself has already
been elaborated, with detailed assessments of the needs
of minority communities. They need to be acted upon,
and we ask the leadership of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government to continue those
outreach activities to minority communities so that
they can grasp their real needs.

We also appreciate the initiative of the Contact
Group aimed at identifying 13 key areas for standards
implementation. This will not only be useful to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in policy
planning and implementation but could also lead to
further desirable developments through closer
interaction among the Provisional Institutions, the
Contact Group and the international community, as
stated in the letter from Prime Minister Ceku to the
Secretary-General dated June 16.

These signs of progress notwithstanding, we are
concerned that there is a lack of progress in promoting
the participation of Kosovo Serbs in the political
process in Kosovo. We wish to reiterate that non-
participation, and encouragement of non-participation
by whomsoever, is to be avoided, since it would not be
conducive to a positive outcome.

Likewise, we are concerned that not much has
been achieved in the area of freedom of movement and
that there has not been any significant number of
internally displaced persons and refugees returned to
Kosovo. It is our expectation that KFOR and the
Kosovo Police Service (KPS) will continue to work to
improve the security situation.

With respect to the issue of future status, the
Government of Japan extends its full support to the
initiatives taken by the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy, Mr. Ahtisaari. We look forward to substantive
discussions on this issue in the Council when he visits
the United Nations next month.

Last but not least, we commend the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the other international players deployed
in Kosovo for their contributions. In particular, as
Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen has indicated his intention
to resign soon, the Japanese delegation expresses its
deep appreciation to him for the outstanding
contributions be has made over the years in leading
UNMIK and as a humanitarian. We would like to
express our hope that the spirit of unity with the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government that he has
engendered in working towards the standards
implementation will be fully embraced by his
successor. We wish Mr. Jessen-Petersen every success
in future.

