Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): I would like
to join my colleagues in thanking President Chiluba for
joining the Council today and for presenting such an
interesting review of his past efforts and the
accomplishments made to date in this very important
enterprise, and for sharing his views and suggestions about
the future course of action. I would also like, as all
colleagues before me have done, to thank him and to
express our appreciation for his commitment and
dedication - in fact, his stamina - in pursuing this
process through very difficult times. I think we all here in
the Council know and appreciate the commitment he made.

I want to make just a couple of comments, and then
I have a few questions similar to some of the questions my
colleagues have raised. First, I would like to say that, as far
as the United States is concerned, I was very taken in
particular by Ambassador Greenstock's remarks about the
question of a practical and realistic mandate that is
demanded by our national political systems, including, in
our case, our Congress. With regard to any peacekeeping
operation this is the case, and it certainly will be the case
with regard to the question of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Another set of questions that frequently confronts the
Security Council has to do with its relationship and
coordination with regional and subregional organizations.
This is a theme that will not be new to President Chiluba,
and it is something that we have repeatedly raised in the
Council: that is, to establish a better way, from the
Council's perspective, to have close interaction and
coordination, in particular, with the Organization of
African Unity and the Southern African Development
Community efforts. I think that President Chiluba's being
with us today is a very welcome step in that regard.

With regard to the next steps in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, it seems to us that the technical
assessment mission should be dispatched as soon as
possible, because what we think we need now is a very
hard-headed evaluation of the security situation within the
Democratic Republic of the Congo so that a decision can
be made about the deployment of the already authorized
military liaison officers. Some have been deployed, as
President Chiluba mentioned, but some have not, and we
need to be assured that the security situation justifies
further deployment within the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, because the Council and the Secretary-General
will be sending these individuals into areas of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo where the security
situation has, to put it mildly, not been assured in the
past, in the very recent past, and even in the current
situation.

Like several colleagues, I would be very interested
in knowing President Chiluba's views about the Joint
Military Commission and what the next steps will be, the
challenges that it faces now that its membership has been
agreed to.
On another subject, the disarmament of non-State
actors within the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
also a subject of high interest. Does President Chiluba
have any advice or observations to share with us about
how that disarmament process might work? Also, does he
have any comments about how the national debate within
the Congo, which is part of the overall Lusaka
Agreement, is scheduled to proceed? We had a visit
recently from the Minister of Justice of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, who told the Council that that
process would be moving forward, but any reflections that
President Chiluba may have on that subject would be
welcome.

I will close by again thanking President Chiluba both
for work done in the past and what we hope will be his
continuing commitment to this very important enterprise.

 

