Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We join in the condolences expressed in connection with
the crash of a Kenya Airlines airliner. We would also like
to welcome our high-level guests from Zambia and South
Africa.

Since our delegation has already had the opportunity
to present the Russian Federation's approach to the
settlement of conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and other aspects of problems on the African
continent, and also bearing in mind the late hour, I should
like to limit myself here to the following comments of a
general nature.

The work done by the Security Council over the past
month reflects the degree of concern evinced by the
international community over the situation on the African
continent. We cannot expect long-term, harmonious
development in the world if African States, which constitute
almost a third of the members of the international
community, continue to find themselves in a situation of
political, social and economic upheaval.

The discussions that took place in January on the
broad range of problems facing Africa compellingly
demonstrate, in our view, the need for joint efforts on the
part of African countries themselves, which bear the
primary responsibility for resolving the problems of the
continent, and on the part of the friends of Africa to
break the vicious circle of insufficient development, social
and inter-ethnic problems, political and military instability
and a breakdown in development programmes. The task
of the Security Council is to see to it that these efforts are
fully supported by the coordinating role, the authority and
the capacity of the United Nations.

We need agreed-upon action on the part of the
various bodies and agencies of the United Nations and of
regional and subregional organizations so as to establish
a system that would both prevent and settle conflicts, and
to find a comprehensive solution to the task of post-
conflict rehabilitation. This is the only way that the
countries of Africa can truly set out on the great path of
stable and dynamic development and achieve fully
fledged integration into the world economy.

The Russian Federation's approach to issues of
cooperation with Africa and in Africa is based on an
open, equal and mutually beneficial partnership without
patronizing, ideological stereotyping or national narrow-
mindedness. We intend in future to make every effort to
contribute to resolving the problems of the African
continent. Africa has been, is and will remain the focus of
our constant attention.

