Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this meeting. We would
also like to thank the representatives of the relevant
bodies of the United Nations system, the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund, for their
participation in today's debate.

The Peacebuilding Commission was established
as an outcome of the 2005 World Summit. For the first
time in its history, the United Nations has a mechanism
to coordinate and address post-conflict peacebuilding
efforts. Despite the remarkable results achieved over
the past 60 years by United Nations Blue Helmets
operations in putting an end to armed conflicts, the
United Nations faces a great many challenges in
building sustainable peace. We hope that the
Commission's establishment will herald better times
for post-conflict countries and their peoples and that it
will enable them to realize their dreams of peace and
development at an early date.

The healthy development of the Peacebuilding
Commission, a newborn baby in the United Nations
family, will depend on the joint efforts of all Member
States; it is also the joint responsibility of everyone.
Peacebuilding in any post-conflict country is, by its
very nature, a comprehensive and systematic
undertaking and requires that each of the parties
concerned fully play its role.

First, countries under consideration at the
country-specific meetings must enjoy full ownership,
which is a prerequisite for successful peacebuilding.
One of the Commission's main functions is to provide
advice for peacebuilding in post-conflict countries and
to help those countries to formulate integrated
strategies. In a sense, the countries under consideration
are the Commission's clients. It is only by
communicating with them as much as possible and by
gaining a better understanding of their needs that the
Commission can establish clear objectives for its work
and develop country strategies that are appropriate to
their specific situations.

Secondly, the Commission's function in
comprehensive coordination must be enhanced. That is
the key to successful peacebuilding. Coordination
should be carried out at the following three levels.

The first is coordination among the different
plans for reconstruction in post-conflict countries.
Before the Peacebuilding Commission entered the
scene, a number of plans for reconstruction and
framework documents may have already existed. The
Commission should consolidate them into an integrated
strategy and programme of action.

The second level of coordination is that among
different players. Peacebuilding is a complex
undertaking, with a host of players, including donors,
countries that by tradition are influential, international
financial institutions, civil society and so forth. The
Commission needs to establish and maintain channels
for smooth communication among the players.

The third level of coordination is that among
different organs of the United Nations. The General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council all play an important role in
peacebuilding, according to their respective mandates.
The relationship between them should be
complementary rather than competitive and should
enable them to capitalize on their respective
comparative advantages. Thirdly, the focus of the
Peacebuilding Commission should be country-specific
meetings so that integrated strategies and programmes
of action can be formulated promptly for countries
under consideration, because they constitute the very
soul of peacebuilding.

Having finished drafting the guidelines for its
work in the initial phase, the Peacebuilding
Commission should shift its focus to country-specific
meetings in a timely manner. Its work should be
practical, efficient, focused and action-oriented, with a
view to developing integrated strategies and
programmes of action that affect the specific situations
of the countries under consideration. The Commission
should try not to be over-ambitious and should
concentrate its limited energy on solid, down-to-earth
work. Only by branding and building up prestige at the
outset can it attract more attention from the
international community.

Fourthly, the role of the Support Office should be
brought into full play so as to provide guarantees and
support for the effective functioning of the
Peacebuilding Commission. The Support Office should
not only serve as a secretariat by preparing for

meetings and providing conference services, but it
should also actively make bold proposals to the
Commission in the fields of policy, theory and strategy
by taking advantage of its wide access to a great
variety of information and its extensive contacts,
thereby playing the role of a good adviser.

The international community, and developing
countries in particular, have high expectations of the
Peacebuilding Commission. This June we will
celebrate the first birthday of this newborn baby. We
hope that with the joint efforts of all, the Peacebuilding
Commission will be able to give us a report card that
pleases everyone. This will be the best birthday present
it can give to itself. China is ready to join the
international community in working hard towards this
end.

