The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Afghanistan, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the consideration of the item, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tanin
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes recent
international initiatives aimed at enhancing
security, stability and development in
Afghanistan, including: the annual Afghanistan
Development Forum (ADF), followed by a
meeting of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board (JCMB), on 29-30 April; the meeting of
Foreign Ministers of the G-8 with the Foreign
Ministers of Afghanistan and Pakistan in
Potsdam, on 30 May, which adopted a Joint
Statement on the promotion of cooperation and
assistance through mutual consultation and
agreement, including follow-up projects in areas
such as refugees repatriation and economic
development on both sides of the border; the
Conference on 'DIAG (Disbandment of Illegal Armed Groups) for the Stabilization of
Afghanistan: Coordination with the Police
Reform' in Tokyo, co-chaired by Afghanistan,
Japan and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), on 21 June; and the
'Rome Conference on the Rule of Law in
Afghanistan', co-chaired by the Governments of
Afghanistan and Italy and the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, on 2-3 July, which agreed
on measures to enhance Afghan and international
commitment to justice sector reform, as outlined
in the Chairs' Conclusions and the Joint
Recommendations of the Conference, and called
for a follow-up meeting in Kabul this October.
The Security Council encourages all relevant
parties to ensure full and timely implementation
of the outcomes of these events.

"The Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan. The Security Council also reaffirms
the central and impartial role that the United
Nations continues to play in promoting peace and
stability in Afghanistan by leading the efforts of
the international community. The Council
welcomes, in this regard, the participation and
contribution of the United Nations Secretary-
General to various initiatives on Afghanistan, as
well as his visit to the country on 29 June.

"The Security Council notes that these
developments reinforce the progress made in
pursuing a comprehensive approach to the
security, governance and development of
Afghanistan, on the basis of the Afghanistan
Compact and the Afghan National Development
Strategy. The Security Council emphasizes that
the strengthening of Afghan institutions, the
advancement of regional cooperation, sustained
economic and social development, and the fight
against international terrorism, as well as against
opium cultivation, production and trafficking,
remain key factors to achieve sustainable peace,
stability and development in Afghanistan.

"The Security Council reiterates its support
for the continuing endeavours by the Afghan
Government, with the assistance of the
international community, including the
International Security Assistance Force and the
Operation Enduring Freedom coalition, to further
improve the security situation and to continue to
address the threat posed by the Taliban, Al-Qaida
and other extremist groups. The Security Council
07-42724
condemns in the strongest terms all suicide
attacks against civilians and Afghan and
international forces and their destabilizing effects
on the security and stability of Afghanistan, as
well as the use by the Taliban and other extremist
groups of civilians as human shields. The Council
deeply regrets all losses sustained by the local
population, the national security forces and
international military and civilian personnel. The
Security Council expresses its concern about all
civilian casualties and reiterates its call for all
feasible steps to be taken to ensure the protection
of civilian life and for international humanitarian
and human rights law to be upheld. The Council
stresses the importance of continued cooperation
between international security forces and the
Afghan authorities, inter alia to promote
awareness of local culture and traditions, which is
useful in the implementation of their tasks. The
Council stresses the role of UNAMA to continue
to contribute to human rights protection,
including monitoring of the situation of civilians
in armed conflict.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
at the serious harm that increasing opium
cultivation, production and trafficking causes to
the security, development and governance of
Afghanistan as well as to the region and
internationally, and calls on the Afghan
Government, with the assistance of the
international community, to pursue effective
implementation of the National Drug Control
Strategy. The Security Council welcomes the
efforts undertaken by the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to promote border
management cooperation in drug control between
Afghanistan and its neighbours. The Security
Council also notes with concern evidence of
growing links between the insurgency and the
drug trade in the south of Afghanistan.

"The Security Council welcomes the efforts
of the International Security Assistance Force and
other partners to train and mentor the Afghan
national security forces. The Security Council
welcomes the establishment of the Afghan-led
07-42724

the

International Police Coordination Board to
enhance coordination and increase effectiveness
in this area, which is central to the process of
empowerment of the Afghan Government. The
Security Council also welcomes the deployment,
beginning on 15 June, of the European Union
Police mission in Afghanistan (EUPOL Afghanistan).

"The Council stresses the importance for
the stability of the country and the region of
finding viable solutions for Afghan refugees, in
particular for their voluntary, safe and orderly
return and sustainable reintegration in
Afghanistan, and calls for continued and
enhanced international cooperation and assistance
in this regard.

"The Security Council encourages relevant
national and international actors to develop
increased operational synergies, taking due
account of their respective roles and
responsibilities. The Security Council emphasizes
in this regard the central role played by the JCMB
in coordinating international assistance, while
preserving Afghan ownership, and encourages
further efforts to promote a more coherent
international engagement.

"The Security Council appreciates the
continued efforts by the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative to ensure the full
implementation of the mandate of UNAMA, as
established by its resolution 1662 (2006) and
extended by resolution 1746 (2007), and looks
forward to the further expansion of the Mission
and its operations to key provinces across the
country at the earliest opportunity."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2007/27.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.35 p.m.

