Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset, before I plunge into the debate, to
offer you, Sir, my congratulations and my best wishes
for success in your presidency of the Security Council.
This tribute is not circumstantial, because the Tunisian
delegation and a great many intellectuals in our country
hold you in high esteem. Our tribute extends to your
country, Singapore, which has succeeded in its
magnificent and spectacular political and socio-
economic experiment.

My thanks also go out to your predecessor,
Ambassador Sergey Lavrov, Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation.

We are confronting today a three-fold crisis that
history will not forgive us for neglecting.
First, there is a humanitarian crisis. We have
allowed an army to occupy a refugee camp in J enin for
days on end and then to carry out a massacre of
proportions that will remain unknown until we receive
the results of an investigation that Israel has refused to
carry out while the Council has stood by. The Council
has failed to act in the face of Palestinian misery. The
silent images on American television networks,
showing the consequences of an apparent earthquake,
have shocked the conscience of the world community.
We have seen men and women using their hands to dig
out the corpses of non-combatants from under the
rubble. Eyewitnesses have begun to describe the scene
to representatives of international organizations. One
honourable and exemplary international civil servant
has described it as "horrific beyond belief." He shall
remain nameless, since a vindictive campaign has
already been launched against him. Israel did not allow
him to participate in the fact-finding team because he
knows too much. We continue to see images of
Palestinian children, women and the elderly helplessly
wandering around the ruins, bewailing their dead and
their property, and of starving Palestinians awaiting
international relief efforts. We have seen the sick and
the injured bleed slowly to death as the Israeli army has
prevented ambulances from doing their job by blocking
or shooting at them.

I am not trying to conduct a propaganda
campaign and I am inclined to say even less than I
might. If the Israelis, Mr. Sharon and Mr. Peres, have
nothing to hide, why have they prevented the dispatch
of a fact-finding team that would have established the
truth? Why would they reject the impartial testimony
of such a team? Does Mr. Sharon himself have to lead
an Israeli delegation before the entire world can learn
the truth? No. It is guilt, the fear that Israel would be
condemned by world opinion and the dread of standing
before the court of international opinion that have
made them renege on their promises. Israel has rebelled
yet again against the will of the Security Council, the
Secretary-General and the entire United Nations
system. There is nothing new in that.

Assistance is needed. The international
community must realize the scope of the tragedy and
act to ensure the delivery of food and medicine. Relief
supplies are trickling in slowly, but how can we
expedite their delivery when the Israeli army continues
to lay siege to Palestinian towns, to carry out
incursions into others and to destroy the administrative
and social infrastructure in the land it treacherously
occupies?
We also face a multifaceted moral crisis. How
could a country with a claim to intelligence get so
mired in an operation led by a man with a well-known
past? How could the Israeli peace camp allow such
dirty work to be done? How could Israel's allies accept
this policy and threaten the use of the veto at the mere
mention of the Middle East? How could Sharon be
portrayed as a man of peace while, only two days ago
and for a month before that, his tanks were besieging
President Arafat, a Nobel Peace Prize laureate? How
can one demand the surrender of those responsible for
an assassination that took place last December and was
fully condemned by the Palestinian Authority, while
dozens of leading Palestinian officials have been
liquidated? Who is going to prosecute those who
practice state murder? How could siege be imposed on
one of the world's holiest shrines, the Church of the
Nativity? This is an outrage that not even the war
criminals of World War II dared commit. How could
Israel, a young and fragile nation, pursue
transgressions that incur the wrath of the entire world?
Who bears responsibility for awakening old demons
and for fanning the flames of hatred between nations?

We are not surprised that, with a few rare
exceptions, the whole world is squarely pointing an
accusing finger at Sharon's Israel. Israeli nationalism,
which pragmatic Arabs had ultimately come to accept,
has been severely tested. A cursory glance at the New
York Times reveals the magnitude of the collateral
damage. What a terrible waste, even for Israel!

Then there is the most serious crisis, which is the
crisis of authority. It is the most serious because it
concerns the Council, which is the highest international
body and which is ignored by Tel Aviv. I will not
elaborate on this, because to do so would be
disrespectful of this body.

Within a few weeks the Security Council adopted
three resolutions, and a presidential statement that for
our delegation carries the same authority as the
resolutions. Because of the dignity of the Council we
need not recall the hopeless words heard two days ago
in the Council's consultations. This is terrible for the
United Nations system.

Let us imagine that an Arab State has committed
an act ten times, or even one hundred times, less grave
than those that have been perpetrated. Immediately a
strong coalition would have been formed; it would
have been noted that the law is the law and that a
Security Council resolution must be implemented;
sanctions would have been imposed, and the provisions
of Chapter VII would have been applied in full.
However, the policy of double standards has become a
permanent feature of our work. I must state clearly and
unequivocally that public opinion in our countries is
increasingly opposed to such policies.

We are fully aware that pressure groups are an
integral part of Western democracies, that is, all
minorities have the right to be heard and to use all
means at their disposal for this purpose. I do not claim
to be an expert on all societies, but I firmly believe
that, rather than groups being demonized, settling a
dispute through peaceful means is the best electoral
guarantee. Success is the ultimate test of politics, and
everyone loves a winner. Not all has been lost.
Previous efforts and missions have brought about a
limited measure of success. We are grateful to all those
who have carried out such efforts. However, the
occupation persists, with neither a political nor a
security solution. Major powers must adopt a firm
position vis-a-vis Israel; they should heed the call of
former President Carter, a man of wise counsel and the
man who achieved the first peace agreement between
Israel and an Arab State.

Having completed the diagnosis of the problem,
we must now consider the remedy.

First, it must be impressed upon Israel authorities
that they must comply - today, and not tomorrow -
with Security Council resolutions. The fact that there
are ongoing negotiations changes nothing. It is
incumbent upon us to support the efforts of the
international community to persuade Israel not to
persist in its behaviour vis-a-vis President Arafat and
to realize that he is the one with whom it must
negotiate. Never in colonial history, either as we have
lived it or as we have read about it, has a colonial
power behaved with such arrogance and cruelty as has
Israel in its treatment of President Arafat. We demand
the immediate cessation of Israel military operations -
all Israeli military operations.

We demand a solution for the matter of the
Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem, which Israel has
desecrated by committing murders and now by setting
fires in it. It is shameful that Israel has accused the
Palestinians of setting fire to a place in which they
have sought refuge, and where they will even be
accused of collective suicide. That is untrue. This fire
will remain a stain on the history of Israel.

What is even more tragic is the situation in which
the Security Council finds itself today. That is the
disbanding, indeed, the dissolution, of the fact-finding
team. We refuse to accept the failure of the Council.
Israel cannot continue to deny the team access to Jenin
on either political or legal grounds. Acting on the basis
that "might makes right", Israel rode roughshod over
four Security Council resolutions. The most recent is
1405 (2002), a United States initiative that we accepted
in good faith and that Israel accepted unequivocally.
Nevertheless, it will remain a dead letter.

In such cases, the United Nations Charter, under
chapters VI and VII, provides for the adoption of
coercive and non-coercive measures to bring
recalcitrant States to comply with the law. It is
inadmissible for the Council to renounce its
prerogatives and accept the defeat inflicted on it by Tel
Aviv.

The Secretary-General has discharged his task
with impartiality and in a most constructive spirit.
Now, should the Council lack the energy and the unity
necessary for political action in the Middle East, we
will have to resort to other forums such as the General
Assembly, which will henceforth be a recourse for
condemning injustice and dealing with the weaknesses
and shortcomings that we have, sadly, seen in the last
three days. When the Security Council has proven its
efficiency and effectiveness in other instances, how can
we accept its inability to do the same in this situation,
which constitutes a grave threat to international peace
and security?

I repeat, the essence of the question is the need
for the Council to shoulder its responsibilities and do
its utmost to expose to the light of day the tragedy, the
nightmare that occurred in Jenin. We live in an open
and democratic society, in which information flows
freely, where fact-finding represents the essence of
democracy. Let us reject double standards, if we truly
wish to establish a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.

