Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia): Malaysia is deeply
disturbed by the new eruptions of violence in the
occupied Arab territory of Jerusalem, the West Bank and
Gaza. This dangerous situation has been brought about by
the irresponsible and blatant act of provocation by the
Israeli authorities in opening a tunnel in the immediate
vicinity of the Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem and in

 

permitting the observance of Jewish religious rites in the
Holy Sanctuary of Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Their act of
violating the sanctity of the Al-Aqsa Mosque and Al-Haram
Al-Sharif has not only undermined the peace process and
led to loss of life, it has inflamed anger and outraged
Muslims throughout the world.

We condemn this blatant act of provocation by Israel.
We call upon Israel to respect the sanctity of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and Al- Haram Al-Sharif and to rescind its
decision and close the tunnel. We also deplore the closure
of Jerusalem to the Palestinians imposed by Israeli
authorities, which would exacerbate the hardship of the
population living in those areas.

Malaysia considers that the measures taken by Israel
to create new demographic facts and to change the status of
Jerusalem are illegal, invalid and in contravention of
relevant Security Council resolutions on the position of the
international community and on the status of Jerusalem.

Malaysia reaffirms its total commitment to and
unwavering support for the Palestinian people and its
leadership in the attainment of all their inalienable rights to
exercise self-determination and to establish an independent
State.

Regrettably, since the election of the new Israeli
Government under Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu the
peace process has taken a new turn. Announcements made
by the Likud Government that it is not to be bound by the
peace agreements signed by the former Israeli Labour
Government and the Palestinian Authority, Mr. Netanyahu' s
decision to rule out any compromise on Jerusalem or a
Palestinian State, the long-delayed redeployment of Israeli
soldiers from Hebron and the departure from the land-for-
peace principle have threatened the Middle East peace
process. In our View, the decision of the Israeli Government
to approve the expansion of Jewish settlements and the
seizure of Palestinian land will only complicate the peace
process.
The present Israeli Government must honour all peace
agreements into which Israel has entered with the
Palestinian Authority. Any departure from those agreements
by the Israeli Government would destroy all hopes of
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace between
Palestine and Israel. The Israeli Government should not
attempt to create new realities on the ground and impose
new conditions before resuming negotiations. It should also
refrain from placing new obstacles to the peace process.
Malaysia would like to urge the United States, which has
invested so much effort in the latest peace process,
earnestly to encourage Israel to honour its commitments
to the peace agreements.

Malaysia strongly believes that the momentum
towards a successful peace process in the Middle East
must be maintained. The climate of suspicion must be
immediately replaced with new faith in peace. Any
attempts to shatter the peace process would only
aggravate instability and bring about renewed violence
and destruction, which must be avoided at all costs.

