Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, I would
like to echo other representatives in expressing our
appreciation to Ambassador Mohammed Loulichki,
Permanent Representative of Morocco, for his
leadership in convening today's open debate.

While we agree with the findings contained in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/746) to the
effect that much more is needed to make an impact on
the ground, Japan welcomes the significant progress
made since the 2009 report (S/2009/304). In addition,
Japan strongly supports the priority directions for
peacebuilding outlined in the report.

Japan attaches particular importance to the
following observations.

First, the importance of institutions in
peacebuilding and, consequently, development, cannot
be overemphasized. The restoration of core Government
and service-delivery functions, based on national
ownership and undertaken with an inclusive approach,
are at the heart of State-building. The international
community must come up with stronger mechanisms
for aligning stakeholders to support that process. We
also look forward to seeing positive results come out of
the civilian capacities initiative.

Secondly,the inclusionofwomeninallpeacebuilding
processes must be accelerated, particularly in the areas
of governance and economic recovery, in accordance
with the seven-point action plan.

Thirdly, sustained international support is also
crucial to the creation of space for countries to fully
engage in institutional transformation, which can often
take years, even decades.

Fourthly, the concept of mutual accountability
allows for equal partnership between the recipient
Government and its international partners, as can
be seen in the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile
States, as well as in the declaration issued at the Tokyo
Conference on Afghanistan held in Japan this summer.

Japan has been a committed member of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) since its inception
and currently serves as the Chair of the working group
on lessons learned. We believe that the PBC has played,
and will continue to play, a crucial role in taking forward
the recommendations contained in the report. Needless
to say, a stronger partnership with the Security Council
is crucial for the PBC to realize its full potential,
particularly when Council decisions directly affect the
peacebuilding processes of the country on the agenda
of the Commission. The meeting of the working group
held on 21 November focused precisely on this point and
emphasized the role of the PBC in ensuring sustained
international support by consciously linking peace and
security discussions to long-term development during
United Nations mission transitions.

The complexity and long-term nature of
peacebuilding require a multifaceted and holistic
approach. One example that Japan can present is that
of the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD) process, our primary framework
for dialogue on development issues with our African
partners. The TICAD process has since its inception
placed great emphasis on the consolidation of peace
as the basis of development. In that context, we are
delighted to host our fifth TICAD in Yokohama next
June.

The current discussion on the post-2015 development
agenda also provides an invaluable opportunity for
Member States to reflect on the role of peacebuilding
in long-term development. The Secretary-General has
called for the inclusion of peacebuilding considerations
such as security, justice and economic foundations into
the post-2015 development agenda. The issue has been
introduced in the post-Millennium Development Goals
contact group, which Japan chairs.

We are very much aware that challenges remain as
to how to achieve convergence of the different views
on how and in which form peacebuilding should be
incorporated into the next development framework. We
believe that human security, emphasizing the protection
and empowerment of individuals through a holistic
approach, plays a significant role in that context. Japan
remains committed to pushing the discussion forward.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Japan's strong
and lasting support for peacebuilding. Peacebuilding is
a very long process, but Japan will continue to engage,
both bilaterally and through the PBC, in the building of
sustainable peace in post-conflict countries.

