Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): Allow me, at the outset, to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on China's assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of June, as well as to express our confidence in your
ability to guide the Council in fulfilling its many duties
and responsibilities in these challenging times.

I would like to express my appreciation to Presidents
Meron and J oensen, as well as to Prosecutors Brammertz
and Jallow, for their comprehensive reports on the
work of the Tribunals in the first half of the year (see S/2012/354, S/2012/349), the status of the cases before
them and measures undertaken in the implementation
of the completion strategy. Croatia strongly supports
the diligent efforts of the Tribunals aimed at the smooth
transformation of those two unique international
institutions into a single body - the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.

In that context, we welcome the recent appointment
of the Registrar, President and Prosecutor of the
Residual Mechanism, as well as the full establishment
of the Mechanism's roster of judges. We congratulate
Mr. Hocking, Judge Meron and Prosecutor Jallow, as
well as all of the elected judges, on their appointments
and elections and express our full confidence in their
ability to successfully master the many challenging
tasks ahead of them.

Let me now turn specifically to the ICTY and its
activities. Croatia welcomes the significant results
achieved by the Tribunal to date and, in particular, the
fact that all indicted persons have been arrested and
transferred to the Tribunal. We expect swift and efficient
proceedings in the three remaining first-instance cases,
namely, Karadeie, Mladie and Hadeic', as well as the
effective handling of appellate activities.

In that regard, Croatia supports the Tribunal's efforts
aimed at expediting the overall pace of proceedings
by introducing innovative reforms, including a waiver
on the direct hiring of interns, as well as retention
incentives. We welcome the continuous readiness of the
Office of the Prosecutor to provide relevant information
to support national investigations on war crimes as
an important contribution to national efforts to end
impunity.

Over the reporting period, Croatian officials at the
highest level remained engaged in direct dialogue with
the Tribunal and the Prosecutor, while the Ministry of
Justice and the Office of the State Prosecutor continued
to nurture a close and intense working relationship with
the Office of the Prosecutor. Last month, Prosecutor
Brammertz visited Zagreb and met with the Deputy
Prime Minister for Home, Foreign and European
Affairs; the Minister of Justice; the State Prosecutor and
members of the Task Force.

We are pleased to note that in his report Prosecutor
Brammertz has recognized the full and unequivocal
cooperation of Croatia with the Office of the Prosecutor.
Furthermore, according to the report, it is the Office
of the Prosecutor's intention to further rely on that in
order to efficiently complete the remaining trials and
appeals. We see that as an important recognition of our
steadfast efforts to establish efficient and comprehensive
cooperation with the Tribunal and its organs in all vital
areas. In that regard, I can only reaffirm our intention
to continue along that path until the very end of the
Tribunal's mandate, and beyond in relation to the
Residual Mechanism.

As I said in my previous interventions, Croatia
continues to follow with particular attention the new
jurisprudence emerging from the Tribunal's work and its
potential to shape future criteria for, inter alia, the lawful
use of force and the waging of legitimate military action.
In that context, we particularly welcome the Tribunal's
attempt to further elucidate its impact and legacy,
including through engaging the most eminent scholars
and practitioners in the field of international criminal and
humanitarian law in thorough discussions and analysis
of these complex matters. Ensuing interpretations and
conclusions will have a serious impact on any future
conduct of hostilities, as well as noble efforts aimed at
preserving or fostering international peace and security.

With regard to regional cooperation, let me stress
that Croatia fully shares the View that cooperation in
the region concerning war crimes and related issues
is of crucial importance. At the same time, it is our
understanding that such cooperation should be carried
out with full respect for national jurisdictions and
generally accepted principles of international criminal
law, including basic principles of legitimate procedure
and evidence collection.

Let me conclude by saying that Croatia is deeply
committed to the process of reconciliation in the
former Yugoslavia. However, we firmly believe that
such reconciliation is possible only on the premise of
unambiguously established historical facts and their
accurate interpretation, and not on their misinterpretation
or denial, in particular in the cases of most serious
violations of international law, including genocide.

