Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this briefing on
behalf of the Secretary-General regarding options for
authorizing and supporting the African Union (AU)
Commission's peace support operations. We also thank
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
his report on resolution 2320 (2016). We express our
appreciation to Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chef
de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, for her briefing
on the various options proposed in line with resolution
2320 (2016).

We are also pleased to have with us Mr. Sma'il
Chergui Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and Security
of the African Union, via video teleconference, as
well as Mr. Donald Kaberuka, African Union High
Representative for the Peace Fund. We are grateful for
their efforts on the issue and for their briefings on steps
taken by the African side.

I am delivering my statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council, namely,
Egypt, Ethiopia and Senegal.

We are meeting against the backdrop of some
important developments over the past six months
that have had great significance for the partnership
between the AU and the United Nations. We have
new leadership in both organizations and there is a
renewed commitment to elevate the AU-United Nations
cooperation and partnership to new heights. The visits
by the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, to
the African Union's headquarters in Addis Ababa in
January and by the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, to the United
Nations Headquarters in New York in April serve as
a reaffirmation of the resolve by the new leaderships
to further strengthen the cooperation and partnership
between the two organizations as a matter of priority.
The joint United Nations-African Union framework
for enhancing partnership signed by the leaderships
of the two organizations on 19 April is indeed a clear
testament to the renewed commitment to work together
to, inter alia, address common challenges to peace
and security in the African continent across the whole
spectrum of the conflict cycle.

On numerous occasions, the Security Council
has reiterated its commitment to cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, as well as to arrangements in matters
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security, consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. There is indeed growing
recognition that a stronger global-regional partnership
is needed in order to effectively respond to the peace
and security challenges and threats and improve our
collective security.

On that basis, the Council has expressed its
determnination to take effective steps to further
enhance the relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in particular the African Union.
Of course, we all recall the concrete recommendations
made by the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations, which presented its report on 16 June 2015
(see S/2015/446). It included the recommendations
regarding the strategic partnership with the African
Union, which were later incorporated in the Secretary-
General's implementation report (S/2015/682). The
Panel's report of the did not put the spotlight on the
AU without reason. The reason was explained nowhere
more cogently than in the Secretary-General's report on
options for authorization and support for African Union
peace support operations:

"Considering the limitations of the United Nations
peacekeeping doctrine with regard to peace
enforcement and counter-terrorism, the African
Union peace support operations are a tool for the
United Nations to better discharge its responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security in certain situations." (S/2017/454, para. 61).

The adoption of resolution 2320 (2016) represents
a tangible testament to the Council's commitment to
strengthen the cooperation and partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union. In that context,
the Council acknowledged the need for more support in
order to strengthen AU peace operations and enhance
the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of
financing African Union peace operations authorized
by the Security Council. In that regard, we appreciate
the work undertaken by the Secretariat of the United
Nations and the African Union Commission over the
past six months to follow up on the implementation of
resolution 2320 (2016), in particular the consultative
process undertaken between March and April.
Accordingly, we welcome the report of the Secretary-
General on options for authorization and support
for African Union peace support operations. We
also welcome the report to the Chairperson of the
Commission, which provides important details on the
proposed scope of operations, progress made, future
benchmarks and timelines for implementation of the
AU Peace Fund, as well as frameworks that support
accountability, transparency and compliance as the
basis for operationalizing the financing arrangement.

We believe that the four financing options identified
in the reports are sound and realistic regarding how
to help the Security Council consider taking its first
concrete steps on the financing of AU peace support
operations. Furthermore, ensuring compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights standards
is very important for the credibility, legitimacy and,
ultimately, the effectiveness of AU peace support
operations. In that regard, the progress that the
African Union has made on finalizing its human
rights conduct and discipline compliance framework
is encouraging, and we look forward to its adoption
in September. The support of the United Nations for
effective implementation of the AU's compliance and
accountability framework is crucial, and we commend
the Secretary-General for his willingness to assist the
AU in that regard.

Lastly, the Security Council has already expressed
its intention to take practical steps to establish the
principle that AU-mandated peace support operations
authorized by the Council should be financed through
United Nations assessed contributions, with decisions
on the financing of specific missions to be taken on a
case-by-case basis. Now that the groundwork has been
done in line with resolution 2320 (2016), we would like to
ask the Security Council to take practical steps towards
adopting a substantive resolution that establishes
that principle. We will work with Council members
to achieve that objective with a view to realizing the
full potential of the United Nations-AU partnership to
swiftly and effectively respond to the complex threats
and challenges to peace and security today.

