Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me welcome and thank His Excellency
Minister Saudabayev for his briefing on the plans of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for 2010. We also join the rest of the Council
members in congratulating him as well as Kazakhstan
on its chairmanship for the current year. Our delegation
welcomes the core objectives that the OSCE has
envisioned for this year. For the purpose of brevity,
though, allow me to make only a few comments.

First, we are particularly encouraged by the
organization's efforts to further enhance its cooperation
with the United Nations in the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter. Bosnia and Herzegovina is
particularly aware of the benefits, as well as the
complexities, that such cooperation entails in the post-
conflict period in terms of democratization, the
establishment of a functional and independent election
administration system, education, human rights and
regional security cooperation. One such challenging
effort, for instance, still remains with regard to the
maintenance of surplus weapons.

Secondly, strengthening the aforementioned
cooperation, moreover, can and must lead to tackling
and combating terrorism. At the same time, such
cooperation can, in addition, work towards the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction at the
global level. In that context, the OSCE's forthcoming
coordination of efforts with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, as well as with
other United Nations agencies, becomes especially
relevant.

Thirdly, it is noteworthy that the Corfu process
will continue throughout 2010. Such informal meetings
at the ministerial level should further reinvigorate
regional dialogue, as well as trust, in accordance with
the OSCE norms and principles regarding security on
the continent and beyond. We look forward to more
information on the specifics of the agenda.

In closing, let us return to our remarks on
education. As some OSCE-driven educational
programmes have already shown in Bosnia and
Herzegovina since 2002, education remains an
important tool for enhancing security. Keeping that in
mind, our delegation would like to welcome
educational efforts that the OSCE plans to foster under
the chairmanship in 2010.

