Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): Thailand is
participating in this important debate because it shares
the international community's concern at the increasing
direct attacks against civilians, including journalists,
particularly those committed by non-State actors and
terrorist groups. We therefore thank Lithuania for
its initiative to discuss this issue and for the detailed
concept note (S/2015/307, annex). We also appreciate
the informative briefings by Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson, Mr. Christophe Deloire, Director-General
of Reporters Without Borders, and Ms. Mariane Pearl.

It is clearly stated in rule 34 of the International
Committee of the Red Cross Customary International
Humanitarian Law that civilian journalists engaged in
professional missions in areas of armed conflict must
be respected and protected as long as they are not
taking a direct part in hostilities. Hence a deliberate
act of violence against journalists in armed conflict in
all forms is unacceptable and unjustifiable. An attack
deliberately targeted at civilians amounts to a war
crime, and perpetrators must be held accountable.
Impunity emboldens perpetrators to continue
their brutal acts and inflames the situation. The
ending of impunity is one of the suppressing factors.
Thailand is alarmed by statistical evidence that there
are no convictions in 90 per cent of cases of attacks
against journalists. This issue must not remain
unaddressed. Ending impunity must begin at national
level, encompassing political will, the strengthening
of the judicial system and effective law enforcement.
Cooperation and sharing of information among law
enforcement authorities at all levels needs to be
enhanced and strengthened. We share the view that
legal frameworks and mechanisms are sufficiently in
place, but they must be efficiently enforced and fully
implemented.

Thailand also sees the need to increase the number
of independent commissions of inquiry and fact-
finding missions in order to bring to justice those
who have committed brutal acts against civilians and
journalists. The Security Council must be clear and
strong in its messages and resolutions that violations
against civilians andjournalists will not be tolerated.

Targeted sanctions imposed on individuals and
entities involved in heinous crimes against civilians
are among the tools the Council may apply. However,
doing so must ensure fair and clear procedures for
placing individuals and entities on sanction lists, and
for removing them. And sanctions need to be fully
implemented by Member States.

The safety of journalists is at highest risk in
terrorist-controlled areas. Thailand joins the call for
all parties to respect and uphold international norms
and laws to protect civilians and journalists. However,
it may be ironic and unrealistic to expect that those who
intentionally defy the law by committing unlawful acts
of violence and terror for their tactical objectives to
respect the law. What else can we do to protect civilians
andjournalists in such circumstances?

Thailand supports mandating peacekeeping
missions to protect civilians. Apart from physical
protection, guidance and regular assessment of a
situation by peacekeeping operations could provide
useful information and reliable alerts for journalists
and media professionals on the ground. Engagement
between journalists and peacekeeping operations would
help to increase the safety of journalists, and would
by no means change their civilian and independent
status owing to the principle of the impartiality of the
peacekeeping operation. At the same time, journalists
and media professionals should strictly follow the
guidance of the peacekeeping operation for their own
safety.

To protect journalists, several issues need further
deliberation. While totally understanding the freedom,
responsibility and rights of the media, their safety
cannot be compromised. There should be a clear
guideline on when they should leave conflict zones
to limit the risk. For the safety ofjournalists in some
active conflict zones, we may need to replace the
presence of correspondents with modern technology
and equipment. That may not be a perfect substitute,
but it may be considered as an alternative to prevent the
loss of life.

I wish to conclude by paying tribute to journalists
and media professionals who risk or have lost their
lives to provide us with substantive and real-time
information from the ground. Their responsible and
constructive role can greatly contribute throughout the
conflict cycle - from conflict prevention, to conflict
management and conflict resolution. They deserve
better protection. That responsibility lies in our hands.

