Mr. Acharya (Nepal): As the last speaker, I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month and to welcome your initiative on this timely
debate on peacekeeping operations. I would also like to
thank the Under-Secretaries-General, Mr. Le Roy and
Ms. Malcorra, for their valuable presentations on the
subject this morning.

As a troop-contributing country, Nepal attaches
strong significance to matters related to peacekeeping
operations, especially the strengthening of operational
and managerial efficiency in the context of the

challenges and strains presented by the increasingly
complex environments that these operations are facing.

Peacekeeping is a dynamic concept and a tool for
maintaining international peace and security and
resolving conflicts, as well as a strategy for filling gaps
in failed or failing States and transitional societies. The
current practice of doctrine, mandating, budgeting for
and supporting peacekeeping operations and their links
to peacebuilding clearly needs a strategic review. In
this context, we welcome the New Horizon and
Support Strategy non-papers as the fastest steps
towards discussion and building broader consensus on
the way forward to effective, efficient and prudent
peacekeeping operations.

Peacekeeping is an endeavour carried out in
partnership among the Security Council, finance and
troop contributors, regional organizations and the host
country. We are pleased that the new non-paper has
been designated "A New Partnership Agenda". This
presents a new opportunity to strengthen peacekeeping
operations in the face of new challenges, especially
since a comprehensive review was made as recently as
2000 in the Brahimi report (S/2000/809). Some of the
core recommendations of that report - concerning,
inter alia, the need for political support and strategic
direction, rapid deployment and standby arrangements,
operational planning and support, the need for robust
doctrine, realistic mandates and practical rules of
engagement, improved mission guidance and leadership
and the need to involve troop-contributing countries in
important decisions - are still valid and should
continue to be implemented even in the face of current
challenges.

Similarly, the steps outlined in Peace Operations
2010 - especially in the five key areas of personnel,
doctrine, partnerships, resources and organization -
remain important and should be implemented.

It is a fact that even after 60 years of experience,
we are conducting every peacekeeping mission from
scratch, dealing with each mission separately, giving
each a separate budget and having to jump over the
same old hurdles each time. This situation can certainly
be improved with streamlined, anticipatory budgeting,
operational flexibility between different missions and
broadened planning horizons for existing and new
missions.

Peacekeeping cannot succeed without meaningful
engagement and involvement of troop- and police-
contributing countries every step of the way, including
in planning, mandating and determining political
strategy. Troop contributors should be given
operational flexibility and involvement in developing
rules of engagement according to individual situations.

The increasing demands of deployment
experienced by troop contributors, particularly with
regard to the complex logistical requirements of
contingent-owned equipment, could be remedied by
providing to the troop contributors support for
contingent equipment and training. Missions should
also be equipped with matching resources,
commensurate with the tasks in the field. Mandates
should be clear, unambiguous and achievable.

The transition from peacekeeping and
peacebuilding to socio-economic development is very
important. We welcome the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/304), which highlights key
challenges in peacebuilding, including the need for
national ownership, international leadership and
coherent support and delivery. The same should apply
to peacekeeping operations as well. There is a need to
improve recruitment and retention of qualified people
in order to reduce the high vacancy rates in missions,
as well as the modalities of partnerships with regional
organizations. While the current practice of holding
thematic debates on issues such as the protection of
women and children, the protection of civilians, rule of
law, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security sector reform, transitional justice and the role
of regional cooperation is important, these subjects
cannot be treated in isolation and should be built into a
comprehensive strategy.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that during
the review process, the core values of United Nations
peacekeeping operations - such as adherence to the
Charter, consent of the parties, non-interference in the
affairs of sovereign States, non-use of force except in
self-defence, and security and safety of personnel -
should be strictly applied. Such principles should not
be compromised even in the context of robust
peacekeeping operations.

