Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, for his
briefing. I welcome Mr. Ivica Dacic', First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and thank him for his statement.
China also listened carefully to the statement delivered
by Ms. Vlora Citaku.

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia. We understand the legitimate
concerns of Serbia on the question of Kosovo.
Resolution 1244 (1999) provides an important legal
basis for resolving the issue of Kosovo. We must follow
the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations, within the framework of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, in order to reach appropriate
settlements and solutions to the question of Kosovo
acceptable to all relevant parties through dialogue
and consultations.

China welcomes the establishment of the new
Government in Serbia and appreciates the positive
efforts of Serbia in seeking a political solution to the
question of Kosovo. We hope that both Pristina and
Belgrade will resume high-level political dialogue
at an early date in order to carry out pragmatic and
constructive consultations and implement the relevant
agreements already reached so as to effectively protect
the legitimate rights and interests of all ethnic groups in
Kosovo and advance national reconciliation. We hope
that both parties will refrain from any words or actions
that may lead to the complication and escalation of the
situation in a joint effort to actively seek a sustainable
solution to the question.

China commends the work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
under the leadership of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Mr. Zahir Tanin. We support
UNMIK in continuing to implement Security Council
mandates. We hope that UNMIK, the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force
will carry out their work, in accordance with their
respective mandates, in order to play a constructive role
in the proper settlement of the question of Kosovo.

The authority of the Security Council, as the main
organ for the maintenance of international peace and
security, should be respected and its seriousness must
be protected.

