Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): First of all, let me join
other speakers in thanking Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Zannier for his briefing on the
latest situation in Kosovo and the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2008/692). We would also like to
welcome the presence of Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and we thank
him for his statement. We also welcome the presence of
Mr. Hyseni.

We are deeply troubled by several inter-ethnic
security incidents, albeit at a low level, during the
rebuilding period. This chain of events must be halted
by various preventive measures, including non-
coercive measures. The Security Council collectively
must transmit a clear message to all parties to continue
to exercise restraint with a view to maintaining
stability and security in the region.

We understand that there are divergent paths
being taken by Belgrade and Pristina with regard to the
space in which the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) can
operate. This has significant consequences within
which the Special Representative can exercise his
mandate, as stipulated in resolution 1244 (1999). This
has led UNMIK to start a series of steps in the
reconfiguration process. In this regard, we support the
work of Special Representative Zannier and UNMIK
and acknowledge the need to adjust UNMIK's structure
and profile in response to the profoundly changed
reality in Kosovo.

We also recognize that UNMIK has to cooperate
with the European Union (EU) to facilitate the EU's
preparation to undertake an enhanced operational role
in Kosovo in the rule of law area. For this reason, we
wish to stress the importance of establishing a clear
link between the EU office with that of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. It is our
understanding that resolution 1244 (1999) still governs
Kosovo, and thus any entity working in the region has
to fall within that framework. These efforts will once
again demonstrate that synergy and efforts between the
United Nations and regional organizations can bear the
fruits of success.

While taking into account the evolving situation
on the ground that surrounds and affects the role of
UNMIK, and in the interests of maintaining peace and
stability, we urge all parties on the ground to continue
to work and cooperate with UNMIK. Resolution 1244
(1999) continues to provide the necessary political and
legal framework in which UNMIK must discharge its
mandate, including the implementation of standards.
UNMIK's operational reconfiguration, as we
understand it, is status-neutral.

Indonesia supports the continuation of dialogue
and negotiation between Belgrade and Pristina on
issues of mutual concern. It is particularly crucial that
this effort also encompass the wider issue of resolving
the final status question. Without this consideration, it
is difficult to foresee the possibility of normalizing the
situation on the ground.
We continue to welcome the steadfast position
taken by Serbia in committing itself to resolving the
final status of Kosovo by political, diplomatic and
legal means. By the same token, we call on all parties
in Kosovo to embrace a similar position. Such an
approach will, we believe, guarantee that all Kosovars
will ultimately enjoy the dividends of peace.

In this context, the Secretary-General should
continue to engage all parties in the region so as to find
a mutually acceptable solution in line with resolution
1244 (1999).

Finally, we would like to conclude by thanking
the Secretary-General and his team for their efforts as
well as all UNMIK personnel, under the leadership of
the Special Representative, Mr. Zannier, for their
dedication to the pursuit of peace and security in the
region.

