Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing. Council members may rest assured that we
will continue to support his work. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2019/938).
We also heard Ms. Adele Raemer's story, from which
it is quite clear that we need to faithfully implement
resolution 2334 (2016).

The Security Council must also conduct a field visit
to Gaza and the West Bank of the occupied Palestinian
territory. I have been wondering - and still fail to
understand - why the Security Council is not able to
effectuate an official visit there, but it does show that
clearly much still needs to be done.

Indonesia fully concurs with the Secretary-General
that illegal settlement activities continue to undermine
the prospects of ending occupation and achieving
the two-State solution. We heard from Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov that the situation has deteriorated and that
much still needs to be done. We therefore join other
Council members in again urging Israel to immediately
and completely cease all settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem. Against this backdrop, I would like to stress
the following points.

First, the Council must devise the necessary
means to ensure the full implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). When the Council adopted the resolution
three years ago, it set the right course for reviving the
peace process based on international law and agreed
parameters. The resolution rejected any efforts that
undermined international consensus on the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, including the settlement issue. It
also entailed preserving and protecting the status quo at
the holy sites in Jerusalem, in line with the special and
historical role of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan as
custodian of the Muslim and Christian holy sites.

It is clear that the occupying Power has much to
do to ensure the full implementation of the provisions
of resolution 2334 (2016). The deteriorating situation
on the ground compels the Council to urgently devise
practical and effective ways and means to end the
illegal settlements. We cannot continue with business
as usual. Failure to devise such measures would be a
case of the Council undermining its own authority and
decisions, which would further destabilize the situation
in the occupied territory and the wider region.

Secondly, with regard to the need for more
concerted action to support the Palestinian cause, if we
are truly serious about our support for the Palestinian
cause, surely it is time for more concerted action. We
need to reinvigorate our commitment to the peace
process in order to achieve the two-State solution, on
the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions
and the internationally agreed parameters. Given the
current negative trends, we are doubtful that a credible
process will ever materialize. To reverse those trends,
members of the international community have the
obligation to undertake necessary actions against Israel
and its settlement policy, including by distinguishing
between Israel and the territories occupied since
1967 in their relevant dealings with that country. The
recent ruling by the Court of Justice of the European
Union - that foods from Israeli settlements should
be specially labelled, encouraging consumers to mull
over ethical considerations while shopping - is a
commendable example.

Lastly, on the need to sustain humanitarian
assistance for the Palestinian people, while we defend
the fate of the two-State solution, let us not forget the
humanitarian crisis facing the Palestinian people in
Gaza, the West Bank and in various refugee locations.
In that connection, we reiterate our call to the
international community to extend its utmost support
for the work of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East with
urgency and by whatever means possible. We need to
remain steadfast in our efforts to assist the Palestinian
people not only in humanitarian terms but also in
enhancing the capacity of the Palestinians to fully
govern themselves. As for Indonesia, the Government
and its people have stood and will always stand by our
Palestinian brothers and sisters. We support the plan to
hold a Palestinian general election and fervently hope
that it will unify all Palestinians towards their dream
State of Palestine.

In conclusion, let me once again remind members
of the international community that resolution 2334
(2016) is much more than a mere document produced
by the Council. It is a beacon ofhope for the Palestinian
people and a pillar that upholds international law against
the fabricated reality being advanced by the occupying
Power. Our action or inaction against that false reality
will determine not only the credibility of the United
Nations but also the fate of the Palestinian people and
of the Middle East.

