Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I also like thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, for her excellent
briefing this morning.

First of all, I express my thanks to the United
Nations for its efforts to bring about peace in the
Middle East and support the Palestinian people. We
express our full support for those efforts. Achieving the
peace that we wish for with all our hearts requires us
to commit fully to the principles of international law,
in particular the relevant United Nations resolutions,
and rely on the agreed terms of reference, including the
Arab Peace Initiative.

It is now clear that the path towards resolving the
Palestinian question lies in the two-State solution,
predicated upon the establishment ofa viable Palestinian
State within the 1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its
capital. That also requires ending the Israeli occupation
of occupied Palestinian territories and immediately
halting all settlement activities. Refugees must be able
to return. The Palestinian people must recover all of
their inalienable rights.

The State of Qatar condemns the intensification
of settlement activities in East Jerusalem, in particular
the announcement in May of the construction of 805
new housing units. In that regard, we call for the
full implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the most recent of which is resolution 2334
(2016), on settlements in the occupied territories.

Qatar reiterates its principled and coherent position
that the Golan Heights is occupied Arab territory.
Therefore, Israel's imposition of its jurisdiction and
administration is null and void and has no legal effect.
As part of its commitment, Qatar has played a positive
role in ensuring the necessary conditions for achieving
peace and is pursuing efforts with the stakeholders, in
coordination with the United Nations, to alleviate the
very trying humanitarian situation that the Palestinian
people are undergoing, in particular in the Gaza Strip,

which is suffering under an extremely burdensome and
long-standing blockade.

In that regard, I should like to draw the Council's
attention to the State of Qatar's pledge, made in May,
to provide $480 million in humanitarian assistance to
our Palestinian brothers in the occupied Palestinian
territories. Of that, $300 million will be disbursed
as a donation and loans supporting the education
and health-care budgets of the Palestinian Authority,
and the remaining $180 million are earmarked for
emergency humanitarian assistance and the provision
of electricity.

Moreover, we are supporting those projects being
carried out under the auspices ofthe United Nations. The
State of Qatar has also committed this year once again
to providing additional support to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, as we realize the tremendous importance
of the services provided by the Agency to millions of
Palestinian refugees. Qatar reaffirms its support for
national reconciliation among our Palestinian brothers.

While the catastrophic humanitarian repercussions
of the Syrian crisis continue, the State of Qatar, for its
part, continues to provide the necessary humanitarian
assistance to the brotherly Syrian people and cooperate
with the United Nations and international partners to
end the crisis. The only way to end the humanitarian
suffering is to end the violence and serious violations
of international humanitarian law. Furthermore, it
is essential to work seriously to achieve a political
solution that responds to the aspirations of the Syrian
people in all their aspects, with respect for the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex) and Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2254 (2015). It is all
in the context of preserving Syria's unity, sovereignty
and independence, while guaranteeing accountability
for the most serious crimes.

The situation in Libya is at a critical phase, with
escalating tensions in the west of the country following
the assault on its capital Tripoli. That risks undermining
the political process under way under United Nations
auspices. Recently, we have seen serious violations of
international humanitarian law, including the aerial
bombing of a migrant reception centre in Tripoli and
the targeting of a hospital in the south of the city. That
requires firm condemnation on the part of the Council
and draconian measures to end the escalation.
The State of Qatar expresses its full support for
the Government of National Accord that is recognized
by the international community. Qatar welcomes the
initiative of Mr. Fayez Al-Sarraj, Chairman of the
Presidential Council, in his efforts to resolve the crisis
by holding an intra-Libyan meeting in coordination
with the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
so as to achieve a comprehensive political agreement
guaranteeing Libya's sovereignty and territorial
integrity and responding to the aspirations of its people
for security and stability. We hope that the international
community will support that initiative and express our
full support for the efforts of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ghassan Salame.

For two years now, our region has been the scene
of an escalating crisis, with serious repercussions
on regional stability, which could become a threat to
peace, security, human rights and cooperation in the
region. I am speaking here of the crisis concerning the
imposition of an unfair blockade and illegal unilateral
measures on the State of Qatar and the accompanying
campaign promoting hatred and disinformation 4 a
flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and the principle of friendly relations among States,
which calls on States not to aggravate conflicts, but
rather to resolve them through dialogue and peaceful
means. The position of the State of Qatar is very clear.
We call for the settlement ofthe crisis through dialogue,
thereby guaranteeing our sovereignty and ending
illegal measures. We have reiterated that commitment
through the good offices of His Highness Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Emir of Kuwait. In that
regard, we thank all States that supported it.

Our approach is the right one, as was demonstrated
in our handling of the crisis using international law and
international dispute settlement mechanisms. Our legal
position is also valid, as proved by the judgment of July
2018 at the International Court of Justice for measures to
be taken against the United Arab Emirates for violating
the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination, as well as the decision
of the Court in June to refuse the request of the United
Arab Emirates for the implementation of temporary
measures against Qatar.

The aim of those attempts to undermine the State
of Qatar is now well known. Attempts to impinge upon
our State have had the sole result of demonstrating its
importance and place on the international stage. Its
place has been recognized, as it is based on positions
and policies rooted in the principles ofinternational law,
the United Nations Charter and based on an important
contribution to cooperation that seeks to preserve
international security, bring about development and
protect human rights. However, the ongoing crisis sets
a dangerous precedent in international relations and
is a threat to international peace and security. The
international community must therefore take a firm
position on the issue and put an immediate end to the
illegal blockade.

In conclusion, the continuation and growing number
of crises in the Middle East should not undermine our
hope in our ability to address them. The Council has
played a key role in combating threats to international
peace and security. The people suffering from the crises
in our region aspire to the role that the international
community and the United Nations can play to address
them effectively.

