Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): The delegation of
Botswana believes a negotiated settlement is always
possible in any political conflict. We are therefore delighted
that reason has ultimately prevailed in Eastern Slavonia,
where the Croatian Government and the local Serb
authorities have abandoned the logic of war in favour of a
political solution. The key to lasting peace in that region
now lies with the full implementation of the Basic
Agreement, within the time limits set therein. It is
imperative that the parties strictly adhere to the
commitments they have entered into, including by
creating conditions of trust and confidence among all the
ethnic groups in Eastern Slavonia. In this connection, it is
crucial for the parties to respect fully the cease-fire and
enable the demilitarization process to proceed as planned.

The Security Council has two principal tasks under
the Basic Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium, signed on 12 November
1995: to create a transitional administration for the region
and to establish a peace implementation force. Draft
resolution S/1996/23 would do just that. It would establish
a United Nations peace-keeping operation to be known as
the United Nations Transitional Administration for
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium
(UNTAES), consisting of both military and civilian
components. Thus, following the adoption of that draft
resolution the Security Council will have fulfilled its
obligation under the Basic Agreement. It will be up to the
parties to fulfil their end of the deal. The recent
announcement by the parties to the conflict that they will
respect the authority of the United Nations was therefore
a welcome development. The relative decline in the level
of military activity in the region following the signing of
the Basic Agreement has given us reason for cautious
optimism, and it is for that reason that we support the
establishment of a United Nations operation there. We are
not, however, unaware of the poor record of both parties
in honouring previous agreements.

The parties should realize that UNTAES is being
established to help them implement their own agreement,
not to force them to do so. Its mandate as spelled out in
paragraphs 10 and 11 of the draft resolution conforms
strictly to the limits and scope of the Basic Agreement
signed by both parties. It is therefore clear that UNTAES
will be doomed to failure without the cooperation of the
Government of Croatia and the local Serb authorities. It
should also be very clear to the parties that the
humiliation to which United Nations personnel were
regularly subjected in neighbouring Bosnia, in the former
Sectors West, North and South, and in the region of
Eastern Slavonia itself in the recent past will not be
tolerated.

The Secretary-General suggested in his report that
the Council should authorize a force large enough to
protect itself and other United Nations personnel, in view
of past experience in former Yugoslavia. The caucus of
the Non-Aligned Movement worked with the sponsors of
the draft resolution in an effort to ensure that a credible
United Nations presence able to respond to any situation

 

in the most robust manner would be established. Although
the initial troop deployment will be less than what the
Secretary-General had proposed, we fervently hope that
paragraphs 13 and 14 of draft resolution S/1996/23 will
provide, as we are assured they will by the authors of the
text, an effective safeguard of the safety and security of
UNTAES. In other words, we hope that these two
paragraphs will make it clear enough that the multinational
Implementation Force (IFOR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina
will have full authority to deter any attacks against
UNTAES.

The question of human rights is one of the most
important elements in the peace process in Eastern
Slavonia, as it is in Croatia as a whole. The continuing
Violations of the human rights of the Serb population in the
former Sectors North and South are, to put it mildly,
unhelpful to the peace process in Croatia. We call upon the
Croatian Government to institute the necessary guarantees
of full respect of the rights of the Serb population in
Croatia and to create conditions suitable for the safe return
of the refugees.

In the final analysis, it is clear that the successful
implementation of the Basic Agreement will depend on the
safety of and respect for United Nations personnel. It will
depend on recourse to political dialogue by the parties in
Eastern Slavonia and the surrounding areas, and on the
creation of conditions of trust and confidence among all the
ethnic groups not only in Eastern Slavonia but in the whole
territory of Croatia.

