Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
First, I wish to thank you, Madam President, personally
and to congratulate the United Kingdom presidency on
taking the initiative to plan this discussion on energy,
security and climate.

We believe that climate change is among the
principal threats to the future of humankind and to its
environmental security. It is a basic threat, the first
consequences of which are already affecting
populations, in particular those of the most vulnerable
countries. Its impact on international peace and
security may take various forms, which are clearly set
out in the very useful concept paper (S/2007/186, annex) prepared in preparation for today's meeting.

Therefore, we must act without delay. In
Johannesburg in September 2002, President Jacques
Chirac began his statement by stating, "The house is on
fire but we are looking elsewhere". Five years later,
there is definitely more awareness, but it has not yet
been translated, as it must be, into concerted decisive
action by the entire international community to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions and to minimize the damage
linked to climate change.

As a matter of urgency, we must mobilize and
find responses to the challenge in all its aspects. The
Security Council is certainly not the number one forum
for dealing with this subject. Nor, clearly, is it the only
one. The United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change and the General Assembly clearly
have a central role to play here. But, within its
mandate, the Security Council cannot ignore the threats
to international security caused by global warming.
And I must say that institutional squabbling is
inappropriate given what is at stake. Exclusivity must
give way to the contribution of all participants in the
struggle; everyone has a role to play.

All of the climate change threats are real threats.
In the medium and the long term, they will affect
security among nations. Today, no one would dare to
challenge the reality of climate change. In its fourth
report, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
reached the scientifically corroborated conclusion that
there is 90 per cent certainty that global warming is the
result of human activity. On 6 April, the same Panel
concluded that this phenomenon could lead to
increased numbers of extreme weather events, massive
population movements resulting from sea-level rise,
decreased agricultural production causing serious food
crises and an increased threat of health risks because of
changes in the functioning of ecosystems.

Those four major impacts are convincing
evidence of the threat to peace posed by climate
change. There is no question but that the depletion of
resources could increase competition for access to
food, energy and water. There is no doubt that the loss
of arable land could lead to a race for territory. It is
clear that natural disasters and rising water levels could
increase the number of refugees and displaced persons
and could result in uncontrollable migratory flows. The
more sudden these phenomena are, the more they will
constitute factors for conflict.

No region is immune, but the impact of climate
change will be greater where it is accompanied by pre-
existing factors of fragility, which it will make even
worse. The most vulnerable countries, particularly in
Africa, already face underdevelopment, ethnic tension,
major pandemics and unpredictable climatic
conditions, and they could pay the highest price. It will
be even harder for them to face these difficulties
because they lack capacity and because State structures
are too weak to respond fully to the needs of their
populations.

The situation therefore requires decisive,
collective and urgent action by the international
community to mitigate climate change and limit its
consequences to tolerable levels - which must never
exceed the threshold of 2 centigrade degrees. As
Nicholas Stern has indicated in his report on the
economics of climate change, the cost of not acting
infinitely outweighs the cost of taking action. That is
why, in order to ensure the continuity of steps taken
and the durability of the relevant instruments, it is
essential to define by 2009 a regime for effectively
combating climate change after 2012. Members are
aware of the commitments in this sphere undertaken by
the European Union in March. The Security Council is
certainly not the place to speak at length about
negotiations taking place elsewhere.

But it falls squarely within the Security Council's
mandate to prevent conflict - the likelihood of which,
as I have just stressed, is unfortunately very great. It is
thus the Council's duty to play its part. Here, we must
think about what could be done in terms of preventive
diplomacy in liaison with the Secretary-General. The
Secretary-General could focus his efforts on regions or
areas where climatic threats can have direct
implications for peace. Such an approach requires that
the consequences of climate change be integrated into
risk analyses prepared by the Secretariat.

The impact of climate change should also be
taken into consideration by the Security Council. It
must include elements related to the depletion of
resources - which have been seen to be a major factor
in conflicts, especially in Africa - in its contribution
to efforts at conflict settlement.

Beyond the role of the Security Council and the
Secretary-General, preventing conflicts requires the

international community to mobilize all the
mechanisms needed to support developing countries in
their efforts to achieve sustainable management of their
natural resources and to prepare for natural disasters.
The United Nations can contribute by promoting the
integration of the economic, social and environmental
aspects of sustainable development, because it is clear
that poverty, human health problems and
environmental degradation can no longer be viewed as
isolated threats. That is also why it is urgent to improve
international environmental governance, towards which
France has proposed the establishment of a United
Nations environmental organization on the basis of the
United Nations Environment Programme.

We must be aware that the international
community cannot win the battle against climate
change and its impact without putting into action the
instruments in its possession.

