Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to welcome the fact that you,
Madam President, are personally presiding over today's
meeting. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2002/ 1300) and statement. I also wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General Oshima and the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC), Mr. Gnaedinger, for their
statements.

The Security Council has considered the question
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict on many
occasions. Security Council resolutions 1265 (1999)
and 1296 (2000) and the aide-memoire adopted early
this year have provided important guidelines. We
commend the Secretary-General and the United
Nations agencies for their efforts, including taking
fully into account the impact on civilians when
formulating and carrying out strategies and goals in the
political, security and humanitarian fields, cooperating
with regional organizations to widely publicize
knowledge and experience in the area of protecting
civilians and drawing up a road map covering work in
the political, legal, humanitarian, disarmament and
peacekeeping spheres. We encourage the United
Nations agencies to continue to strengthen cooperation
and coordination, further refine and improve the road
map for protecting civilians, establish a relevant
timetable at an early date and clarify the division of
responsibilities between the various agencies.

To thoroughly resolve the question of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, we must
eliminate the root causes of conflict, eliminate poverty,
promote economic development and national
reconciliation and safeguard national stability. It also
needs to be stressed that the responsibility for
protecting civilians lies mainly with the Government of
the country concerned and the parties to the conflict.
The parties to the conflict must strictly abide by
international humanitarian law, strictly distinguish
between civilians and combatants, prevent injury to
civilians and allow humanitarian assistance to reach
vulnerable populations in an unimpeded manner. As far
as the Security Council is concerned, if more can be
accomplished in the prevention and the timely
settlement of conflicts, that would be an important
contribution to protecting civilians from being harmed
in armed conflict.

I wish to point out that the restoration of peace
and stability to conflict areas in Africa is an urgent task
before the Security Council. Among those tasks is the
work of disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration. That is very important
with regard to former combatants. The international
community should increase its input and participation
in that regard.

It must also be pointed out that, due to Israel's
military actions, blockades and curfews, the
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories continues to deteriorate. Many basic needs of
innocent Palestinian civilians, such as water, medicine
and education, cannot be met. Israel should lift its
blockades and curfews against the Palestinians and
facilitate international humanitarian relief work as soon
as possible. Israel and Palestine should respond to the
efforts of the international community to achieve peace
and emerge from the cycle of violence as soon as
possible. Otherwise, we cannot even begin to speak of
the problem of protecting innocent civilians, both
Palestinian and Israeli.

