Mr. Savinykh (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus has always ensured a high level of
protection for State borders. Belarus is a reliable
barrier to illegal migration, the movement of terrorists
and the transit of weapons, drugs and their precursors.
Given its geographical location, Belarus has
significantly expanded the resources and efforts that it
devotes to protecting State borders. The effectiveness
of those measures can be felt fully by other countries in
the region.

An example of that work was the recent
disruption of a network of trafficking in women,
undertaken jointly with INTERPOL and British law
enforcement agencies. A broad series of measures was
also implemented, alongside Ukraine, to ensure
security around the European Football Championship.
Belarus is also cooperating productively with the
Collective Security Treaty Organization to protect
common borders. In this context, Belarus could be
called a regional exporter of security.

In order to safeguard security along its entire
border, the Republic of Belarus is taking steps to
ensure that separate parts of the border no longer
receive unequal treatment in terms of protection. To
this end, we are redeploying resources to staff and
equip the southern border control. That is extremely
important because Belarus lies on the main transport
routes not only between the East and the West but also
between the North and the South.

I would like to support and respond to the
interesting and important idea expressed by the
delegations of the United States of America and
Norway. I call attention to the work of the Committee
on Trade of the United Nations Economic Commission
for Europe. The Committee's work on trade standards
and information and communications technology
infrastructure development has allowed us to promote
transparency in all international trade exchanges and
decrease the related financial and temporal costs. We
see a genuine possibility of concluding this work in the
near future in the Eurasian Economic Commission,
which has begun its work this year as the executive
body of a common economic space for Belarus,
Kazakhstan and Russia.
The Economic Commission for Europe plans,
through the Committee on Trade, to discuss the future
possibility of establishing a universal, pan-European
system for supporting and monitoring trade operations.
Such a system would enhance the transparency and
security of all trade flows, removing excessive
bureaucratic obstacles to business.

Belarus intends to continue to act as an effective
guarantor of the security of borders in the interests of
the entire region. We note that the expenses involved in
this area continue to rise. In this connection, and also
given the need to ensure capacity-building for border
protection in light of rising threats, we appeal to our
partners to offer practical cooperation and support for
protecting our borders.

