Mr. Lee Ho-jin (Republic of Korea): We are very
grateful to you, Mr. Jayakumar, Foreign Minister of
Singapore, for presiding over this historic meeting of
the Security Council today to mark the independence of
East Timor. I would like to pay tribute to you and to the
Singaporean presidency for successfully guiding the
Security Council during the month of May. We
welcome the fact that under Singapore's leadership, the
Security Council has been moving towards greater
openness in its work.

Today, 20 May, is a time for celebration. After
centuries of sufferings and devastation, East Timor has
now emerged as a free, independent State. On this
delightful occasion, I extend, on behalf of the
Government and the people of the Republic of Korea,
my deepest congratulations to the leaders and the
people of East Timor.

Over the past two and a half years, the United
Nations has exercised competence and robustness in
helping to convert into reality the East Timorese
people's aspiration to independence. In that regard, my
delegation admires the unreserved dedication of Mr.
Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and of all other members of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET).

With independence, the role of the United
Nations in East Timor is being transformed from one of
administration to one of support. My delegation
welcomes and fully supports Security Council
resolution 1410 (2002), adopted unanimously last
Friday, which details the establishment of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), the successor mission to the United
Nations Transitional Assistance Mission in East Timor
(UNTAET), for an initial period of 12 months. We are
fully confident that UNMISET will fulfil its mandate
successfully under the able leadership of Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma.

This day of East Timorese independence holds
special significance for my country, as I am sure it does
for many others. The Republic of Korea has been
actively contributing to East Timor's transition to an
independent State. Based on our firm commitment to
democracy and human rights, we have been
participating in international efforts at nation-building
in East Timor by extending humanitarian and
development assistance, by taking part in election
monitoring and, above all, by dispatching a significant
number of peacekeeping battalions to the military
component of UNTAET.

Today, the Republic of Korea has established full,
ambassadorial-level diplomatic relations with the
Democratic Republic of East Timor. Building on those
formal bilateral relations, we will continue to
strengthen our ties with East Timor not only in political
and economic areas but also in social, cultural and
other fields.

The Republic of Korea remains committed to
joining in the efforts of the international community to
ensure democracy and prosperity in the new State of
East Timor. As far as our participation in UNMISET is
concerned, the Republic of Korea will continue to
contribute peacekeeping troops to the United Nations
Mission until its mandate is accomplished.

It gives us great pleasure to welcome East Timor
to the community of nations. We expect it to join the
United Nations as soon as is practicable. The
Government of the Republic of Korea very much looks
forward to working closely with the Government of
East Timor in the international arena.

