The President: The Security Council will now
resume its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the

understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the

following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes

participation of the Foreign Minister of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in its
meeting on 7 March 2001 and carefully listened
to him.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
recent violence by ethnic Albanian armed
extremists in the north of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, in particular the killing
of three soldiers of the armed forces of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in the area of
Tanusevci. The Security Council regrets that the
Violence continues and calls for an immediate end
to it.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern at those events, which constitute a threat
to the stability and security not only of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia but also of the
entire region. It calls on all political leaders in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, who are
in a position to do so to isolate the forces behind
the violent incidents and to shoulder their
responsibility for peace and stability in the
region.

"The Security Council underlines the
responsibility of the Government of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia for the rule of
law in its territory. It supports actions by the
Government of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia to address the violence with an
appropriate level of restraint and to preserve the
political stability of the country and foster
harmony between all ethnic components of the
population.

"The Security Council recalls the need to
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. In
this context it emphasizes that the border
demarcation agreement, signed in Skopje on 23
February 2001, and ratified by the Parliament of
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on 1
March 2001, must be respected by all.

"The Security Council welcomes the steps
taken by the international security presence
(KFOR) to control the border between Kosovo,
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in accordance
with the military-technical agreement signed in
Kumanovo on 9 June 1999. It welcomes the
ongoing dialogue between the Government of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
KFOR on practical steps to address the immediate
security situation and to prevent crossing of the
border by extremists as well as possible
violations of resolution 1160 (1998) of 31 March
1998. It welcomes the efforts of all relevant
international organizations in cooperation with
the Government of the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia to promote stability and to create
conditions for a return of the inhabitants to their
homes.

"The Security Council will continue to
follow the developments on the ground closely,
and requests to be briefed regularly on the
outcome of the efforts referred to above."

This statement will be issued as a document of

the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2001/7.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

I should like to thank all my colleagues around

the table for their patience and discipline during this
long but useful day in the Security Council.

The meeting rose at 8.20 pm.
