Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, on behalf
of the Government of Kazakhstan, my delegation joins
others in conveying our deepest condolences to the
United States and its people on the passing away of
a great statesman, former President George Herbert
Walker Bush. He was the one who recognized the
independence of Kazakhstan after the dissolution of
the Soviet Union and will be remembered dearly in
our country.

We warmly welcome you to the Chamber,
Mr. President, and congratulate you on chairing your
delegation's important signature event. We also thank
the Ivorian presidency for highlighting the importance
ofpeacebuilding and sustaining peace and giving us an
opportunity to learn from its experiences, which range
from emerging from a long conflict to holding a seat on
the Security Council. We join others in commending
this great accomplishment. We also express our
gratitude to His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres and
His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat for their
commitment to bringing sustainable peace to Africa.

My delegation would like to offer the following
observations based on Cote d'Ivoire's lessons.

Conflicts today are accelerating at an unprecedented
pace and intensity and are aggravated by the many new
emerging threats - terrorism, extremism, weapons of
mass destruction, organized crime, all forms of illegal
trafficking, migration, refugee influxes, human rights
violations, unmitigated climate change, deep-seated
poverty and multidimensional injustices. Therefore,
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Secretary-General's new agenda for peace, Action for
Peacekeeping, and reforms provide us with the most
viable way forward. They should further reinforce
regional plans, such as Agenda 2063 and the Silencing
the Guns in Africa initiative, which must be supported
by the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Support Office.

Hence peacebuilding and sustaining should be a
priority, through a strategic and coherent approach for
conflict-prone and -affected countries, from the first
early warnings and not as a post-conflict intervention.
International attention must be paid to prevention.
As United Nations efforts in Cote d'Ivoire proved,
we must also overcome prevailing fragmentation and
silo-like strategies within the United Nations system
itself. The focus on laying the foundation for enduring
peace in some challenging areas is critical, such as
democracy-building, national security, the rule of law,
local governance, public administration, economic and
financial structures, social services and reconciliation.

Mediation, negotiations and confidence-building
measures between the sides involved to resolve
protracted, as well as newly emerging, conflicts are the
building blocks of the peacebuilding architecture. They
are best achieved through coordinating the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representatives and
Envoys, in conjunction with regional and subregional
organizations, as well as the World Bank and African
and European development banks. Bilateral donors and
international aid agencies make a vital contribution,
supported by South-South, North-South and triangular
cooperation, to capacity- and institution-building and
the reintegration of regional and national economies.

Similarly, the changing nature of conflicts demands
a new, robust and multidimensional strategy that
combines peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustainable
development. Such a strategy should include climate
mitigation and the conservation of precious natural
resources. Those ultimate goals also call for a review
of how we shape our mandates and implement them
by broadening the concept of peace and stability
from State-centred security to people-oriented
security - from purely military to non-military
security, which includes food, water and energy
security - the key drivers of peace. In that process
of sustaining peace and reconstruction, the women,
youth, peace and security agendas must be overarching
and is most crucial. In that regard, Kazakhstan firmly
supports predictable and sustainable funding of United
Nations-African Union-led peacekeeping operations
and proposed a draft resolution on that matter.

Based on our two-year experience in the
Council - which included visiting the Horn of
Africa, the Great Lakes region, the Lake Chad basin,
Afghanistan, Colombia and Myanmar - or even taking
the example of cote d'Ivoire, Kazakhstan proposes
strengthening multilateral system-wide coordination
to improve the interlinkages between development and
security with investments in education, job creation,
health care, a revamped regional approach and the
United Nations Delivering as One. This strategy is
not new, but a robust combination of those elements
can create a universal model to address conflicts and
sustain peace in other parts of the world.

We can also envisage creating a new United
Nations paradigm for peacebuilding, sustaining peace
and development with reflections from my President's
Manifesto: The World. The 21st Century, which proposes
just economic structures among countries to eliminate
conflicts by the United Nations centennial in 2045. In
addition, through its code of conduct towards achieving
a world free of terrorism, Kazakhstan has succeeded in
building a platform of 80 countries to jointly implement
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and eliminate that scourge by 2045.
The First and Second World Wars began as a result
of the lack of negotiations and dialogue, which still
persists 73 years after the United Nations was founded.
My President therefore recently proposed that the
main world actors and peace guarantors * such as the
United States, Russia, China, the European Union and
others - address their differences and find political
solutions together to threats to international security
and sustainable peace. Kazakhstan believe that such a
platform can have a great impact on peacebuilding and
sustainable peace.

The United Nations plays an irreplaceable role as
the most universal, representative and authoritative
Organization in the world. Kazakhstan will steadfastly
continue to support the United Nations as the premier
security envoy and forerunner of development.

