Mr. Otunnu: On behalf of children affected by
war all over the world, I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this particular meeting devoted to the
protection of children in war situations. I also thank the
Ambassador of France for having set in motion this
initiative last September.

It is a particular honour to have in our midst Ms.
Graca Machel of Mozambique and South Africa. Her
groundbreaking work, commitment and passion laid the
foundation for this work. We are watering the plant, the
seed of which she planted.

How wonderful to have young people at this
table. The door has finally been opened to those who
are most affected by conflict.

When we adults wage war, the highest price is
paid by children. They are killed and maimed, orphans
and refugees, traumatized and sexually abused, denied
education and exposed to malnutrition and, of course,
exploited as child soldiers.

I greatly appreciate the commitment of the
Security Council and its work over the past several
years to incorporate the protection and well-being of
children into the peace and security agenda of the
United Nations.

With regard to the efforts under way today to
mainstream this activity, what do I ask of the Council
in particular? I ask that, working together with you, we
should ensure that the protection and well-being of
children is included in negotiations to end conflict and
in every peace accord in a systematic way; that the
protection of children becomes truly part of the raison
d'etre of peace operations, expressed in mandates and
reports to the Security Council; that effective training
and codes of conduct be provided for peacekeeping and
humanitarian personnel, so that they, by their conduct,
might set the best example for the respect and
protection of children and women. I ask that child
protection advisers be included on the staff of
peacekeeping missions to strengthen the capacity for
advocacy and protection on the ground; that we
actively promote the participation of young people
themselves in peace processes, so that they thereby
become actors and advocates on their own behalf and
on behalf of other children - that is why I am so glad
that the young people are here today; and that the
demobilization and rehabilitation of former child-
soldiers are an important component of any
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme on the ground.

As for countries that are emerging from conflict,
we ask that the rehabilitation and well-being of
children should be a centrepiece of any reconstruction,
healing and rebuilding programme, and that this be
expressed as a matter of urgency in policy-making,
priority-setting and, above all, in resource allocation
for the benefit of children and young people. We can
already point to this commitment today in Afghanistan,
Sierra Leone, the Balkans and, we hope, in Angola.

Finally, I ask the Security Council to spare no
effort to ensure that the wonderful and very impressive
norms, rules, obligations and commitments, including
Security Council resolutions, are translated into reality
on the ground - reality that can provide protection to
children and women exposed to war. This is the best
gift we could give to the children who are here with us
this afternoon and who, on behalf of millions of other
children around the globe, will spread the good news
emerging from the Council's deliberations this
afternoon.

