Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): Allow me,
first of all, to convey our congratulations to you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for November. I also wish to express our
gratitude to the Permanent Representative of Japan for
his stewardship of the Council last month. We also
thank Assistant Secretary-General Angela Kane for her
briefing to the Security Council this morning.

The escalation of Israel's serious and continuous
military operations in occupied Palestinian territory is
a continuation of Israel's established policy to use
military force to dictate a solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict. That approach has proved futile and has only

resulted in further bloodshed and destruction. The
League of Arab States condemns Israel's acts of
aggression against the Palestinian people as well as its
brutal invasion of the Gaza Strip. That action has
already claimed numerous Palestinians lives, due, in
part, to unrestrained firing upon Palestinian civilians in
Beit Hanoun in the Gaza Strip. We also condemn the
use by Israeli forces of internationally prohibited
weapons against Palestinians and its deliberate
destruction of vital Palestinian infrastructure. We
believe that the continuation of Israel's acts of
aggression will result in a further escalation of an
already tense and complex situation in the region. That
will, in turn, hinder efforts aimed at finding a peaceful
resolution of the problem.

Israel's continued acts of aggression on
Palestinian territory and against the Palestinian people
are further evidence of Israel's intention to be neither a
real participant in the peace process nor a contributor
to regional stability. The international community, and
especially the Security Council, should therefore
seriously consider the Arab request to work towards
the revival of the peace process. We wonder why it is
that the Quartet, which has been entrusted with
following the situation in Palestine, has not yet played
its role in that regard and call upon it to play its proper
role in the peace process.

We also call upon the Secretary-General to
establish a fact-finding commission to investigate
Israel's ongoing acts of aggression in the occupied
Palestinian territories, which are in violation of
international law, as well as to submit a report to the
Security Council on this matter as soon as possible.

It is obvious that the events unfolding before our
eyes today reflect the tragic collapse of the entire peace
process between the Israelis and the Palestinians.
Israel's logic of using force as the only course of action
cannot lead to a resolution of this conflict. In our view,
the only viable option to bring about peace is a return
to the negotiating table by both the Palestinian and
Israeli sides.

