Mr. Mladenov: With no prospect in sight for
resuming negotiations, developments on the ground in
Israel and Palestine continue to undermine an already
precarious situation. Illegal settlement construction
advances, Gaza remains beyond the control of the
legitimate Palestinian Authority and the political
leadership on both sides continues to shy away from
the steps that are necessary for peace. That is the reality
that continues to erode trust in the prospect for a two-
State solution, the constituency for which is dwindling
both in Israel and Palestine.

Although the past month has been relatively calm in
terms of the frequency and intensity of violence in Israel
and in the occupied Palestinian territory, a number of
security-related incidents continued to cause concern.
First, there was the apparent extrajudicial execution by
members of the Palestinian security forces in Nablus on
23 August ofa man, while in custody. He was suspected
of orchestrating the killing of two security personnel
earlier in the week. I welcome the announcement by
Prime Minister Hamdallah of an investigation and call
for a thorough, independent and transparent process, in
line with international standards, in order to bring to
justice the perpetrators of that crime.

On 21 August, militants in Gaza fired two rockets,
one of which landed in a residential area of Sderot,
causing no injuries. Israel responded by directing
some 60 missiles and shells at 30 suspected military
installations in Gaza. Once again, I reiterate that such
rocket attacks and the response they elicit risk lives
of both Palestinians and Israelis and do not serve the
cause of peace.

On 26 August, a Palestinian man, who was
reportedly under psychiatric care, was killed by
members of the Israeli security forces. A preliminary
investigation established that he was unarmed and
did not pose a threat. I call upon Israel to ensure
accountability and take all the necessary measures
protect against the unjustified use of force.

It is against such a backdrop that preparations are
advancing for the 8 October Palestinian local council
elections. In a positive development, on 25 July, political
parties signed an electoral code of conduct, to which all
parties and candidates must adhere. The elections are
expected to be the first simultaneous polls in the West
Bank and Gaza since 2006.

Conducting the local elections in line with
established international standards can contribute to
advancing Palestinian reconciliation. The lack of unity,
however, or any attempt to influence the outcome of
the elections, including through intimidation, threats,
violence or coercion, risks widening divisions and
undermining the Palestinian national cause. In that
respect, the recent decision by Fatah to bring the party
together - a decision welcomed by Jordan, Egypt and
the region - is an important step towards laying the
groundwork for national reconciliation and unity.

Turning briefly to Gaza, three days ago we marked
the two-year anniversary ofthe ceasefire to the last Gaza
conflict. While progress has been made on rebuilding
from the physical damage, sadly we are miles away from
repairing the physical and psychological damage of the
conflict. While Gaza remains locked away from the
rest of the world, in the grip of militants and dependent
upon aid and humanitarian assistance, the status quo
will prevail. We need a radical overhaul of how we deal
with the problems of Gaza.

Until the closures are lifted, the militant build-up
has ceased and Gaza is back under the control of the
legitimate Palestinian authorities, international funding
and an uninterrupted flow of aid are a lifeline to over
1 million Palestinians in the Strip, who are struggling
to survive within a dire humanitarian situation. In
that context, I commend the Government of Palestine
for enabling a much-needed humanitarian payment
to over 20,000 unpaid civilian employees in Gaza,
made possible by the generous donation from the State
of Qatar.
Separately, however, I am very concerned about the
recent Israeli indictments of two aid workers accused
of diverting funds and/or material to Hamas. Those are
very serious and deeply troubling accusations, which
must be investigated throughly and quickly and proved
in a court of law. I welcome the commitment of the
United Nations Development Programme and World
Vision International to uphold the highest standards
of accountability. It is important that the international
community continue to enforce its policy of zero-
tolerance for any wrongdoing and assures partners that
robust measures are in place to ensure that aid goes to
those for whom it is intended.

It has been nearly two months since the Middle
East Quartet outlined clearly the threats to the two-
State solution and offered practical recommendations
to enable an eventual return to meaningful negotiations
to end the occupation that began in 1967. Its
recommendations, however, continue to be ignored,
including by way ofa surge in Israeli settlement-related
announcements and continuing demolitions. Let me
focus briefly on the expanding Israeli footprint in the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, which
Russia, the European Union, the United States and the
Secretary-General - all part of the Quartet - have
clearly condemned.

We heard that settlement construction was not
an impediment to a two-State solution - that "a few
houses" were not a problem for peace. Let me ask in
return: How will advancing the construction of over
1,700 housing units bring the parties closer to negotiated
peace, uphold the two-State solution, create hope for
the Palestinian people or bring security to Israelis?
Since 1 July, Israel has advanced plans for over 1,000
housing units in occupied East Jerusalem - in Pisgat
Ze'ev, Ramot, Har Homa and Gilo - as well as 735
units in Ma'ale Adumim and other locations in the West
Bank. It has published tenders, some new, for 323 units
in East Jerusalem settlements and reissued tenders for
42 units in Kiryat Arba, near Hebron, for which it also
allocated over $13 million of new funding.

It is undertaking a new land survey to identify
potential "State land" in the sensitive E-2 area. That step
could enable the establishment of a new settlement on
the outskirts ofBethlehem, further restricting that city's
development and contributing to the dismemberment of

the West Bank. It is also reportedly examining plans
for new housing units for 100 Israelis on a portion of a
military compound in Hebron that it has allocated for
that purpose.
Israel advanced the so-called retroactive
"legalization" of the Horesh Yaron and Rechelim
outposts and put forward a potentially precedent-
setting proposal to relocate the illegal outpost of
Amona - which is slated by Israel's High Court of
Justice for dismantling by the end of the year - onto
nearby "absentee land".

Allofthoseplanswouldessentially createnewillegal
settlements, and I call on Israel to cease and reverse
those decisions. Let me be clear: no legal acrobatics can
change the fact that all outposts - whether "legalized"
under Israeli law or not, whether located on State land,
absentee land or private land - just like all settlements
in Area C and East Jerusalem, remain illegal under
international law. It is difficult to read in those actions
a genuine intention to work towards a viable two-State
solution. This appears to reinforce a policy, carried,
out over decades, that has enabled over half a million
Israelis to settle in territory that was occupied militarily
in 1967.

The Quartet highlighted that Palestinians living in
Area C and East Jerusalem were also disproportionately
denied Israeli building permits. The past two months
have seen an increase in the enforcement of non-punitive
demolition orders against Palestinian structures in East
Jerusalem, with 43 structures demolished, affecting
more than 340 people. According to our colleagues
in the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affaris, in Area C in August alone, over 91 structures
across 26 communities were demolished for the lack
of Israeli building permits, displacing 125 people and
affecting the livelihoods of over 2,100.

The Bedouins in Area C are particularly vulnerable.
Some communities, such as the herders in Susiya and
those in the controversial E-l area around East Jerusalem,
are particularly at risk, especially as settlement
expansion plans move forward. Repeated rounds of
demolitions of homes or livelihoods and restrictions on
basic services are part of an environment that pressures
those communities to move. Susiya, for example, is
built on private Palestinian land in the southern West
Bank. It is sandwiched between a settlement and an
outpost. For years, planning schemes submitted by the
residents to the Israeli authorities have been repeatedly
rejected, while the neighbouring settlement has been
granted a generous planning scheme, and the nearby
illegal outpost is connected to water and electricity
networks. The demolition of that community would set
a dangerous precedent for displacement and fuel the
perception that Israel aims at a de facto annexation of
Area C.

I note a new plan for the occupied West Bank,
announced recently, promoting differential treatment
to areas of the occupied West Bank from which
perpetrators or suspected perpetrators of attacks
against Israelis originate. While measures that
generate economic opportunities for some Palestinians
are helpful, they cannot come at the cost of what
may amount to collective punishment for others, or
undermine the legitimate Palestinian institutions and
aspirations for ending the occupation.

Turning briefly to the Golan, the situation
remains volatile and continues to undermine the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement. Fighting between
the Syrian armed forces and armed groups in the areas
of separation and limitation continue, with several
incidents across the ceasefire line reported.

I take this opportunity to also draw attention to a
nearly $100 million shortfall in the core budget of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Pa1estine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). That funding gap
affects UNRWA'S key services for vulnerable Pa1estine
refugees throughout the region and compounds
regional instability. It must be addressed with the
utmost urgency.

In conclusion, let me say that, more than 37 years
ago, the Security Council determined that Israeli
settlements in occupied territory had no legal validity
and were an obstruction to achieving a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East. That
determination was true in 1979, and it is equally true,
and even more urgent a concern, today. For years, we
have been managing this conflict while the occupation
has continued, Palestinians have been dispossessed
and a one-State reality has been establishing itself
on the ground. It is time for all of us - the leaders
on both sides, with support from the region and the
international community - to end the conflict on
the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions
and in a manner that meets the legitimate national
aspirations of both peoples. Both sides should work
to reverse the negative trajectory, to build trust and to
restore hope that a negotiated two-State solution is not
just a political slogan, but a reality that can be achieved
through negotiations within our lifetime.

