Mr. Campos Ferreira (Portugal) (spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation): I
would like to begin by expressing Portugal's complete
solidarity with France. Here, in the Security Council
Chamber, I wish to reiterate, on behalf of Portugal,
our strongest condemnation of the heinous, cowardly
and utterly unjustifiable terrorist attack committed in
Paris this past 13 November. I would also like to pay a
public tribute to the victims, including two Portuguese
citizens, and send condolences to their families.

It was not just an attack on France. It was a barbaric
attack perpetrated by a group of radical individuals
against all those who uphold the principles and values
of the Charter of the United Nations, namely, the 193
States Members of the Organization. Portugal expresses
its full support to France, our European partner and
ally.

In the light of that attack and others that preceded
it, in Beirut for instance, the international community
has the legal right and the moral duty to act in a
concerted effort to put an end to Daesh, a radical and
terrorist entity. In doing so, we will not give in to fear
nor surrender our values, particularly with regard to
human rights. I would also reiterate Portugal's support
for the actions undertaken by the United Nations and
the Security Council to prevent and combat terrorism.

That attack makes the choice of the subject for this
debate by the United Kingdom extremely timely. I would
like to underline the importance of the perspective that
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon shared with us, as well
as the relevant statements made by Ambassador Olof
Skoog and Ms. Ouided Bouchamaoui, to whom I pay

tribute for her role in building democracy in Tunisia.

Portugal is well aware that investing in
development brings security benefits. Consequently,
our development cooperation assigns absolute priority
to strengthening the link between peace and security,
sustainable development and human rights, which
reflects the Sustainable Development Goals that were
adopted in September (General Assembly resolution 70/1). In that regard, we attach particular importance to
sectors that have a structural and multiplier effect, such
as governance, the rule of law, human rights, education,
health care and institutional capacity-building, while
promoting the participation of women and girls and
the eradication of all forms of gender-based violence.
In that context, I congratulate Spain for the debate
organized in October on women and peace and security
(see S/PV.7533) in the framework of resolution 1325
(2000).

In addition to the already ineluctable role of
civil-society actors, I stress also the importance of
the perspective of inclusive development, given the
growing role of the private sector in the mutually
reinforcing relationship between security and
development. Indeed, there will be no eradication of
poverty without the creation of wealth. And without the
eradication of poverty and the consequent promotion
of the dignity of every human life, we will always be
subject to the threats to peace and stability that will
subsequently arise. I therefore stress the importance
of social responsibility and encourage the Secretary-
General to continue promoting the United Nations
Global Compact.

In this world of immediacy and media sensationalism
in which we live, the numerous successes of the
Organization and the Council in conflict prevention
sometimes go unnoticed. It is only fair that we
acknowledge these accomplishments. Undoubtedly, in
this respect no news is good news. However, given the
deterioration of crises such as those in Syria, Libya and
elsewhere, we - and the Council in particular - must
conclude that there are lessons to be learned so that in
the future we can better undertake the responsibility
to protect, as well as responsibility while protecting.
To paraphrase Kofi Annan, in dealing with any given
country we should not presume to know more about its
reality than those who live there.

We all subscribe to effective multilateralism and the
central role played by the United Nations. Whatever the
terminology in vogue - "cross-cutting", "system-wide
coherence", "delivering as one" and "breaking down
silos" - if we are to be effective we have to promote an
attitude of cooperation rather than duplication, sharing
rather than competition, and structural collective
responsibility instead of short-term individual interests.

When speaking of conflict prevention, early
warning mechanisms and capacity for concerted
action are particularly relevant. Much has been done
concerning cooperation between international and
regional organizations, but there remains substantial
room for improvement. The European Union, whose
statement in this debate Portugal naturally endorses,
has been strongly committed in this regard, particularly
with the United Nations and the African Union. Africa
in general, and West Africa in particular, require
special attention with respect to preventing possible
relapses into conflict. In this context, we welcome
the concerted action of the international community
in Guinea-Bissau, including the United Nations, the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the European Union and the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP).

On the subject of the CPLP, I take this opportunity
to acknowledge Angola, an elected member of the
Council with an important vote that recently celebrated
40 years of independence.

In response to the invitation addressed to us,
Portugal decided to be represented here today at the
political level in order to underline the priority it
attaches to conflict prevention, particularly against
the background of the close link between security and
development. This was reflected in the constant priority
with which we promoted preventive diplomacy during
our previous mandate in the Council, in 2011 and 2012,
wither through the improvement of the working methods
that we sought to launch, aimed at a more expeditious
and effective response of the Council; or in the high-
level briefing on new challenges to international peace
and security that we organized in November 2011 (see S/PV.6668) with a view to preventing conflicts in the
medium and long terms.

To the extent of our capacities, especially as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Matters and during the month of
our presidency, as well as throughout our mandate, we

promoted interaction and fought ritualized inertia and
rigidity ofmethods. Our aim was to free up time in order
to focus on early warning, enhancing the most possible
systematic use of diplomatic means available for
conflict prevention, for example by sounding out United
Nations regional offices and responsible parties of the
Peacebuilding Commission. In addition, in this vein we
fully supported the British horizon-scanning initiative,
which allowed for informal analysis and discussion,
thereby increasing the preventive intervention capacity
of the Council. We also advocated recourse to meetings
under the Arria Formula, facilitating civil society's
access to the Council.

In the aforementioned briefing on new challenges,
it became evident that contemporary phenomena such
as climate change and its impact on oceans - which,
in particular, threatens small island developing States
and promotes transnational organized crime, migration
and pandemics - require a collective response that,
to be effective, will need to be more integrated and
systematic. Although these issues follow under the
purview of other forums, the Council must remain
mindful of the increasing impact of these challenges
as causes of conflict. The Council should therefore not
fear the audacity of innovation and, as such, would have
every advantage in developing a more comprehensive,
systematic, coordinated and informed approach in this
regard.

In this context, we reiterate our proposal for
setting up an informal working group of the Security
Council on the new challenges to international peace
and security. Such a sustained monitoring mechanism
of these issues, by analysing the Secretary-General's
reports as well as those of other relevant bodies and
agencies, and other institutions, would be of an asset of
great added value for the conflict-prevention capacity
of the United Nations, and of the Council in particular,
precisely in the perspective of today's debate.

In conclusion, conflict prevention was part of
the genesis of the United Nations 70 years ago, and
sustainable development is at the heart of its future.
The Security Council is part of that dynamic. It cannot
be insulated from it and must therefore interact with
the other competent bodies in this field. Security and
development are comprehensively interlinked and they
either reinforce or undermine each other. Furthermore,
new challenges to international peace and security that
are closely related to development increasingly tend to
degenerate into instability and insecurity.
Although conflict prevention is first and foremost
the responsibility of States themselves, it is up to
the Council, as the primary body responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to
assume its responsibilities and, at the political level,
lead efforts to prevent conflicts that appear on the
horizon. The Council should always be mindful that
the cost of preventing a conflict is always negligible
compared to the price paid in human lives, and this
should be reflected in its action.

Portugal, which in December celebrates 60 years
since its accession to the United Nations, will continue
to be at the forefront of promoting conflict prevention
so that the culture of prevention, to which we committed
at the 2005 World Summit, can effectively materialize.

