Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
Special Envoy Michel Kafando for his valuable briefing
and for the important work that he has carried out in
recent years. We also thank Ambassador Jiirg Lauber
of Switzerland for his briefing.

Peru highlights the progress that the Government
of Burundi has made in the preparatory processes for
the 2020 general elections, in particular its publication
of a detailed electoral calendar. We hope those actions
will be complemented by further ones to ensure that the
electoral process is inclusive, credible and transparent,
in accordance with the Arusha Agreement, and that the
measures will effectively restore the rule of law and
democratic institutions in the country. Peru believes
that, in order to do that, it is essential to banish all
forms of intolerance and broaden the political sphere
by involving the full and free participation of all
actors in the political life of the country, including the
political groups that are in exile. The success of those
efforts will depend to a large extent on assistance of
the international community, and in particular on the
monitoring and support that the African Union and the
East African Community are able to provide, as they
have a core responsibility in these processes.
On another note, Peru is concerned about the
continued reports of human rights violations in Burundi
and underscores the importance of establishing
independent investigative mechanisms. We also
call on the Government of Burundi to strengthen its
cooperation with the various United Nations human
rights protection mechanisms and with independent
civil society organizations. We are also concerned
about the delicate humanitarian situation in the country.
Although there has been progress made towards
preventing Ebola, there is an urgent need to undertake
an effective response with a subregional focus with
regard to the increase in reported cases of malaria and
cholera. In the same vein, the already-critical situation of
thousands of refugees and internally displaced persons
is being exacerbated by food insecurity. We believe
that it is crucial to fully implement Burundi's national
development plan for the period 2018 to 2027 and the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
for 2019 to 2023, which can act as relevant instruments
for Burundi's medium- and long-term political stability
and socioeconomic development.

We would like to emphasize the important role
that the Peacebuilding Commission has played in the
dialogue process on the socioeconomic situation of the
country, particularly through its promotion of women
as authorities in mediation and resolution of local
conflicts. Both women and youth must play a greater
role in the country's political processes.

I conclude by reaffirming Peru's commitment
to achieving sustainable peace in Burundi in order
to create regional stability. We also call on financial
institutions and international donors to contribute to
the achievement of this objective.

