Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Annadif, for his very
enlightening presentation and for his exemplary work.
I also welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali, Mr. Tiebile Drame,
to the Council. It is an honour to be here with him and
we appreciate his presence as an important gesture.

I would like to begin my statement by expressing
our deepest condolences to the Government and the
people of Mali in the aftermath of a despicable attack
that once again struck the country's central region.
France will stand resolutely by Mali's side throughout
this new ordeal. I take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the memory of all the civilians, State officials and
members of the national and international armed forces
who lost their lives in the terrorist and intercommunal
violence that, unfortunately, affects Mali on almost a
daily basis.

The escalation of violence that central Mali is
experiencing today requires us to bestir ourselves and
take urgent action, especially to prevent new massacres
from occurring. The Malian authorities on the front
line in this regard and we encourage them to take all
necessary measures to prosecute the perpetrators
of these crimes, disarm the militia and engage in
meaningful intercommunity dialogue without delay. In
the longer term, only the re-establishment of the State's
authority and presence, the restoration of basic social
services and genuine efforts to combat impunity will be
able to restore peace in the region. France will propose a
draft press statement containing these various elements
at the end of this meeting.

The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) has a
significant role to play in accompanying and supporting
the Malian authorities in the centre of the country. In
this regard, I wish to commend the important steps
undertaken by the Mission since the adoption of
resolution 2423 (2018) in June last year. We hope that
MINUSMA will continue to bolster its support in the
region, including in helping to redeploy the State and
protect civilians. We must also bear in mind that the
Mission's work is not intended to act as a substitute for
the primary responsibility of the Malian authorities,
and that it can be effective only if it is based on the
redoubled commitment of the latter. We must also
ensure that MINUSMA has the adequate means at its
disposal to meet the needs that exist on the ground.

The implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali in the north remains a
prerequisite for the stabilization of Mali and the region.
Unprecedented progress has been made in recent
months, including with regard to the latest demands
made by the Council in its presidential statement
S/PRST/2019/2 of April. The inclusive national
dialogue to be held in the near future is also a good
sign regarding consensual progress in the conduct of
the Government's political and institutional reforms,
some of which relate to the agreement.

The progress made to date, however, remains largely
insufficient and needs to be rapidly consolidated. That
is why we encourage the Malian parties to adopt an
updated road map, articulated around a limited number
of priorities accompanied by binding deadlines, as
soon as possible. I refer in particular to continuing
the constitutional review process, developing a plan
for the redeployment of the reconstituted Malian
armed forces in the north, making tangible progress
in decentralization and effectively operationalizing
the northern economic development zone. The Council
must continue to define precise expectations on these
key points for the implementation of the agreement
through benchmarks. It must also be made clear that
the non-implementation of these benchmarks comes at
a cost, including possible sanctions.

MINUSMA continues and will continue to play
a vital role in the stability of Mali, as recalled by the
Secretary-General in his recent report (S/2019/454) and
by the Special Representative in his briefing today. We
welcome in particular the Mission's efforts in recent
months to reinforce its robust posture and to improve
coordination between its various pillars and interaction
with the country team, as well as to cooperate with other
security elements deployed on the ground. I believe that
these efforts have been widely recognized.

In the difficult context we are witnessing, we
believe that the renewal of the Mission's mandate for
an additional 12 months, while maintaining unchanged
parameters, is absolutely essential. We wish to take
advantage of this in order to maintain heightened
pressure in favour of implementing the peace
agreement, to strengthen the Mission's actions in the
centre in support of the efforts of the Malian authorities
and to continue developing partnerships with the other
security elements cited in resolution 2423 (2018). We
also fully support the implementation of the options
for the Mission's adaptation, as proposed by the
Secretary-General, which will continue to enhance the
effectiveness of the Mission's work. We will, of course,
continue to encourage efforts to reduce security threats
to MINUSMA while preserving sufficient flexibility
and agility in its posture. Finally, we will seek to promote
the adoption of a clear, realistic and concise mandate,
in line with the recommendations made within the
framework of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.

The Council's responsibility is to continue
supporting Mali along the road to peace, in the
understanding that the international community cannot
serve as a replacement for the efforts of the Malian
authorities, which are indispensable in driving Mali
towards lasting peace and stability. That is the spirit
of the draft resolution France will be working on until
the end of this month, together with its partners in the
Council, in order to renew the MINUSMA mandate. You
may rest assured, Sir, of my country's full commitment
to that end.

