Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank the Russian
presidency for organizing this important debate to allow
us to discuss the situation in the Middle East and North
Africa in a comprehensive manner. We are pleased
to see you, Mr. Deputy Minister, presiding over this
debate. We appreciate the concept paper (S/2018/524, annex) made available to us to facilitate the Council's
debate on the topic.

We also thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
for his presence here today with us, as well as for his
very useful presentation which helps put matters in
their proper perspective. I want to thank the Secretary-
General most earnestly for his very thoughtful and
incisive analysis of the challenges of the region, which
we must expect from the Head of the world body at a
time when such frank analysis is so needed and has
become indispensable.

The region of the Middle East and North Africa is
facing multiple and complex challenges. Long-standing
and unresolved disputes continue to fester, while, as
indicated in the concept paper and highlighted by the
Secretary-General, new conflict and crisis situations are
also plaguing the entire region and causing horrendous
suffering for millions of civilians. The increasing level
of violence has created unprecedented humanitarian
crises, forcing millions ofpeople to be displaced.

With the further weakening of State institutions,

terrorist organizations - including the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), Al-Qaeda and
others - criminal gangs and human traffickers have

had the opportunity to exploit the political vacuum,
further undermining State legitimacy. Who can
forget that at one point not too long ago, the terrorist
organization ISIS had managed to control a large area
with a big population and almost assumed the attributes
of a State? Never had the continuing weaknesses of
international cooperation in counter-terrorism been as
glaringly plain as they were at that time. That could
be possible in this day and age was telling and also
helped to underscore the extent to which the challenges
faced by the region are very complex and potentially
extremely dangerous and have the potential to cause
wider and expanding conflict.

The repeated use of chemical weapons in the
region is also undermining the global non-proliferation
architecture. The future of the Iran nuclear deal, which
was signed after a long and arduous negotiation, is
under threat, with serious implications for regional
and indeed international peace and security. Of course,
we all know the geostrategic importance of the wider
region. The current dynamics have not helped, but
rather have intensified geopolitical rivalries, further
complicating efforts aimed at finding solutions to
the many challenges and threats facing the region.
The conflict and crisis situations plaguing the region
have also undermined hard-won development gains,
exacerbating socioeconomic challenges, including high
youth unemployment, leading to inequality, a sense
of frustration and alienation. Furthermore, they have
aggravated sectarian divisions and tensions, destroying
centuries-old social fabrics.

All these have been eloquently stressed by the
Secretary-General, and they underscore the need for a
comprehensive and holistic approach to addressing the
political, security, socioeconomic and humanitarian
challenges of the region. That is why we find this
debate very timely and appropriate, as it allows us to
look at the situation from a broader perspective, rather
than considering issues in isolation, and we appreciate,
as already indicated, the concept note shared with us to
guide our discussion in this regard.

We have no illusion that there are any easy solutions
to resolve the long-standing and unresolved disputes,
as well as the new conflict and crisis situations in the
region. However, there is one thing that we believe
is true, and we think it broadly applies to all the
difficult issues in the region, without discounting the
varying nature and context of each conflict situation.
Unless there are genuine and meaningful dialogue and
negotiation among the various parties, which should
be complemented by the constructive engagement
of concerned countries in the region, and indeed, the
major Powers, achieving a peaceful and comprehensive
political settlement will continue to be unachievable.
We know this is easier said than done, but there is no
other sane option than this to resolve conflicts, diffuse
tensions, create trust and address anxieties and fears
among communities and States in the region.

That is why we support all diplomatic efforts being
exerted through the good offices of the Secretary-
General and his special representatives and envoys
operating on the ground. In that regard, it must be
stressed that no matter what we do to contribute to peace
and security in that region or elsewhere, unless those
efforts are guided by and anchored in commitment to
the principles of international law governing inter-State
relations, which essentially means adherence to the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, it is
definitely unlikely that we would manage to secure
peace and ensure security.

The Council, as the principal organ for the
promotion and maintenance of international peace
and security, has a critical role to play in facilitating
and supporting genuine and comprehensive efforts to
prevent and resolve violence, as well as to build and
sustain durable peace initiatives. Unfortunately, we all
know that the Council has been effectively paralysed,
and its dysfunction has seriously undermined its
credibility. The Council is no longer a place for dialogue
and compromise to find solutions to many threats and
challenges afflicting our world, but a platform for
point-scoring and grandstanding among major Powers,
and the rest of us are being forced to be sandwiched
in between. Nowhere is that more evident than in
the discussion on issues of peace and security in the
Middle East.

In the face of this standoff, we are seeing
attempts being made to export some of the difficult
and contentious issues elsewhere. This in our opinion
will contribute only to widening the existing division
and further undermining the international peace and
security architecture. As far as we are concerned, there
is no other alternative but to restore the credibility of the
Council. The major Powers in the Council have a special
responsibility to revive what one astute observer of the
United Nations has referred to as "the shared sense of
strategic purpose" among them. However, we should not
blame the big five alone; we the elected members have a
responsibility, too, and if we are able to play our role we
have the capacity to contribute to unlocking the logjam
in the Council. We tried to demonstrate that last year,
but we need to do more in fulfilling our obligations to
the wider membership of the United Nations.

Finally, the conflict and crisis situations in the
region require urgent and concerted action. Unless we
do everything possible to reverse the current dangerous
trajectory, we will not be able to avert a looming
disaster down the road. The sooner the Council gets
its act together, the better for peace and security in the
region and indeed the entire world.

