Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to express my thanks for the
timely convening of this meeting. The level of this
Security Council meeting clearly attests to the
importance that this body attaches to the question of
Darfur.

After lengthy and extensive negotiations in the
Abuja process, today we share some optimism about
the signing of the peace agreement between the
Government of the Sudan and the Sudan Liberation
Movement. We welcome this success and commend the
efforts of the parties in achieving it, as well as all of
those who were actively involved in the process.
However, we believe that true pacification and
reconciliation in Darfur requires that this process be
inclusive and properly representative. Thus we
encourage the parties that have not yet joined in the
peace agreement to do so as soon as possible, without
preconditions.

Now a new phase of the peace process in Darfur
has been started. It will be necessary to strengthen the
capacity of the African Union Mission in Sudan in
order to ensure that it has the adequate resources to
provide appropriate security conditions on the ground,
give the civilian population effective protection and
assist in implementing the agreement that has been
reached - all of this without prejudice to the parallel
activities of this Council to initiate planning for a
United Nations operation in Darfur, which should be
started without further delay.

In this regard, we call on the Government of the
Sudan to make it possible for the technical assessment
mission on the ground to be carried out, as it is
essential to complete preparatory analysis for the
future mission. We would like to assure you,
Mr. President, that our delegation is fully ready to
work immediately to conclude this preparatory work
promptly. In this regard, we shall be carefully
considering the draft resolution presented by the
United States to this effect.

The people of Darfur have been suffering for too
long. Their afflictions have been incalculable. It is our
responsibility to work to improve the quality of their
lives. Therefore we need to urgently and practically
respond to the grave humanitarian situation that
persists in Darfur. Our activities should be guided by a
single objective: to provide relief to the suffering of
hundreds of thousands of innocent civilians who have
experienced the most painful sufferings as a result of
the armed struggle. The parties must abstain from any
acts that would lead to a breach of the ceasefire and put
an end to attacks immediately. The Government of the
Sudan must also facilitate access for humanitarian
assistance for people in need and remove all hindrances
in the path of humanitarian workers.

It should also be recalled that the Government
has an unconditional obligation to protect its own
population. The international community must
continue to lend support and assistance, not only in this
crisis but also in the future tasks of reconstruction and
development. All of us have obligations that we must
honoun
The agreement signed on 5 May 2006 offers
without question an opportunity for peace in Darfur.
We must be unstinting in our efforts to ensure that it is
effectively realized.

The new phase of implementation, which will
undoubtedly be more demanding than the previous
phase, will require the sustained commitment of all
actors involved in the process. We urge the parties to
fulfil their commitments and the international
community as a whole to renew its commitment to the
cause of peace in Darfur, which, without a doubt, will
result in better and more decent living conditions for
its inhabitants.

