The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security

Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I

have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the most recent escalation in
attacks perpetrated by Boko Haram, in particular
the 10 and 11 January 2015 suicide bombings in
Maiduguri, Borno state, and Potiskum, Yobe state,
reportedly involving children coerced by Boko
Haram to act as suicide bombers; the 3-7 January
2015 attacks in Baga, Borno state, which resulted
in the massive destruction of civilian homes and
significant civilian casualties; as well as the
increasing attacks in the Lake Chad Basin region
along Nigeria's borders with Chad and Cameroon
and in the northern provinces of Cameroon.

"The Security Council reaffirms that terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations is criminal and
unjustifiable, regardless of its motivation, wherever,
whenever and by whomsoever committed. The
Security Council reaffirms that terrorism cannot
and should not be associated with any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
sympathy and condolences to the families of the
victims and expresses its sympathy to all those
injured in these attacks, and to the people and the
Government of the Federal Republic of Nigeria,
as well as the people and Governments of other
affected countries.

"The Security Council strongly condemns and
deplores all abuses of human rights and, where
applicable, violations of international humanitarian
law by the terrorist group Boko Haram, since
2009, including those involving violence against
civilian populations, notably women and children,
kidnappings, killings, hostage-taking, pillaging,

rape, sexual slavery and other sexual violence,
recruitment of children and destruction of civilian
property. The Security Council expresses serious
concern over the reported violations and abuses
of human rights and large-scale displacements of
the civilian population, including into Nigeria's
neighbouring countries. The Security Council
recalls its decision to place Boko Haram on the
Al-Qaida sanctions list.

"The Security Council demands that Boko
Haram immediately and unequivocally cease
all hostilities and all abuses of human rights and
violations of international humanitarian law and
disarm and demobilize. The Security Council
demands the immediate and unconditional release
of all those abducted who remain in captivity,
including the 276 schoolgirls abducted in Chibok,
Borno state, in April 2014. The Security Council
recognizes that some of such acts may amount to
crimes against humanity and stresses that those
responsible for all abuses and violations of human
rights and violations of international humanitarian
law must be held accountable. The Security Council
reiterates the primary responsibility of Member
States to protect civilian populations on their
territories, in accordance with their obligations
under international law.

"The Security Council expresses its concern at
the scale of the growing humanitarian crisis caused
by the activities of Boko Haram, which has resulted
in the large-scale displacement of Nigerians within
the country and into neighbouring Cameroon, Chad
and the Niger. The Security Council, in this regard,
commends the support provided to the refugees by
the Governments of the said countries, including
with the assistance of humanitarian actors and
relevant United Nations entities, and calls on the
international community to provide its support in
areas which require urgent attention.

"The Security Council expresses deep concern
that the activities of Boko Haram are undermining
the peace and stability of the West and Central
African region.

"The Security Council takes note of the
outcome of the 17 May 2014 Paris Summit, which
underscored the commitment of the countries in
the Lake Chad Basin region, including with the
support of bilateral and multilateral partners, to
enhance information-sharing, coordination and
joint operations, to more effectively combat Boko
Haram, as well as the outcomes of the follow-
up London and Abuja ministerial meetings. The
Security Council also takes note of the 7 October
2014 communique of the Extraordinary Summit of
the Lake Chad Basin Commission (LCBC) Heads of
State, as well as the 25 November 2014 communique
of the African Union Peace and Security Council
on the efforts of the LCBC member States and
Benin to combat Boko Haram.

"The Security Council takes note of the
decision of the LCBC member States and Benin
to operationalize the Multinational Joint Task
Force, including through the establishment of a
joint headquarters and the deployment of national
contingents, to conduct military operations against
Boko Haram.

"The Security Council welcomes plans for a
regional meeting in Niamey, Niger, on 20 January
2015 to discuss the regional response to the threat
posed by Boko Haram. The Security Council urges
the LCBC member States and Benin to undertake
further planning toward the sustainable, Viable and
effective operationalization of the Multinational
Joint Task Force. The Security Council, in this
regard, urges them to identify the means and
modalities of the envisaged deployment, especially
in the areas of intelligence sharing and joint
operations.

"The Security Council welcomes the
assistance to the States in the region already being
provided by bilateral and multilateral partners and
encourages them to increase support to enhance the
operational capacity of the Multinational Joint Task
Force, including through the provision of financial
and logistical assistance, relevant equipment
and modalities to increase effective intelligence
sharing to further the region's collective efforts to
combat Boko Haram more effectively. The Security
Council underlines that all operations of the
Multinational Joint Task Force must be conducted
in full compliance with international law, including
international humanitarian law and human rights
law.

"The Security Council takes note of the
communique of the Government of Chad, issued
on 14 January 2015, which pledged active support
in the fight against Boko Haram. The Security
Council welcomes the vote by the National
Assembly of Chad on 16 January 2015, which
authorized Chadian armed troops and security
forces to assist Cameroonian and Nigerian soldiers
in the fight against Boko Haram terrorists.

"The Security Council underlines the need
to bring perpetrators, organizers, financiers and
sponsors of these reprehensible acts of terrorism
to justice in accordance with international law and
relevant Security Council resolutions."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2015/4.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.15 pm.
