Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate your friendly
country, Mr. President, 0 assuming the presidency of
the Council for this month. We assure you that the State
of Kuwait will support you throughout your presidency
term. We are fully confident that your wisdom and
experience will help guide the work of the Council
during this month. I would also like to thank all the
members of the delegation of the Netherlands for the
excellent and successful work done with professionalism
and transparency during the month of March.

As part of today's debate, I thank Mr. Lacroix for
his briefing on the developments in Haiti and the role of
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
in accordance with its mandate.

I should like to address three aspects related
to our today's topic: politics, security and the
humanitarian dimension.

First, on the political aspect, I commend the work
of President Moise as he consults with the Haitian
Parliament on a legislative agenda that would establish
a permanent electoral council and a constitutional
council, in addition to finalizing appointments in the
Supreme Court. We look forward to the enactment
without delay of key legislation, including the penal
code and the code of criminal procedure. We call upon
the relevant authorities in Haiti to participate actively
in consultations in order to positively impact the
justice system.

Secondly, on the security aspect, we note that
security affects all other areas in Haiti. We therefore
welcome the marked improvement in security as crime
rates have gone down in Haiti. Nevertheless, we call
upon the national authorities to maximize the benefit
of United Nations experience in the area of justice
so as to improve the capacity and efficiency of the
Haitian National Police. That would consolidate the
gains achieved in the security sector and promote
rule of law institutions, end impunity and prevent
corruption. We commend the President's two initiatives
in that connection.

Thirdly, on the humanitarian aspect, we are
concerned about reports of violations of human rights.
We hope that the Haitian national authorities will
prosecute the perpetrators whether they are members
of the National Police or not. That will ensure
accountability and justice. In that context, we welcome
the results of the United Nations plan for combating
cholera, since the weekly infections have been reduced
by more than 99 per cent. I would also like to commend
the efforts of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), which is working
to support and consolidate the gains that have already
been made, in addition to strengthening stability and
achieving long-term sustainable development in Haiti
by supporting the Government's efforts to promote the
rule of law.

In conclusion, based on the what I have said here,
I would like to express our support for the Secretary-
General's proposal that MINUJUSTH'S mandate
be extended to reflect the timeline defined by the
benchmarked exit strategy. We support the report's
contention that achieving the 11 benchmarks identified
will facilitate the transition to a non-peacekeeping
United Nations presence in Haiti. That would lead
in the long term to fostering political, security and
development stability in Haiti and will help to implement
the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals, especially
Goal 16, which is aimed at promoting peaceful and
inclusive societies for sustainable development through
providing access to justice for all.

