Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We thank you for
organizing this important debate on the protection of
civilians in situations of armed conflict. We thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Ms. Valerie Amos, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Alain Le Roy, and also
thank the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, and the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Mr. Yves Daccord, for their informative
briefings this morning.

Uganda remains concerned that civilians still
account for the vast majority of casualties during
situations of armed conflict. It is essential, therefore, to
put in place effective safeguards for vulnerable persons
during situations of armed conflict. We welcome the
revised aide-memoire by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(S/PRST/2010/25, annex) as a practical tool that
provides a basis for improved analysis and diagnosis of
key protection issues, and we are of the view that there
is a need to continue its use on a more systematic and
consistent basis.

We continue to witness blatant attacks on
civilians by armed groups, such as the Rwandan
Defence Forces and the Allied Democratic Forces in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Lord's
Resistance Army in the Central African region and
Al-Shabaab in Somalia. We deplore those attacks and
reiterate our call on the international community to
strengthen its collective resolve to deal effectively with
groups such as those. The existence of such groups is a
clear reminder of the challenge that we all face in
dealing with non-State actors who commit such
heinous crimes against civilians.

It is essential that peacekeeping mandates are
realistic and robust and that peacekeepers have the
necessary tools to undertake their protection mandates.

It is also important to focus on achieving durable
solutions for refugees and internally displaced persons,
in particular their voluntary, safe and dignified return
or local integration and resettlement. As a result of
conflict situations, Africa hosts 11.6 million of the
world's 26 million documented internally displaced
persons. In this regard, we underscore the importance
of the United Nations working with regional and
subregional organizations like the African Union to
find durable solutions to protection issues.

We remain concerned by the humanitarian impact
of conflict, especially the excessive accumulation and
destabilizing effects of small arms and light weapons,
as well as the devastating impact of landmines and
explosive remnants of war. Even more significant for
us is the recognition of the needs of persons with
disabilities as a vulnerable group brought about by the
indiscriminate use of those weapons.

Uganda recognizes that States bear the primary
responsibility to respect and ensure the human rights of
individuals within their respective territories, as
provided by the relevant international law. We reiterate
our commitment to those principles and urge all parties
to armed conflict to endeavour to meet the basic needs
of the civilians affected by such conflict. We also
underscore the responsibility of States to comply with
their relevant obligations to end impunity. To that end,
we recall the outcomes of the first Review Conference
of the Rome Statute, held in Kampala in May and June
of this year.

It is necessary that all parties to armed conflict
emphasize the dignity of civilians by recognizing
losses that result from armed conflict, even those from
lawful combat operations. In that regard, we encourage
all parties to conflict to provide meaningful amends to
affected individuals and communities, such as financial
assistance or funding for humanitarian aid programmes.
We encourage all Member States to embrace the
concept of making amends, not because there is any
legal obligation to do so but simply in the interest of
mitigating suffering and promoting humanity. A small
gesture of compassion goes a long way in regaining the
trust and understanding of the affected civilians. That
has been the policy of the Uganda People's Defence
Forces and continues to be implemented by the Uganda
People's Defence Forces serving under the auspices of
the African Union Mission in Somalia - AMISOM.

I would like to emphasize, however, that making
appropriate amends never creates a licence to harm or
an excuse for violations of international law. It is not a
replacement for reparations, nor does it constitute an
alternative for prosecuting those who are responsible
for violations of international humanitarian law.

Finally, we pay tribute to the men and women of
the United Nations who continue to serve in often
difficult circumstances in the protection of civilians
and, regrettably, sometimes pay the ultimate price.

Uganda thanks the delegation of the United
Kingdom for its work on the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2010/25) that we adopted this morning.

