Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We thank Argentina
for convening this important open debate and
congratulate you, Madam President, on your energetic
and productive chairing of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. We also thank the Ombudsperson of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), Ms. Kimberly Prost, and the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
their briefings today.

In the interests of time, I shall deliver an abridged
version of my statement. The full version will be
circulated, including a discussion of the issues raised in
the concept paper (S/2014/725, annex) and support for
the French initiative on the veto.

We are pleased that there is a regular opportunity
in the Council's programme to consider working
methods in this way, but we remain of the view that
an annual discussion is insufficient. We believe that
more frequent, transparent discussion that includes the
wider membership and is accompanied by follow-up
and monitoring is required.

The notes that have been agreed on by the Council
under Argentina's stewardship in the past year are
very positive steps. We particularly welcome Council
members' renewed emphasis on the importance
of early and regular consultation with troop- and
police-contributing countries, and the important role
that the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations can
play in that regard. We also welcome the confirmation
that all Council members can be penholders, and
the commitment that has been made to enhancing
the participation of all members in drafting Council
documents. Those commitments are significant because
they relate to issues over Council practice in recent
years that have generated such concern, prime among
them the fact that most Member States are locked out
of the substance of Council deliberations. However, the
notes are a challenge to the Council to act rather than
an end in themselves. They must be implemented if any
kind of practical change is to flow from them.

This year we have been pleased to see more frequent
and flexible use of meeting formats such as Arria
Formula meetings, which have helped Council members
to consult more widely on sensitive but pressing issues.
Wrap-up meetings and informal briefing sessions have
also become the norm over the past year. The challenge
now is for all Council members to ensure that those
sessions are used for substantive exchanges of views
that improve the Council's performance and practice.

As we have said in previous debates this year, more
must be done to enable the Council to perform its most
neglected responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations, those that come under Chapter VI concerning
conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. We welcomed the Council's consideration
of conflict prevention in August (see S/PV.7247) and
the resolution that followed. The Security Council has
developed many tools for action under Chapter VII,
but is much less well adapted for peaceful action under
Chapter VI. Adapting the Council's working methods
to that end is vital. In recent years, relevant tasks
have become more pre-programmed, more formal and
more concentrated in a few penholder hands. It is also
unfortunate that the practice of horizon-scanning does
not appear to have taken hold this year. We recognize
that some States have concerns about that format and
welcome continued attempts to improve the concept.
Regardless of the name or form given to the concept,
the Council should have mechanisms whereby it can
regularly look ahead and plan for emerging threats to
peace and security, so as to promote early and effective
responses. Discussions on emerging crises are often
likely to be very sensitive, and are not always best
suited to formal Council meetings. We believe the
potential exists for a greater role for Council subsidiary
bodies to help facilitate more active Council roles in
conflict prevention. Similarly, the Council would
be much better placed to respond to threats if it had
more effective processes for engaging with regional
organizations. That has been a focus of some efforts on
the part of Council members, but further improvement
and greater consistency of engagement are required.

