Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen for his briefing. We share many of his views.

Russia is taking active measures to advance
the political process and restore trust among the
conflicting Syrian parties. Intensive work with Iran
and Turkey is under way within the Astana format, in
cooperation with the Special Envoy and in coordination
with the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and
the opposition. On 25 and 26 April we held the twelfth
high-level international meeting on Syria in Nur-Sultan,
which resulted in the adoption of a joint statement by
the guarantor countries. Incidentally, I want to point
out to the United States representative that we are not
the "so-called" guarantor countries, we are simply the
guarantor countries.

Today we circulated the joint statement as an
official Security Council document. The Astana troika
reaffirmed its steadfast commitment to the sovereignty,

independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic, as well as to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. In that
context, it was noted that in accordance with Council
resolution 497 (1981), the Golan is still Syrian territory
under Israeli occupation. Special attention was paid
to the situation in the Idlib de-escalation zone, where
tensions persist. Militants from the terrorist group
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham are intensifying their attacks on
Syrian armed forces' positions while simultaneously
attempting to reorganize themselves into a so-called
moderate opposition and unite the various armed
groups operating in Idlib into a single one under their
command. The fight against organizations that the
Security Council recognizes as terrorist must continue.
The guarantors are determined to fully implement the
agreements on stabilizing Idlib.

In the most recent exchange of views in Nur-
Sultan on north-eastern Syria, it was acknowledged
that stability and security in that region can be ensured
only on a basis of respect for the country's sovereignty
and territorial integrity and by rejecting separatist
plans that undermine the national security of Syria and
its neighbours.

Substantive consultations were held both in the
trilateral format and with the participation of Special
Envoy Pedersen on accelerating the launch of the
constitutional committee, which will enable the start of
a viable process for settling the Syrian crisis. Like the
Special Envoy, we are optimistic that the preparatory
work on this front can be completed very soon.

We held the eighth meeting of the Working Group
on the release of detainees/abductees, the handover of
bodies and the identification of missing persons. We
welcomed the success of the efforts in November 2018
and February and April 2019 to release people, 82
altogether, who had been forcibly detained, representing
a unique contribution to building trust and confidence
among the Syrian parties.

We also remain optimistic about the future
development of the situation in Syria. We can all see that
as the situation is normalized, major terrorist hotbeds
are eliminated and the country returns to peaceful
life, issues related to post-conflict reconstruction and
the provision of humanitarian assistance come to the
fore. Humanitarian assistance must be extended to all
Syrians throughout the country without preconditions.
We are pleased that the United States delegation has
finally taken an interest in the fate of the residents
of Rukban camp, as we have long been calling on
them to do. We urge it to include them in the overall
resettlement efforts, which regrettably the United
States has prevented for a long time.
We once again urge everyone to recognize the
harm that has been done by the unilateral sanctions that
a number of Western countries have imposed and that
only exacerbate the humanitarian situation in Syria.
Ordinary citizens are suffering. To a great extent it is
because of those restrictions that we have witnessed a
large-scale fuel and energy crisis in Syria in the past
few days.

Syria is one of the key States in the Middle East
and an integral part of the Arab world. It should not
be artificially ripped from the regional context in the
interests of short-sighted, politicized, opportunistic
aims. We therefore support Damascus's speedy
restoration to the Arab family, which will help rebuild
inter-Arab harmony and improve the general situation
in the Middle East. I believe that our partners in the
Astana format will agree with me that we are open to
honest interaction without hidden agendas. We should
point out that at the meeting in Nur-Sultan the troika
agreed to invite Syria's neighbours Iraq and Lebanon
to join the Astana process as observers. We call on all
those who are genuinely interested in restoring peace in
Syria to engage constructively in our efforts. Together
we can help end the war and focus on the political
process and national reconciliation.

