Ms. King (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's important debate. Australia very
much welcomes your initiative, Sir, to address piracy in
a holistic, integrated manner.

Maritime security is vital to the trade that
underpins economic growth. The global economic costs
of piracy are staggering. The cost of Somali piracy, for
example, in the past year alone is estimated to have
reached several billion dollars. Maritime security and
oceanic governance are particularly important to the
blue economy, on which island nations rely for their
livelihoods. Piracy has significant social costs, and
the victims that suffer most acutely are often the least
visible: crew members held for ransom, dependent
families and the families of jailed pirates. Piracy is
also generally linked to other transnational criminal
activity.

Nearly 90 per cent of global piracy attacks in the
past year took place in three regions - the Gulf of
Guinea, the Horn of Africa and South-East Asia. While
the situation in each region is very different, there are
parallels and lessons to be learned across them.

Piracy in the Gulfof Guinea - primarily associated
with the offshore oil and gas industry - needs to
be addressed urgently to avoid escalation. Australia
commends the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) and Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) for their progress
on comprehensive regional counter-piracy strategies,
and we welcome the proposed summit of ECCAS and
ECOWAS Heads of State and Government next year.
We encourage the development of a regional maritime
information-sharing mechanism.

Australia is pleased to support efforts to address
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, including through an
expert position in the United Nation's Office on
Drugs and Crime, support for an ECOWAS integrated
maritime strategy and a maritime security workshop to
be held in Ghana next year.

Turning to the Horn of Africa, where piracy has
taken the form of hij acking and holding ships and crews
for ransom, we echo others' comments in welcoming
progress. But as others have also said, such gains can
be easily reversed. Ultimately, addressing piracy in
the region will depend on stability and on economic
opportunity, including in coastal communities. It
is vital that we support the new Somali Government
in consolidating recent gains. We also encourage the
Government to move forward with its declaration
of Somalia's exclusive economic zone, in order to
clarify the legal basis for the protection of its natural
resources. Australia, as an Indian Ocean country,
has been engaged for some time in efforts to address
Somali piracy, including through our contribution to
the Combined Maritime Forces and support aimed at
enhancing the capacity of judicial systems in countries
in the region.

Piracy has declined in recent years in South-
East Asia, in large part thanks to strong and effective
cooperation among the States of the region. The main
problem is now opportunistic theft from ships in port.

Australia has been engaged in efforts to draw
together lessons from across the regions I have
mentioned, including through a conference in July in
Australia and a follow-up seminar held in October here
in New York, which we were very pleased to co-host
with the Permanent Mission of Benin. Key lessons to
emerge - and my written statement contains more
detail - include the facts that strengthening national
capacities to counter piracy is a critical first step;
effective action at sea begins on land; international
cooperation is essential to handle a cross-national
problem; strengthening information sharing is vital;
developing workable legal frameworks to prosecute
pirates is critical; promoting best-practice security
in the international shipping industry is a sound
investment; and, finally, we must do more to assist
captured seafarers and their families.

As a global community, we cannot address this
scourge in the long term without tackling its root
causes, including the lack of economic opportunity,
employment and effective policing. Piracy is an
issue that demonstrates the value and necessity of
international cooperation. Australia will continue to
play its part in that important endeavour.

