Mr. Sotirov (Bulgaria): I am pleased to
congratulate you, Mr. President, for the remarkable
way in which you are performing your duties as
President of the Security Council for the month of
January at the beginning of the mandate of your
country, Singapore, on the Security Council. May I
express my confidence that the Council can only
benefit from your vast knowledge and experience.

The present open debate on the issue of
strengthening cooperation among the Security Council,
troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat
deserves our full attention and further consideration in
the context of the fruitful and constructive debates
recently conducted in the Security Council and the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. We
are grateful for the timely and useful background paper
submitted by Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani.

We appreciate the way in which today's
consultations are being conducted, giving an
opportunity to speak first to several non-members of
the Security Council. In our view, this innovation has
proven itself rewarding in the evaluation process, and it
enriches the deliberations in the Council.

Bulgaria associated itself with the statement made
this morning by the Permanent Representative of
Sweden on behalf of the European Union. My
delegation fully subscribes to the positions and
proposals he put forward on the improvement of
cooperation among the Security Council, troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat. Therefore, I
will confine my statement to some observations and
comments based mainly on the experience and long-
standing participation of my country in United Nations
peacekeeping.

Bulgaria is strongly committed to United Nations
peacekeeping, which continues to be a unique and
indispensable instrument of the international
community for the maintenance of international peace
and security. Our firm commitment to this core activity
of our Organization was further acknowledged last year
by the decision of my Government to voluntarily
increase its financial contribution to the peacekeeping
budget under the scale of assessments recently adopted
by the General Assembly. We took this important step
recognizing the crucial contribution that enhanced
financial resources can make to the credibility and
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping. In
addition, Bulgaria has substantively increased its
physical presence in some of the hot spots on the
ground. The goal set by the Bulgarian Government of
having 100 police officers in United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and 50 civilian
police observers in United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina - a threefold increase compared to
1999 - was successfully fulfilled by the end of the
year 2000. To meet this goal and to prepare for future
participation in peacekeeping operations, additional
efforts have been deployed to strengthen the national
military and police training capacities and increase the
number of personnel available for peacekeeping
purposes. In this regard, a possible future contribution
of a military contingent has been considered a priority
issue by my Government.

In this context, Bulgaria attaches particular
importance to further improved cooperation among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries. We welcomed the report of the Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations and endorsed the
subsequent conclusions and proposals of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations on the
modalities of cooperation between the Security Council
and troop-contributing countries. We believe that this
cooperation should further evolve into a transparent,
strengthened and more concrete dialogue which
continues throughout the entire process of the
consideration and formulation of mandates and, later
on, during the implementation phase.

Being directly linked to the fundamental question
of the formulation of clear, credible and achievable
mandates, the consultations must be put on a sound
basis to ensure common understanding of the situation
on the ground as well as the strategic goals and
mandates that might be found appropriate for a
particular mission. We welcome, in this regard,
Security Council resolution 1327 (2000) as the first
step in our common endeavours to explore new ways to
enhance the existing system of consultations. The
establishment of a new mechanism would enable the
Security Council to have a clearer picture of the
resources available for a particular mission while
deciding on mandates and strength of personnel. In the
same vein, greater transparency during the entire
process might encourage the troop-contributing nations
to fully meet their commitments. In this context, we
commend the determination of Under Secretary-
General Jean-Marie Guehenno to promote permanent
dialogue, openness and transparency between the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and troop-
contributing nations, including on so-called sensitive
issues. We are confident that such an approach would
allow for more realistic operational and logistical
planning by the Secretariat.

It is my delegation's view that the Security
Council activities relating to peacekeeping can only
benefit from increased and fruitful cooperation with
troop-contributing countries. The expertise and
knowledge accumulated by some of these countries in
conflict prevention, crisis management, peacekeeping
and peace-building might be utilized during all stages
of consultations, including the formulation,
implementation and termination of or significant
changes in the mandates.

Recognizing the primary responsibility of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security, Bulgaria is further contributing to
the fulfilment of this goal by playing a key role in a
number of initiatives intended to promote the crisis
management and peace-building capacities of countries
of south-eastern Europe. The Multinational Peace
Force for South-Eastern Europe, established in 1998,
stands ready for deployment in conflict prevention and
other peace-support operations mandated by the United
Nations and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. The headquarters of the Force
was activated in August 1999 in Bulgaria and is
currently fully operational.

As a troop-contributing country, Bulgaria is
looking forward to working closely with all delegations
on the important issue of strengthening cooperation
among the Security Council, troop-contributing
countries and the Secretariat for the achievement of the
United Nations objectives in the field of international
peace and security.

