Mr. Cardi (Italy): I thank you, Mr. President. The
debate on the Council's working methods is timely.
We, as Member States, must work together and with
the Organization to satisfy the growing demand for
effective multilateralism. Those efforts involve every
United Nations body, including the Council.

First, we must acknowledge that today's security
challenges are different from those of the past. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) introduces an integrated
approach to sustainable development by linking
together the five Ps of the Agenda: people, prosperity,
partnership, planet and peace. Its implementation will
require a fresh look at working methods and effective
synergies among the various bodies of the United
Nations. Similar challenges are posed by the need for an
integrated approach to implement the recommendations
stemming from the three major reviews underway on
the future of peacekeeping, peacebuilding and the role
of women in peace and security. Improvements have
already been achieved. Nevertheless, Italy believes
there is room for further improvement. Allow me to
highlight some potential areas.

We believe that the Council could make use of the
tools at its disposal, including informal meetings and
briefings, to foster synergies with the other bodies of
the Organization. At the same time, we share the view
that closer attention should be paid to wider security
issues, which are a matter of concern to the wider
membership. As an example of best practice, allow me
to refer to the open debate held during the New Zealand
presidency of the Council on the security challenges
facing small island developing States (see S/PV.7499).
We fully supported that initiative and followed it up by
organizing a ministerial meeting in Milan on climate
adaptation and food security in small island developing
States. Let me also mention the issue of migration as a
joint integrated challenge confronting us.

Secondly, knowledge leads to prevention. We must
act ahead of crises, rather than react after the fact.
Information-sharing is key, and interaction between
the Council and the Secretary-General can indeed
foster awareness and early warning. Italy is committed
to providing additional support to the Department of
Political Affairs to ensure an effective deployment of
mediation teams where needed. We also welcome the
strengthening of early warning mechanisms, such as
the Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes, the
Rights Up Front Initiative and the role of the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights. All of them
represent valuable tools whose potential will have to be
fully exploited.

That leads me to my third point, which concerns
the revitalization of Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations, in connection with the work of the
Council and the systematic recourse to cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations under
Chapter VIII. We should collectively renew our focus
on the peaceful settlement of disputes, by promoting
good offices and mediation efforts and by apportioning
work to regional and sub-regional partners.

Fourthly, we must not shy away from debating the
reform of the Council, with a View to making it more
representative, transparent, democratic, effective and
accountable. While the membership is engaged in
seeking a appropriate and comprehensive compromise
solution that includes all five clusters, we believe that
there is scope for action under the current system to
further improve the Council's working methods.
Bearing that in mind, Italy has endorsed both the joint
French/Mexican initiative and the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group's code of conduct
to limit the use of the veto on issues linked to mass
atrocities and crimes, as provided for under the Rome
Statute.

My last point is that we should invest in the
preventive power of justice by fighting impunity and
promoting accountability. Improved working methods
are crucial to the Security Council's ability to fulfil its
responsibilities. As Vice-President of the Assembly of
States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, I stress the importance of responsible
follow-up to cases referred to the Court by the Council.
We believe that the Council should have a forum where
international criminal justice issues can be regularly
discussed, bearing in mind the various sensitivities at
stake.

In conclusion, the aforementioned is part of Italy's
commitment to improving the working methods of the
Security Council. Italy will consistently pursue the
goal of a more transparent, efficient and accountable
Council, where elected members can make a bigger
contribution to its work by acting as a bridge towards
non-Council members and their concerns. Enhancing
the transparency and efficiency of the Council's
working methods should be a constant objective for
all Member States. The general membership of the
Organization can rely on Italy's strong determination
in that endeavour.

