Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Zarif for his briefing. We welcome Prime
Minister Thaci and Prime Minister Vucie to the Security
Council and we thank them for their statements.

The European Union-facilitated Kosovo-Serbia
dialogues in implementation of the April 2013
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations continue to be critical elements for building
a strong, inclusive and integrated democracy in Kosovo.
We are eager to see high-level meetings resume and
expeditious progress continuing towards the full
implementation of the Brussels Agreement, including
the full functioning of all of Kosovo's municipalities
in accordance with Kosovo law. In that regard, the
United States welcomes the recent progress by Kosovo
political leaders to overcome the political impasse that
has prevented the formation of a Kosovo Government
following the June elections.

We call on Kosovo's political party leaders to
move lawfully and quickly to constitute the Assembly
and form the Government fully in line with Kosovo's
Constitution, laws and rulings by its Constitutional
Court. As the Secretary-General observes in his report
(S/2014/773), there are many pressing issues affecting
the future of all people living in Kosovo, and there
are opportunities to continue the historic process of
normalization with Belgrade and to reconcile with the
past. Sustaining momentum in the Belgrade-Pristina
dialogues and the full implementation of all agreements
reached to date remain integral to the welfare of the
people of Kosovo, to both Kosovo and Serbia's progress
on their respective paths towards European integration,
and to a stable, peaceful and prosperous region.
To that end, we will continue to back the intensive
engagement of the European Union (EU) and the EU
High Representative in advancing the dialogue.

While there has been a pause in progress at the
political level while awaiting the Kosovo Government's
formation, progress does continue to be made on the
technical level, including on important agreements
on integrated border management, the freedom of
movement, energy and reciprocal recognition of vehicle
insurance, which will allow citizens of both countries
to travel easily across the borders. We welcome the
cooperation between international and local authorities
that helped facilitate visits by Serb pilgrims to Kosovo
for religious holidays in November.

The United States condemns those who seek to
oppose the work of building an inclusive democracy in
Kosovo by committing acts of violence or intimidation
or by sowing tension, mistrust and fear among the
communities. Threats against returnees and their
property, the deplorable acts of vandalism at the
Visoki Decani monastery on 11 and 12 October and
the incendiary rhetoric that surrounded the suspension
of the soccer match in Belgrade between Serbia and
Albania are all grounds for concern. Those incidents
demonstrate the need to intensify outreach, redouble
efforts to promote dialogue and understanding and to
further strengthen security where it is needed.

The Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continue to
exercise indispensable roles in cooperation with Kosovo
authorities in ensuring security and strengthening the
rule of law throughout the country. Their work has
also been instrumental in ensuring an environment
conducive to advancing the implementation of the
dialogue agreements between Kosovo and Serbia.
KFOR's support for security and its presence as a third
responder in Mitrovica following the Serbia-Albania
soccer match helped prevent tensions from escalating
into violence.

EULEX personnel remain essential in mentoring
and training Kosovo's judicial and police personnel.
Their work continues to facilitate the identification
and repatriation of remains from previous conflicts, as
we witnessed in September and October. Colleagues
have raised recent allegations against certain EULEX
officials. Those allegations should be the subject of
a full and transparent investigation. Nonetheless,
inflammatory language directed against EULEX and
the lack of full cooperation in certain law enforcement
matters are unacceptable. We continue to support the
important European Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo.

Finally, the United States notes and welcomes
Kosovo's growing involvement in regional cooperation
forums and commends the 10 October decision of the
multinational advisory group of the Regional Arms
Control Verification and Implementation Assistance
Centre for Security Cooperation in South-East Europe
to invite Kosovo's full participation in the organization.
Increased dialogue among the countries of the region is
vital to addressing shared concerns such as the threat
of foreign terrorist fighters. We call upon the countries
in the region to work together to ensure that effective
preventative and response mechanisms are in place to
counter extremist individuals and violent extremist
ideas. In connection with those efforts, the United
States commends the work of Kosovo and Serbian
law enforcement agencies in response to the threat of
foreign terrorist fighters. Those are important lines of
effort in the coalition to counter the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, of which we thank both Kosovo
and Serbia for being members.

