Mr. Shinyo (Japan): At the outset, allow me to
join previous speakers in thanking Mr. Rucker for his
briefing. I would also like to thank Ms. Raskovic-Ivic,
President of the Coordination Centre of the Republic of
Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija, and welcome the
presence of the Prime Minister of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo, Mr. Ceku,
at this meeting.

While a form for the final status of Kosovo
dominates the political situation in Kosovo, the
implementation of the Kosovo standards is the
challenge which the leaders of Kosovo must address on
a day-to-day basis. Since the standards include some
important elements which provide the foundation for
governance based on democracy and the rule of law,
Japan would like to reaffirm the importance of
continued implementation efforts by the future
Government in Kosovo, regardless of the final status.

In that regard, we welcome the steady progress
on the implementation of 13 priority areas, as noted in
the report of the Secretary-General. In addition, we
appreciate the creation of structures and work plans by
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to
implement the European Partnership Action Plan, in

which the standards are now integrally incorporated.
Those efforts can be regarded as evidence of Kosovo's
commitment to the continuing implementation of the
standards in the future.

Needless to say, serious work should go into all
standards implementation efforts. However, I would
like to mention the following three points that require
particular attention in light of the anticipated situation
following the settlement of the final status.

First, with regard to functioning democratic
institutions, it is a serious problem that no progress has
been reported on the issue of participation of Kosovo
Serbs in Kosovo's political institutions. We express our
deep concern, in particular, with regard to the three
northern municipalities' ongoing boycott of contacts
with the Provisional Institutions, and urge those
municipalities once again to resume their contacts
without delay. To solve that problem, the Government
of Serbia, as a responsible member of the international
community, should respond positively to the
international calls for action on that issue.

Secondly, with regard to the economy, a stable
society will not be achieved through the stabilization of
governance alone, but also requires economic recovery.
The economy of Kosovo is hardly self-sufficient. The
Provisional Institutions need to redouble their efforts to
build the necessary economic system and institutions,
and also to address the issue of youth unemployment,
which some say exceeds 60 per cent. In addition,
special attention should be given to creating job
opportunities for returnees and minority groups.

Thirdly, with regard to the freedom of movement,
the mistrust among ethnic groups, especially the fear
among the Kosovo Serbs and other minority
populations with regard to the majority population, is
an underlying factor that is hindering freedom of
movement. Serbian and Albanian leaders alike
therefore need to take the necessary measures for
confidence-building among the people. That issue,
together with the aforementioned problem of
insufficient job opportunities, constitutes an obstacle to
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons.
For that reason, we call for prompt measures in that
regard.

I would also like to make several points
concerning the efforts of the international community
towards determination of the final status of Kosovo.
First, Japan has been fully supporting the efforts of

06-6573]
Special Envoy Mr. Ahtisaari and, in that context, we
express our understanding of his decision to present his
comprehensive proposal immediately after the
upcoming Serbian elections. Secondly, we welcome the
careful preparations now under way for the transition
to an international civilian presence after the
withdrawal of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) under the
leadership of UNMIK and the European Union. The
transition needs to take place without any delay upon
the determination of the final status.

Before concluding my remarks today, I would
like to send an important message to all parties. While
the situation in Kosovo will reach a critical juncture at
the beginning of next year, we would like to strongly
urge all parties to act with the utmost prudence to
ensure that the final status will contribute to peace and
security in the region.

