Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to extend
our thanks to all of our briefers. I would like in particular
to ask Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Onanga-Anyanga and Special Representative Moussa
Nebie to pass on to their teams on the ground the
thanks of the Council for the work they do in difficult
circumstances, and I echo my American colleague's
thanks and tribute to the Ambassador of cote d'Ivoire
for the very important work he has personally been
spearheading on behalf of us all.

We share the Secretary General's assessment that
the security situation in the Central African Republic
remains extremely fragile - a message repeated in a
letter sent to all of us today by 45 non-governmental
organizations active in that country. As our briefers
today have illustrated, there are some positive signals
of progress in the Central African Republic, but the
security, humanitarian and justice situations remain
concerning. The international community must not
relax its efforts towards building a secure, stable and
peaceful Central African Republic.

Civilians, peacekeepers and humanitarian workers
continue to be attacked. More than one in four Central
Africans remain displaced. Half of the population is in
desperate need of humanitarian assistance. Only 36 per
cent of the 2018 humanitarian response plan has been
funded. We encourage all Member States to help fill that
gap. The United Kingdom has provided £63 million, or
$81 million, in humanitarian aid to the Central African
Republic since 2015. We believe that this aid supports
progress towards a stable, secure and peaceful Central
African Republic - something that remains in all of
our interests.

It is clear that in order to achieve peace in the
Central African Republic, efforts to stabilize the
country in the short-term must go hand in hand with
longer-term progress on reconciliation, justice and
peacebuilding. We therefore welcome the efforts of
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic, which remains the
only viable path to peace. I agree wholeheartedly
with the French Ambassador on the need to avoid
parallel initiatives, which risk confusion, or worse.
Coordinated and sustained international support is
vital if the Central African Republic is to achieve long-
lasting peace and stability. We therefore welcome the
Secretary-General's recommendation that there should
be greater United Nations involvement in the Initiative
to ensure link up between political peace and security
efforts and to reinforce coordination between national
and international partners on the Central African
Republic's road to peace.

The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) has an essential role to play in supporting
the peace initiative, and the United Kingdom is
committed to working with colleagues on the Security
Council to ensure that MINUSCA can deliver that
support as part of its stabilization mandate. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General's recommendation
for MINUSCA's renewed focus on the peace process,
including through more direct engagement.
Also, in support of MINUSCA's mandate delivery,
we commend the Secretary-General's plan to introduce
a performance management mechanism to alleviate
some of the pressures on the Mission. That will give
it a greater ability to improve performance and to
enforce the zero-tolerance policy on sexual abuse
and exploitation and sexual harassment. I note in that
context Special Representative Onanga-Anyanga's
comments about ensuring that troops that are deployed
are properly trained and equipped. He is right in saying
that it is a responsibility of the Council.

We also welcome the Secretary-General's
recommendation to establish and implement a
comprehensive, strategic outreach and communication
plan, making clear what MINUSCA is delivering for
the people of the Central African Republic, building a
better understanding of the peace process and making
sure we take into account the views and needs ofCentral
Africans. As we have all heard and seen many times in
the Council, an inclusive peace process that ensures the
participation of women is more likely to be sustainable
and successful.

Among these concerns respecting the Central
African Republic, we must remember that there can
be no peace without justice. Incitement to violence,
including on religious and ethnic grounds, and
attacks on civilians, peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers will continue unchecked if perpetrators
perceive impunity to be the standard. We recognize
the efforts of the Government of the Central African
Republic, together with MINUSCA, to bring some of
the perpetrators of serious crimes to account. In that
regard, we hope that the positive news of the inaugural
session of the Special Criminal Court yesterday will
soon translate into concrete progress in the fight against
impunity, especially now that the Court's investigations
can officially commence.

We urge the Central African Republic to work
with international partners to expedite progress on
criminal and transitional justice and ensure that judicial
mechanisms are in place to support due process on these
and other cases. That remains an essential component
to bringing stability to the Central African Republic.
The international community and the Government of
the Central African Republic have come a long way
since elections in 2015. We must continue to unite in our
focus on building peace and stability in the country and
on creating the conditions for the long-term protection
and prosperity that the people deserve.

