Mr. Cardi (Italy): First of all, let join others in
thanking you, Mr. President, and the Secretariat for
the excellent organization of the joint meeting with the
African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council and
for the warm hospitality offered by your Government in
your capital last week. Iwould also like to thank Special
Representative Haile Menkerios and Commissioner
Smail Chergui for their active participation in the
meeting, and particularly Mr. Menkerios for his
briefing today.

Resolution 2320 (2016), the AU-United Nations
framework agreement signed last April, the Secretary-
General's report (S/2017/744) on the mechanism to
finance AU peace operations and the report of the
Chairperson ofthe AU Commission on the same subject
mark the beginning of the new strategic partnership
between the two organizations. Last week, the Security
Council had a very frank and very substantial and
constructive exchange of Views with the African Union
Peace and Security Council on those important topics.
Today's meeting fosters continuity in our discussions.
Focus should now be placed on implementation. In that
regard, the discussion held in Addis Ababa made it clear
that there is broad consensus for developing joint field
missions and harmonizing the work programmes on
Africa. We support that pragmatic way to improve our
methods of work and strengthen cooperation between
the two bodies.

In the same vein, we encourage the African Union
Commission and the United Nations Secretariat to
further enhance their cooperation in addressing the
root causes of African conflicts. We commend Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed for the first-
ever joint high-level mission with the African Union
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria
on women's meaningful participation in peace, security
and development.

New common challenges have been arising in
recent years. I have underlined them in the meetings
in Addis Ababa. First and foremost is terrorism and
the growing connection among criminal networks,
including on human trafficking. The scope of those
crimes is cross-regional. It is no longer a challenge
related only to local conflicts in Africa. The effects of
those conflicts are global, and therefore more relevant
than even to collective security.

The cross-regional dimension of African conflicts
and the regional capacities of the African continent
are interlinked, whether in the Horn of Africa and
the Red Sea or in West Africa and the Sahel, or in the
Mediterranean region of Africa. We must continue to
enhance the regional capacities of the continent. As
indicated by the Secretary-General in his latest report,
cooperation can be further implemented through
triangular mechanisms that involve subregional
organizations and regional economic communities.
A contribution by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development to the South Sudanese crisis and by
the Economic Community of West African States
in The Gambia crisis are clear examples of political
comparative advantages. That is also the case in the
security field for the Group of Five for the Sahel States
and its newly established force for the region.

Such a flexible framework will help respond to
the legitimate demand for African solutions to African
problems. In the long run it will also contribute to
making our joint efforts sustainable, even financially.
African Union peace operations have comparative
advantages when it comes to African crises. In that
respect, Italy supports the mechanism set out in the
Secretary-General's report for joint planning and
mandating of African Union peace operations.

The African Union has taken on important
responsibilities in recent years and has shown a
willingness to take on more. We support its ambitions
in the development of the African Peace and Security
Architecture, the African Union Peace Fund and
the African Standby Force and its rapid deployment
capability. In the meantime, following the pragmatic
approach we advocate for shoring up that cooperation,
we deem it critical to start securing the current capacities
of African Union-mandated peace operations.

The founding of the African Union Military
Observer Mission in Somalia, for instance, requires a
prompt solution. The Secretary-General's next thematic
report will be issued in November, during Italy's
presidency of the Security Council. We look forward to
developing our discussion on that occasion.

Enhanced strategic cooperation with the African
Union is the leading way to smart and cost-effective
peace operations. We encourage African partners to
finalize their operative arrangements for the 25 per cent
contribution of the African Union to peace operations.
Financing predictability is an essential, yet not the
exclusive way, to strengthen African capabilities.
We are in favour of the United Nations exploring
the use of assessed contributions, provided that the
appropriate set of requirements in terms of troop
quality, accountability, human rights compliance and
conduct and discipline standards are met. Equipment,
technological innovation and training are also crucial.
Italy stands ready to strengthen its engagement in
capacity-building in favour of police and military units
in African Union missions and to contribute to devising
new training schemes tailored to African needs.

