Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General for his latest report (S/2015/684)
and for supplying the Council with the report of the
Tripartite Review Commission on the United Nations
in Afghanistan (S/2015/7l3, annex). I welcome the
briefings of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Haysom and Executive Director Fedotov.

I would also like to pay tribute to Ambassador
Tanin at his final debate. He has represented his country
admirably through a period of great transition, and he
leaves as Afghanistan enters its transformation decade,
with full ownership of its national affairs. I wish him
every success in his new role.

I would like to share the words of teacher caught up
in a suicide bombing in Jalalabad - one that claimed
32 lives. Recovering in his hospital bed, the teacher
said, "Death does not frighten me, but, ifI die, what
will happen to my children?" Those words are from
a United Nations interview in April. They could have
come from any parent, anywhere in the world. The echo
a shared fear - a fear that our children will not grow
up, safe, healthy or happy.

Sadly, as the Secretary-General's report on the
protection of civilians shows (S/2015/453), that fear
has yet to be eradicated for everyone in Afghanistan.
Between January and the end ofJune, over 1,500 civilians
were killed in Afghanistan; one-fifth of them were
children. That violence is setting back Afghanistan's
prospects for prosperity and better opportunities for
all. It is damaging children's education, setting back
the rights of women and girls, and making it harder to
secure the political settlement so desperately needed
for a stable and secure Afghanistan.

What can we do, as a Council, to support the Afghan
Government and the work of United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)? We should we
maintain our focus on Afghanistan and concentrate on
three things: security, politics and people.

First, we must maintain our support for the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces. As current
fighting in Helmand shows, the challenge that they are
facing is intensifying. But they are also showing that
they are capable of meeting it, and more. I pay tribute
to their bravery and sacrifice. To support the continued
efforts of the Afghan security institutions, the United

Kingdom is contributing $110 million each year until
at least 2017, and we are proud of our commitment to
the Afghan National Army Officer Academy, which
graduated its first female officers over the summer. I
urge Member States to continue their vital support to
the Afghan National Forces.

However, security will count for little without
a strong political settlement underpinning it. We
welcome President Ghani's commitment to peace and
the commitment made by Pakistan and others in the
region to reaching a political settlement. The Murree
talks in July were an important step towards that goal.
Let us therefore urge all the parties to return to the
negotiating table. A peace process is the only route to a
secure and stable Afghanistan, and the Council should
give its full support.

We should also take this chance to welcome the
progress of the National Unity Government during
its first year in office. The Government set out its
achievements at the senior officials meeting earlier
this month. Those included agreeing and sticking to
a macro-economic reform plan with the International
Monetary Fund, tackling impunity by re-opening
the Kabul Bank fraud cases, and agreeing major new
investments in power transmission.

All of those have been done in the face of
challenging circumstances. There is much now to
do. Let us therefore show our support to the National
Unity Government and help it deliver its ambitious
agenda. There are important benchmarks to measure
next year, such as creating jobs - including for
women - improving fiscal stability and providing
better education and health services. Those will all help
Afghanistan make its case for continued international
support at next year's ministerial meetings and, more
importantly, show that it is keeping its promises to its
people.

Afghanistan's neighbours also have a clear
interest in supporting the National Unity Government.
Economic cooperation - including on trade, energy
and infrastructure - is vital to the prosperity of
Afghanistan and the region. The United Kingdom will
be there to support the process, but that transformation
can be achieved only if others match Afghanistan's
ambition for a productive Eurasian partnership.

It is with the people of Afghanistan that I wish
to conclude. For so long now, stories like those of
the teacher in Jalalabad have come to typify our
impressions of Afghanistan. But for every victim, there
are countless others whose stories we do not hear. Like
that of Mahjabeen from Herat, who at the age 0f41, with
no formal education, opened her first business. She is
now putting her daughter through university. Or that of
Sohila, who, thanks to Save the Children, is going to
school for the first time, like countless other Afghan
girls. Or that of Aqeela Asifi, who just this week was
recognized by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for her tireless pursuit of
education for refugees.

It is the stories of these people of Afghanistan
that underline why progress on security and a political
settlement are so important. If we are to hear more of
them, we must do all we can to support Afghanistan.
We cannot allow them to be silenced.

