Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I want to thank you, Madam
President, for accepting to shepherd the Security
Council in the month of May. My delegation wishes you
green pastures.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
update.
The delicate nature of the situation in Ukraine
impels us to urge great circumspection by the contending
parties in order to avoid a degeneration of the crisis into
full-blown military confrontation. That consideration
is even more pertinent today, as developments on the
ground have assumed an anarchical dimension. The
reported downing of two Ukrainian military helicopters
yesterday and the seizure of a local railway control
centre near Donetsk by unidentified armed groups
amplify our concerns. The brazen takeover and control
of public establishments by armed groups has led to
the recent response by the Government of Ukraine.
We acknowledge the responsibility of the Government
to maintain public order and the rule of law. It is also
possible to restore public order in a measured manner
to avoid degeneration into a full-blown conflict.

Our call on all parties to de-escalate tensions could
not be more urgent. We reiterate our position that the
outcome of the Geneva meeting of 17 April among
Ukraine, the Russian Federation, the European Union
and the United States provides the path to the resolution
of the conflict. There are, however, prerequisites to
that. All sides must refrain from violence, intimidation
or provocative action. All armed groups must disarm
and vacate illegally seized buildings.

The doors to a diplomatic solution must remain
open. The international community, including the
United Nations and the relevant regional organizations,
must remain engaged and committed to finding a
peaceful solution that takes into consideration the
interests of all people of Ukraine. We would like to
see Ukraine return to peace, security and stability, and
its independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
respected in accordance with the Charter of United
Nations.

The alternative would resemble falling
dominoes - not only in the region but in every other
region in the world. Perhaps we should all study the
domino theory. We would be mortified by what we saw.
The current scenario is for us simply mortifying. It
is our collective responsibility to prevent the domino
theory from being replayed out in our times.

