Mrs. Juul (Norway): Success in Afghanistan
requires the building of Afghan ownership. That must
be done through strengthened and coordinated
international efforts aimed at the full implementation
of the Afghanistan Compact. We believe that the
United Nations should play a stronger role. We
welcome the expansion of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
commend Special Representative Koenigs and his team
on their work. UNAMA must be further strengthened
and expanded so that it can play a strong and unifying
role. Norway encourages the United Nations to
continue its efforts to improve relations between
Afghanistan and the countries of the region.

The security situation in many parts of
Afghanistan is better than it was last year, but there are
signs of continued security challenges ahead. We are
concerned when it comes to the protection of civilians
and conditions for the delivery of humanitarian and
development assistance. Close cooperation between the
Afghan authorities, UNAMA and the International
Security Assistance Force will be required.
International forces must continue to do their utmost to
avoid civilian casualties. All international efforts must
be organized in a way that strengthens the Afghan
Government and Afghan popular support for the
international presence.

A number of countries have increased their
contributions to Afghanistan. That is a positive
development. Norway has increased its humanitarian
and development assistance, and will contribute almost
$75 million this year, but we also have to improve the
way we work together. The Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board, ably and jointly chaired by the
Afghan Government and UNAMA, contributes to
better coordination, but coordination can be effective
only if we are all ready to be coordinated. During the
last Board meeting in Berlin, the Afghan authorities
asked us to reduce the caveats on our assistance. In the
short term, we need to focus on capacity-building
through joint efforts, but the long-term answer is to
transfer control to the Afghan authorities through the
Afghan budget. The Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust
Fund is a good vehicle for joint action, and we
encourage donor countries to channel a substantial part
of their funding through the Fund.

Progress on promoting the participation of
women is crucial for sustainable development. The
Afghan Government and the United Nations must
redouble their efforts to ensure the full implementation
of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women.

There are signs that opium production may
increase further. However, it has been demonstrated
that this trend is not irreversible. Opium production has
been reduced in some provinces where there has been
strong leadership on the part of the governor and a
good dialogue with traditional leaders, supported by
the international community. We need to learn from
and build on those success stories.

Strengthening law and order is key to stability in
the long term. We welcome the European Union's
decision to establish a European Security and Defence
Policy mission, and we aim to make a substantial
contribution to it. The disbandment of illegal armed
groups is key to the security of the population and to
stability, and progress is long overdue. UNAMA has an
important role to play, in particular through the
disbandment of illegal armed groups and through
dialogue with the Afghan authorities. Reform of the
Ministry of Interior is pivotal, and we encourage the
Afghan authorities to continue and redouble their
efforts in that regard.

We believe that peace and justice go hand in
hand. We underline the importance of the full
implementation of the Action Plan on Peace, Justice
and Reconciliation, in accordance with the Afghanistan
Compact and the expectations of the Afghan people.

