Mr. Kodama (Japan): I thank you very much,
Madame President, for giving us the opportunity to
address the situation in the Middle East. I would like to
thank Mr. Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing. I
would also like to thank the Permanent Observer of
Palestine, Ambassador Mansour, for his statement this
morning.

Japan hopes that a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace will be realized at the earliest date
possible. In this context, Japan strongly supports a two-
State solution and remains convinced that the only way
to achieve durable peace is to achieve the two-State
solution through sincere negotiations.

Gravely concerned by the current impasse in the
peace process, we strongly encourage both parties to
restart direct negotiations. We also believe that there is
lack of mutual trust that is preventing this. We call on
both sides to engage the United States and the
international community and to take steps that will
create an environment conducive to renewing direct
negotiations.

The two parties must abide by their obligations
under previous agreements, most importantly the Road
Map. We call on Israel, as we have on so many
occasions, to freeze its settlement activities in the West
Bank, which includes East Jerusalem. In that
connection, Japan condemns the demolishing of a part
of Shepherd Hotel in East Jerusalem with a view to
constructing new housing units for Jewish people.
Japan does not recognize any unilateral measures that
prejudge the outcome of the final status negotiations.

At the same time, we call upon the Palestinian
Authority to continue its efforts to improve security
and fulfill its commitment to cease violence and work
against incitement. We strongly condemn the rocket
attacks launched into Israel and call on those
responsible to immediately stop.
11-21096

Japan strongly supports and will continue to

provide assistance to the State-building efforts of the
Palestinian Authority.

On the Gaza strip, the measures taken by Israel to
ease the blockade are a positive step, but Japan remains
concerned about the humanitarian situation. Japan
stresses the importance of further easing the blockade
while preventing the inflow of weapons into the Gaza
Strip. Japan welcomes Israel's easing of restrictions on
movement and access in the West Bank, which has
contributed to the development of the Palestinian
economy, and hopes that Israel will further ease such
restrictions.

We call on both parties to make the difficult
decisions to advance peace. Japan will continue its
efforts to realize a just and comprehensive peace in the
region.

Allow me to say a few words on Lebanon. We are
concerned about the situation in Lebanon, where a
number of Cabinet members under Prime Minister
Saad Hariri announced their resignation last week. We
reaffirm our support for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, unity and political independence of Lebanon
and for the full implementation of all relevant Security
Council resolutions. We are closely following the
developments in Lebanon and support the efforts of
President Michel Sleiman for the early establishment
of a new Government and the maintenance of
democratic institutions.

We support the Special Tribunal for Lebanon -
an independent and international judicial organization
whose work will enhance the rule of law. The Tribunal
should continue to carry out its mandate without any
interference, which will contribute to ending impunity.

