President Bouteflika (spoke in Arabic): This
very special Security Council meeting cannot be
completely isolated from the current discussion of
reform of the United Nations system. However, I do
not believe that we need to address that issue today as
we deal with the problems of collective security.

No one would dream of questioning what has
now become self-evident: there is a link between
development and peace - peace and respect for the
rule of law. The mission of the United Nations quite
rightly goes beyond the maintenance of international
peace and security to include the promotion of
economic and social development, friendly relations
among States based on respect for their sovereign
equality and the right of peoples to self-determination.
The Security Council has a primary, but not exclusive,
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security under the Charter of the United
Nations.

We would like to reiterate once again that we
condemn all manifestations of terrorism. It is within
the United Nations that we must all work together to
combat it. Accordingly, the draft comprehensive
convention on terrorism should be completed as soon
as possible to fill the lacunae that remain with regard
to terrorism-related activities not yet covered by
existing international instruments. There must also be
an agreed definition of terrorism that will avoid any
confusion between terrorism and the legitimate
struggle of peoples for self-determination, a struggle
which is covered by international law and international
humanitarian law.

The negative impact of globalization is another
issue that must be addressed. All international bodies
must strive to promote cooperation and exchange
information in combating terrorism. Africa's
commitment to fighting terrorism is crystal-clear; as
exemplified by the Algiers Convention. Our
commitment to eradicating terrorism has enabled
Algeria to address the phenomenon comprehensively.

Having emerged from a crisis that did not prevent
us from pursuing that campaign, we have now restored
peace to our cities and countryside and repaired the
fabric of our society by encouraging the social
reintegration of those who were misled by false
propaganda. We have adopted a national reconciliation
policy and a referendum is to be held on 29 September
in our country. That is our commitment.

