Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation
congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October and assures you of our fullest cooperation. I
should also like to pay tribute to your predecessor,
Ambassador Moctar Ouane of Mali, for the admirable
way in which he conducted the work of the Council last
month.

My delegation expresses its appreciation to you
for convening this urgent meeting of the Council to
consider the grave situation in Palestine in response to
requests for such a meeting, including from Malaysia
in its capacity as the Chairman of the Islamic Group at
the United Nations and as coordinator of the caucus of
non-aligned members of the Council. We are therefore
doubly grateful to you.

My delegation is deeply dismayed at the turmoil
that has descended on Palestine, particularly in East
Jerusalem and Gaza, as well as in several Arab
townships in Israel, following the provocative visit to
the sacred Islamic site of Al-Haram Al-Sharif by the
leader of the Likud Party, Mr. Ariel Sharon. To date,
some 51 Palestinians - most of them innocent
civilians - have been killed and over 1,000 wounded
as a result of the massive use of deadly force by Israeli
security forces. My delegation mourns these senseless
deaths and offers its profound condolences.

My delegation strongly condemns the actions of
the Israeli security forces against defenceless
Palestinian civilians at Al-Haram Al-Sharif that have
led to unnecessary bloodshed and loss of life. Malaysia
also condemns the visit of the Likud Party leader to
Al-Haram Al-Sharif in utter disregard of and contempt
for the religious sensitivities of the Palestinians. His
visit at a particularly delicate juncture in the peace
process cannot be seen as anything but a brazen act
intended to provoke Palestinian reaction. Given his
well-known record and attitude towards the peace
process, it is not difficult to delve into the motivations
that prompted him to visit the sacred site in the first
place. It was a blatantly cynical and irresponsible
exercise of political power for self-serving political
ends. His visit, accompanied by heavily armed Israeli
security forces, was no friendly visit. He did not go
there as an ordinary visitor or tourist. He went there to
assert the Israeli claim over the sacred site and over all
of East Jerusalem at a particularly sensitive time. From
his perspective, of course, Mr. Sharon's timing was
nothing less than perfect.

It is very sad indeed that, instead of apportioning
blame where it squarely belongs, the finger is now
being pointed at the Palestinian Authority as if it had
invited Mr. Sharon to visit Al-Haram Al-Sharif.

We have read news reports and witnessed on our
television screens excessive and disproportionate use
of force by Israeli security forces, which have used
grenades, rocket launchers, tanks and helicopter
gunships against civilians armed, for the most part,
with only the most primitive of weapons, if you can
call them that: crude rocks and stones. The world will
not forget the image of the 12-year old child being
brutally shot and killed in the arms of his own father
while seeking protection behind a concrete wall. The
fates of the boy and his father sum up the plight of the
Palestinians living in the occupied Arab territories in
general: that of very vulnerable people living in the
territories who are from time to time caught haplessly
in situations of violence and subjected to the draconian
policies and practices of the army of an occupying
Power. As a member of the Special Committee to
Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories, I
am personally familiar with the plight of the
Palestinian people living there.

My delegation calls on the Israeli authorities to
put an immediate stop to the high-handed actions of
their security forces and to bring to justice those
directly and wilfully responsible for these tragic
deaths. These actions constitute grave breaches of the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, which is applicable to
all the territories occupied by Israel since 1967. This
Council has a clear responsibility to put an end to
violations of the Convention, as well as to ensure the
safety and protection of civilians, especially innocent
children.

My delegation reaffirms its position that a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace can be achieved
only with the complete withdrawal of Israel from all
Arab and Palestinian land occupied since 1967,
including the city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and occupied
Syrian Golan. We also reaffirm that establishing an
independent State of Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital, along with the implementation of all
international resolutions on the Palestinian issue, are
the only guarantees for lasting peace between Israel
and Palestine.

Malaysia reaffirms its recognition of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as the political and historical capital of the
Palestinian people and State. We recognize Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as the meeting point of the three divine
religions and the site of coexistence between the three
great civilizations and cultures, and we recognize that
it forms an integral part of the Palestinian lands
occupied since 1967. We once again call on Israel, the
occupying Power, to comply with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and all other
relevant resolutions of the Council.

The grave situation in occupied East Jerusalem
and the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory must
be addressed immediately by the international
community, especially this Council, which is entrusted
with the maintenance of international peace and
security. We must exercise our responsibility in order
to ensure the safety and protection of the Palestinian
people, rescue the Middle East peace process and
enhance the prospects for peace in the region. My
delegation welcomes the upcoming meeting on
Wednesday, 4 October, in Paris and commends the
efforts of the United States and France in this regard.
We trust their efforts will bear fruit. We hope that the
meeting will find a way to end the acts of provocation
and violence and to restore peace. More importantly,
we hope that the meeting will address the urgent issue
of resuming the peace negotiations, leading to a final
political settlement, thereby fulfilling the hopes and
aspirations of all peace-loving Arabs and Jews.

