Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I should like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe for his introduction of the
report (S/2008/628) of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS). We listened closely to the
assessment of the Permanent Representative of Brazil,
Mrs. Viotti, on the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission's Guinea-Bissau configuration.

We welcome the establishment of a new
Government in the country headed by Carlos Correia.
We hope that he will be successful in stabilizing the
political and security situation in advance of the
parliamentary elections scheduled for 16 November.
The holding of open, inclusive and free elections is a
significant step towards consolidating peace in Guinea-
Bissau. We support the Government's efforts to prepare
for the elections and its readiness to respect the
timetable for their holding.

We are concerned by the assessment of the
Secretary-General, presented by Mr. Pascoe, that
Guinea-Bissau is not just a transit point, but one of the
centres for drug trafficking. In that regard, we would
like to know about the progress of the plan of operation
to combat illicit drugs developed by the Government
with the support of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. We would also like to know more about the
work of the Office's representative in Guinea-Bissau.
We would also be grateful to the Secretariat for
explanations with regard to the Secretary-General's
proposal to establish a so-called panel of experts of the
Security Council to identify those involved in illegal
drug trafficking and organized crime. In particular,
what would the mandate of the panel be? What
mechanisms would be established for punitive
measures? What would the modalities for such a
proposal be? We believe that all this requires more
clarification, at the very least.

We suggest that, given the limited progress made
in that area by the Government, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the Peacebuilding
Commission, introducing a sanctions regime would not
be effective at this stage. If genuine progress is to be
made in countering organized crime and the illegal
drug trade in Guinea-Bissau, we believe that it is
necessary first and foremost to support the country's
law enforcement and judicial institutional capacity. We
should also fully support the potential of regional
organizations in that area, in particular that of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). We welcome the organization of the
ECOWAS regional conference on the issue to be held
in Cape Verde on 28 and 29 October. We commend the
work done in that area by the Peacebuilding
Commission and Mrs. Viotti.

We also welcome the adoption of the Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau. We
believe it is important to develop a realistic mechanism
for monitoring the implementation of the Framework.

We are concerned about the slow progress in
implementing projects funded by the Peacebuilding
Fund. We hope that the Government and its partners
will be able to address the current difficulties in
implementing those projects. At the same time,
experience has shown that there is a need for both
project viability and scrutiny of existing capacities
when decisions are taken by the Peacebuilding Fund to
support a project.

UNOGBIS has an important role to play in
supporting political stability in Guinea-Bissau and
establishing dialogue between the Government and the
Peacebuilding Commission. We look forward to
specific recommendations from the Secretary-General
to strengthen the potential of UNOGBIS.

