Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): We are assembled here
this afternoon to focus on the increasingly dangerous
situation in the Middle East, about which my
delegation is highly concerned.

Israel has mounted a major indiscriminate
offensive in Gaza. In the words of the BBC,

"Israel's operations in Gaza and the West Bank
appear to have as their aim not just an increase in
pressure to get the release of its captured soldier
but the weakening of the Hamas Government."

In the course of the past few days, Israel has
captured cabinet ministers and taken many other
democratically elected Hamas legislators. Furthermore,
the Israeli air force has hit over 30 targets in the Gaza
Strip so far, including the Palestinian Ministry of the
Interior. Also, earlier today, one of those air strikes hit
a civilian car on the main road in Gaza City, injuring
two people. On the ground in southern Gaza, thousands
of heavily armed Israeli soldiers have taken up
positions and are primed for action.

The power supply has almost completely
disappeared following the disabling of two of the
remaining electrical relay stations in the blasts. The
destruction of the Palestinian territory's main power
transformer on Tuesday had already left hundreds of
thousands of people without electricity and hampered
the water supply, thereby pushing the territory to the
edge of a humanitarian crisis.

In our view, if the objective is truly to see the
return of a captured soldier, this is not only aggression;
it is also a grave violation of international law. The
standoff between the Palestinian leadership and the
Israelis is threatening to explode, and it is appropriate
that the Security Council is meeting to reflect on this
issue. In the interests of international peace and
security it is crucial that this Council take action to
prevent further deterioration of the situation.
Otherwise, mistrust between the parties will increase
and will make the return to peace negotiations more
difficult to achieve.

Regrettably, this heavily disproportionate use of
force can in no way advance the interests of peace.
This heavy-handedness is about the show of brutal
military force, not about getting back a captured
soldier. My delegation therefore condemns it without
reservation. This is particularly significant, given that
the Hamas-led Government has indicated that it is
considering important policy changes.

The delegation of Indonesia calls on the Security
Council to act urgently to have Israel pull out of Gaza
without delay and cease its military operations without
preconditions. Both sides should be urged to resolve by
peaceful means the issue of the kidnapped soldier, as
well as the matter of the release of all recently
kidnapped and detained Palestinians. My delegation
makes this suggestion conscious of the fact that this is
a very sensitive point on the road to peace. However, it
must be remembered that the longer the current
stalemate goes, the worse the humanitarian situation in
the Palestinian territory will be. Already, the
Palestinians' quality of life has been deteriorating
following Israel's refusal to remit taxes collected on
behalf of the Palestinian Authority.

We call on Israel to resist the temptation to
escalate the crisis. It must focus on the objective of
lasting peace through the full implementation of the
road map. We reiterate that there can be no military
resolution of the conflict. We must repeat that only the
realization of two States, Palestine and Israel, living
side by side within secure, internationally recognized
borders, as provided for in resolution 1397 (2002), can
end the perpetual violence and mistrust in the occupied
territories.

