Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I thank the Permanent Mission of Belgium to the United Nations for taking the initiative of holding this open debate on the issue of transitional justice, which is an extremely important topic that represents one of the key pillars for sustaining peace in countries emerging from conflict. I also thank the briefers for the valuable information that they provided (see S/PV.8723). Transitional justice is an issue of increasing importance in view of the experiences and lessons learned with regard to the central role of justice in peacebuilding and sustaining peace. That was reaffirmed by two identical resolutions on the five-year review of the peacebuilding architecture (Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262). The two resolutions demonstrated the importance that the international community attaches to implementing and operationalizing transitional justice mechanisms as a means of addressing the root causes of conflict. They also demonstrate the need to adopt a holistic approach towards the achievement of transitional justice in order to ensure that countries do not relapse into conflict. In that regard, I will share with the Security Council the Egyptian vision for promoting the role of the United Nations in supporting efforts to achieve transitional justice in post-conflict countries. First, Egypt's delegation stresses the importance of considering the specificity of every situation. There is no one-size-fits-all approach to fit every situation. The success of transitional justice endeavours and the move from a divisive past to a shared future depend on the respect of the international community for providing assistance and support to the countries concerned and the principle of national ownership and leadership of those efforts. International support must be based on national priorities and an environment conducive to the success of such efforts. Secondly, my country's delegation emphasizes the importance of coordination and clarification of the roles of various United Nations bodies in supporting transitional justice efforts in the countries concerned. The Organization's effectiveness requires harmony among its various components so that they complement one another and are fully coordinated. Thirdly, we underline the importance of discussing this important topic. I would also like to capitalizing on the Peacebuilding Commission's wish the Council presidency every success. consultative role when the Security Council reviews the mandates of peacekeeping missions and building on the Commission's past experiences and lessons learned in order to reinforce national peacebuilding priorities in the countries concerned. That helps to strengthen peacekeeping in order to build and sustain peace while ensuring a continuous response throughout a given conflict. Fourthly, we note the need to strengthen partnerships between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations, in particular the African Union. Deepening such partnerships provides an opportunity to coordinate efforts and benefit from the comparative advantages of all the various entities, which strengthens their effectiveness. Fifthly, members will agree that post-conflict transitional justice demands the continued commitment and support of the United Nations and the international community in order to enhance the human and institutional resources of countries emerging from conflict so that they can assume their essential functions with a view to achieving the rule of law, strengthening the justice system and preventing impunity. Lastly, given the importance of the role of regional organizations in maintaining international peace and security, Egypt, during its chairmanship of the African Union, has accelerated the operationalization of the African Union Centre for Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development, based in Cairo, in order to address the root causes of conflict and build and sustain peace across the African continent, in line with the concept of African solutions for African problems. In December 2019, Egypt also hosted the Aswan Forum for Sustainable Peace and Development. That was the first African event that allowed an honest dialogue among the continent's leaders and senior officials, the private sector, civil society and research centres on practical recommendations to address interconnected security and environmental challenges. We are confident that making the Forum an annual event would help the African continent to continue that important dialogue in the future. In conclusion, I reiterate my thanks to the Belgian presidency of the Security Council for the opportunity given to my country's delegation to participate in
