Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Kubis for his analysis of the
situation in Afghanistan. We listened carefully to the
statement of the Afghan Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Rassoul. Russia is interested in seeing Afghanistan
become a peaceful, stable, democratic nation. Naturally,
we hope that the threats posed by terrorism and drug
trafficking emanating from that country will be fully
eradicated.

Regrettably, as made clear by the spate of recent
incidents, the country continues to face a complex
security situation both in remote regions and in the
capital itself. We are particularly concerned by the
renewed extremism in the north of the country, where
only three years ago the situation was relatively calm.
The terrorists are essentially being pushed northward,
from where they penetrate into the Central Asian
countries. That is a direct threat to the stability of the
region. We are alarmed by the wave of terrorist acts
that has engulfed the country, against the backdrop
of the rapidly advancing transfer responsibilities and
the withdrawal of foreign troops. We express our
condolences to our South African colleagues with
respect to the death of a South African national during
the attack on Kabul on 18 September.
The reduction in the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) troop strength should be
offset by the qualitative enhancement of the combat
readiness of the Afghan security forces, so that when
the time comes for the international force to depart, the
Afghan Government will have its own capabilities for
maintaining law and order in order to be able to fully
ensure security. Russia will continue to provide Afghan
forces with assistance in that area.

We have questions with respect to the contradictory
statements that foreign troops will leave Afghanistan in
2014, while foreign bases will remain. We would like
to have full clarity. If the counter-terrorist mission is
completed, that means that foreign bases are being
maintained for some other aim not related to the
Afghan challenge. If the fight against terrorism needs
to continue, there will have to be an extension of the
mandate by the Security Council. In either the case, a
residual military presence should not be used against
the interests of Afghanistan's neighbours and the
countries of the region.

That is specifically why we look forward to a
constructive dialogue regarding that mandate, troop
strength and the objectives of any possible future NATO
operation in Afghanistan. That can be established
solely under a decision of the Security Council and
only once the ISAF reports to the Council that it has
fulfilled its existing mandate. In the context of an
ISAF withdrawal, it is clear that the role of the United
Nations in the Afghan settlement will grow. Its mission
must be to remain the coordinator of international
civilian efforts to assist in stabilization, while focusing
activities on strengthening Afghan sovereignty and on
the leading role of Afghans in governing their country.
The consequences of reducing the mission force for
operational activities must be fully explored. The issues
of optimizing the participation of Afghan regions must
be addressed together with the Afghan Government and
taking into account the security situation in different
areas of the country.

The situation remains unacceptable with respect to
the illegal production, trade and trafficking in drugs
in the country, which poses a threat to international
peace and stability. We note the efforts of the Afghan
Government to destroy opium poppy crops and fight
illegal drug trafficking. However, addressing those
problems requires a comprehensive approach, with
the United Nations playing a coordinating role. We
are confident that ISAF, regardless of its withdrawal
timetable from Afghanistan, needs to enhance the
effectiveness of its counter-narcotics efforts. Particular
attention and decisive action are needed for the challenge
of destroying drug crops and heroin laboratories.

Unfortunately, our persistent attempts to work
out cooperation with NATO in that area via regional
mechanisms, such as the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO), are being doggedly rebuffed.
We intend to continue to work within the Moscow-
Paris Pact, which has become one of the more effective
international tools for countering the drug threat. We
also intend to continue to work within the framework
of regional organizations - the SCO, the CSTO and the
quartet of Afghanistan, Pakistan, Russia and Tajikistan.

National reconciliation is one way to ensure the
peaceful settlement of the Afghan problem. We support
the position of the Afghan Government in the context
of that process. It has been approved by the Security
Council and provides for a dialogue with those who have
rejected violence to achieve their political aims, who do
not maintain ties to Al-Qaeda and other terrorist groups,
and who recognize and comply with the Constitution of
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan. Fulfilling those
criteria is a prerequisite for removing individuals from
the sanctions regime.

The possibility of involving different individuals
in a dialogue must be approached very carefully,
taking into account the sanctions regime established
by the Security Council. We oppose behind-the-
scenes contacts with Taliban groups that circumvent
the Government of Afghanistan, which could send
misleading signals as to the genuine intentions of the
international community in the context of an Afghan
settlement.

The regional dimension of an Afghan settlement
is growing in importance. In that regard, and in
combination with existing regional mechanisms,
it is important to develop the Istanbul process,
clearly with the active role of the United Nations.
We support the approach of the Kabul Conference to
strengthen regional cooperation, including through the
implemention of agreed confidence-building measures.
Russia is prepared to do its utmost to develop regional
cooperation in the interest of Afghanistan in those
areas that could be of true benefit to that country. We
are open to partnerships with all interested countries
in implementing projects that are meaningful for
Afghanistan. We also continue to provide humanitarian
assistance to the Afghan people. We are confident
that more coherent and coordinated regional efforts
and the implementation of the obligations undertaken
by members of the international community will
contribute to ensuring the sustainable development of
Afghanistan and the prosperity of its people, and will
help to restore an independent, peaceful Afghanistan
that is free from terrorism and drug crime.

