Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this meeting on the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2019/498). I also want to take this opportunity
to congratulate the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic and
Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) for his comprehensive presentation of
the first report issued since the signing in Bangui on
6 February by the Government and 14 armed groups of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic. I also want to thank all the
other speakers for their informative and enlightening
briefings and statements. My delegation supports them
in every way.

We see from the report that security challenges
and the protection of civilians continue to be a source
of serious concern, although we had hoped that with
the leaders of armed groups participating in political
life, the situation would improve significantly.
Unfortunately, the Paoua massacres have brought us
back to sad reality. The Government's considerable
efforts to implement the peace agreement are sufficient
proof of its willingness to respect the commitments it
outlines. The signatories have an obligation to respect
what they have freely signed, which includes ceasing
all acts of violence against the civilian population and
others such as the levying ofillegal taxes and the illicit
exploitation of natural resources. However, as with
any peace agreement, we need time to implement and
effectively enforce it and for everyone to truly own
it. I welcome the leading role of the guarantors of the
agreement in being ready to intervene as soon as the
need arises.

The humanitarian situation remains alarming,
owing to the abuses suffered by the populations in
areas where armed groups continue to operate despite
MINUSCA's continuing security efforts. The facts
described in this report illustrate how precarious the
situation in my country is and suggest that the road to
a lasting peace will be a long one. But with the support
provided to MINUSCA and the Government by the
international community and bilateral and international
partners, the Central African people will be able to
hope for a peaceful future. We are pleased with the
comments in that regard in the report, and this is the
right place to acknowledge the leadership of the Special
Representative, who has spared no effort since taking
office to advocate with countries and international
institutions in order to mobilize and support the efforts
under way, with a view to the upcoming elections. I
wish the Council every success in its consultations.

