The President: I shall now make a statement as
representative of the United Kingdom.

I would like to express the United Kingdom's
thanks to President Meron, President Joenson, as
well as Prosecutor Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow,
for their reports today. We would like to congratulate
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) on its 20 years of service. It has
been instrumental in helping to tackle impunity and
delivering justice to the many victims of the conflicts
in the former Yugoslavia. On behalf of the United
Kingdom, I would like to thank the ICTY for all of
its work and for what it has accomplished since its
establishment 20 years ago.

We are pleased that verdicts have been delivered
in the Stanisie, Simaiovie and Prlie cases which are
milestones for the ICTY. It is important that everyone
respect those verdicts. We welcome the continued
cooperation of Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. State cooperation is essential for the
completion of the ICTY's mandate. We note, however,
that there has been limited progress in investigating
the support networks that helped Mladie and Hadzie
evade capture. Investigating those networks remains a
priority.

We welcome the signing of a protocol covering
the exchange of evidence between Bosnia and
Serbia. That is a positive step that will help improve
cooperation between the two States. However, as the
Prosecutor's report (S/2013/308) states, the capacity of
domestic institutions to conduct effective war-crimes
prosecutions remains a concern. We encourage all
parties to consider this point and to explore ways to
improve the capacity of domestic institutions.

It is disappointing to see that the judgement in the
Karadeic' case is now expected in July 2015. Repeated
delays to this trial are disheartening. We urge the
Tribunal to take all necessary steps to minimize any
further delays, given the importance of the timely
completion of trials.

Turning to the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), we are pleased to see that the Tribunal
has completed all of its trial work and that the transition
to the Residual Mechanism is progressing well.
Capturing the remaining ICTR fugitives remains a
priority. The Tribunal's work cannot be fully completed
until all of those individuals are apprehended. We
encourage all Member States to provide their full,
unequivocal support and cooperation to ensure that the
fugitives are captured.

At the same time, we encourage the ICTR
to cooperate with States to facilitate the national
prosecutions that relate to individuals accused of
genocide. Those actions will help ensure that all
accused of genocide face justice. We note that host
States for the acquitted individuals in Arusha have
still not been found. This is disappointing, and we
encourage all parties to work together to find a solution
to this problem as soon as possible.

We regret to see that staff retention continues to
be an issue for both of the Tribunals. There is no easy
solution to this problem, and so we encourage both
Tribunals to prioritize their resources as rigorously as
possible.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I remind those speaking under rules 37 or 39 that
they should also keep their remarks to five minutes or
less.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Nikola
Selakovic', Minister of Justice and Public Administration
of Serbia.

