Mr. Pamir (Turkey): Turkey has aligned itself
with the statement made by the representative of Spain
on behalf of the European Union. But this being so, I
would like to avail myself of this opportunity to briefly
describe the main considerations that led Turkey to
decide to take over the leadership of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) from the United
Kingdom.

To start with, our appreciation goes to the United
Kingdom, which is fulfilling this crucial responsibility
in an impeccable manner at this vitally important
juncture. As the statement of the European Union made
clear, the Afghan people, after decades of war and
internal strife, are closer to historic reconciliation.
Turkey, which has traditionally had warm relations
with this beleaguered country and its people, is happy
that this opportunity to contribute distinctly to this
evolution towards normalcy is now being carried out. It
was with this hope that we decided to be part of ISAF
from the very start and became a contributing nation.

Turkey is fully aware that the success of the Bonn
process is fundamentally important to obtaining peace
and stability in Afghanistan. We are therefore moving
on to firmly grasp this historic challenge. Indeed, it is
with the determination to meet this challenge that we
accept the lead-nation status in ISAF for Kabul and its
surrounding area for a period of six months. Needless
to say, we will assume this responsibility after the
Council extends its authorization of the Force.

Our understanding is that this six-month period
will commence with the actual transfer of the lead to
Turkey, which we expect will take place soon, in the
latter half of June, around 28 June, to be more precise.

The Turkish Government has made this decision
with the understanding that the mandate and the area of
operation of ISAF will be maintained as stipulated by
Security Council resolution 1386 (2001). As such, the
current ISAF mission remains to assist the Afghan
Administration in the maintenance of security, as
envisaged in annex I to the Bonn Agreement.

Under the lead of the United Kingdom and with
the valuable assistance of the contributing States, ISAF
has been successful in fulfilling its role. The continuing
strong support of the international community remains
crucial to maintaining present capabilities and the
efficiency of ISAF. We expect Member States to make
concrete and timely contributions to the Force.
Furthermore, I would like to recall that the trust fund
established in accordance with resolution 1386 (2001)
to provide financial support to ISAF-participating
States has yet to become functional. This is the lifeline
of ISAF, and we expect Member States to contribute to
it.

As the lead nation of ISAF we look forward to
reporting to the Council regularly. We hope that the
six-month period that will be completed when Turkey
transfers its responsibilities to a successor nation will
be a glowing one for the people of Afghanistan in their
painful recent history.

Finally, I would like to extend our thanks to those
delegations that expressed their support for my
country's assuming the lead-nation role.

