Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): Ijoin earlier speakers in
thanking Ambassadors Van Bohemen and Oyarzun
Marchesi, and you, Mr. President, for the briefings
provided in your capacities as Chairs of your respective
Committees. I also wish to express my delegation's
sincere appreciation to the Ambassadors for their
able stewardship of those Committees. I also take this
opportunity to extend my appreciation to the respective
Groups of Experts and Monitoring Teams supporting
the Committees.

Malaysia reiterates its long-standing commitment to
our collective effort to combat the scourge of terrorism
and eradicate it from our midst. The work of the three
Committees under discussion represents an integrated
bulwark against the threat posed by potential terrorist
acts and actors. In that context, we continue to believe
thatjoint briefings such as today's provide an important
opportunity for holistically reviewing and assessing
our efforts to that end, as well as providing us with a
space where we can identify areas with the potential for
further synergies and cooperation between and among
the Committees. For example, a common strain running
through all their work concerns outreach to partners and
stakeholders, including Member States, international
organizations such as Interpol, the Financial Action Task
Force, the World Trade Organization, the International
Civil Aviation Organization and the International Air
Transport Association, civil society and academia, as
well as the private sector. Such activities are critical
to enhancing understanding of the various regimes and
their mechanisms and contributing to their improved
implementation. Such efforts must continue to be a
central focus for the work of all the Committees, and
in that regard, we welcome the commitment of all three
Committee Chairs to continuing that engagement,
including through open briefings and consultations.

The adoption in December of resolution 2253
(2015) and the January report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/92) accompanying it have brought the evolving
nature of the threat posed by terrorist actors, especially
Da'esh, into sharper focus. As Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi noted in his briefing, there is evidence that
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is actively
pursuing a chemical weapons programme. While we
note the existence in relation to that area of strong
international institutions, particularly the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, which
monitors the international trade in chemical substances
and related technologies and equipment, the regime
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) provides another layer of protection for
guarding against the possible acquisition, development
and use of such substances by potential terrorist
actors. Against the backdrop of that evolving threat,
and within the context of the ongoing comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004), my delegation would
like to stress the importance of addressing the gaps in
the current framework, particularly on the biological
and toxic weapons side.

Another area of particular interest to my delegation
is the possibility of replicating the assistance matching
model, as demonstrated last month at the African
regional meeting in Addis Ababa, in other regions,
including my own. In noting the preliminary findings
highlighted by the Chair of the 1540 Committee in
his briefing, my delegation stands ready to continue
to work closely with all Council members, as well as
other partners and stakeholders, in order to ensure a
successful outcome for the review.

The recent spate of terrorist attacks around the
world highlights a disturbing trend in the complexity
and sophistication of terrorists' planning and execution
of their attacks. We share the view that the growth of
foreign terrorist fighters flocking to theatres of conflict
around the world poses a future threat as well as an
immediate one, including to their home countries, even
if it is not necessarily a definite one. As Ambassador
Van Bohemen noted, such fighters will return home
battle-hardened, radicalized and well networked.
A further threat is posed by the expansion of Da'esh
and its affiliates to other territories. It is crucial to
recognize that the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities addresses primarily the front end of the
problem. In order to address it more comprehensively,
the continuity and synergies between the Committee
and its work could be further explored and, where they
already exist, further deepened with other relevant
mechanisms and institutions at the national, regional
and international levels. In that connection, we support
the Chair of the Committee's call to Member States to
actively engage with it, including by submitting the
necessary implementation reports.

On that note, I would like to conclude by stating
our strong approval of and support for the substantial
analytical and norm-setting work being actively
undertaken by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate under the guidance of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, as you highlighted in
your briefing, Mr. President.

