Mr. Mladenov: We meet today in the aftermath of
the most serious recent escalation between Israel and
Palestinian militants in Gaza. Although the immediate
crisis was defused, the situation remains highly volatile.

Following Israel's targeted killing of Palestinian
Islamic Jihad (PIJ) Commander Baha Abu al-Ata in
Gaza, Palestinian militants launched more than 500
rockets towards Israel. This latest escalation was
preceded on 1 November by some 10 rockets that
were launched from Gaza towards Israel, one of them
hitting a house in Sderot city. While, according to the
Israel Defense Forces (IDF), 90 per cent of the rockets
were intercepted by the Iron Dome, those that landed
caused damage to residential and commercial property.
Seventy-eight Israelis were treated for injuries or shock.
The indiscriminate launching of rockets and mortars at
civilian population centres is unacceptable and must
stop immediately.

In response to the rocket attacks, the IDF conducted
a number of strikes against PI] and militant targets in
Gaza. Thirty-four Palestinians were killed, more than
20 of whom were identified by the IDF as militants and
including three women and eight children. One of the
fatalities was reportedly caused by a Palestinian rocket
falling short inside Gaza. In total, 109 people were
also injured.

Among the people killed in Gaza were eight
members ofa family, who were killed in a single Israeli
strike. The IDF has reportedly admitted that their home
was mistakenly targeted. That is a tragic and heinous
incident and must be thoroughly and impartially
investigated. There is no justification for the killing of
civilians anywhere.

I want to recognize today the extraordinary effort
by Egypt, working closely with the United Nations, to
ensure that calm in Gaza was restored after 48 hours of
hostilities. Had our efforts failed, we would certainly
be in the midst of another war that would be far worse
than the terrible conflict in 2014. However, the dangers
have not passed. Although for now the arrangements
that came into effect in the early hours of 14 November
are holding, sporadic rocket launches have continued,
prompting Israeli retaliation.

But there are also other risks. Israeli closures and
intra-Palestinian division feed a desperate reality.
Militant activity, rocket fire and retaliatory air strikes
constantly risk more violence. Over the past year and
a half, the United Nations has worked hard to prevent
escalation and to implement the United Nations package
for Gaza as endorsed by the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance
to Palestinians (AHLC). As a result of that work, the
electricity supply was restored to an average of 13 hours
per day; more than 16,000 temporaryjobs were created;
and work is progressing on reviving an industrial zone
to create long-term economic opportunities. All those
measures have admittedly eased tensions but they fall
far short of what is required in terms of both financial
resources as well as political commitment by Palestinian
leaders and measures by Israel.

Gaza ultimately requires a political solution.
Militant activity cannot continue to undermine the
chances for peace and development. Israel cannot
continue with its policy of closures that stifle
development. Palestinian leaders cannot continue to
avoid the devastating consequences of their internal
political division.
I take this opportunity to thank those in the
international community who have contributed to the
implementation of the AHLC plan and call on all to
increase their support to United Nations programmes
on the ground. Most urgent is the need to address the
collapse of the health system in Gaza.

Nevertheless, our important humanitarian
engagement must not divert us from the political goal
of helping Palestinians to develop freely, without
relentless occupation, and Israelis to live in security,
free from the fear of terror and rockets. The only way to
ensure this goal is to work towards and achieve a two-
State solution - one that is based on relevant United
Nations resolutions and in which Gaza is an integral
part of the future State of Palestine.

Protests in Gaza at the Gaza perimeter fence have
also continued, with a small number of participants
engaging in violent activities. The IDF responded
with riot dispersal means and live fire, injuring over
300 people, including women and children. The Israeli
security forces must exercise maximum restraint and
use lethal force only when it is strictly necessary, as
a last resort, and in response to an imminent threat of
death or serious injury, in accordance with international
law. Hamas must ensure that protests at the fence
remain peaceful and prevent provocations.

If we want a way out of this crisis that leads to
something more than just another ceasefire, the road
is clear. There must be no more firing of rockets,
retaliatory strikes or provocations; the understandings
that sustain calm in Gaza must be upheld; efforts must
be redoubled to alleviate the humanitarian crisis and lift
the closures; and the focus must be towards a long-term,
sustainable political solution that includes allowing the
Palestinian people throughout the occupied territory to
vote and elect their leaders for the first time since 2006.

In recent weeks, I have engaged with senior
Palestinian officials and different factions and am
encouraged that all sides have moved from their
entrenched positions and made important concessions
towards making elections a more realistic prospect.
Renewing the legitimacy of all national institutions
is important for the future of the Palestinian people.
In my discussions, I have emphasized all the critical
elements required for elections to be credible. First,
they must be organized across the occupied Palestinian
territory - in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
and Gaza - in line with the Palestinian Basic Law,
electoral legislation and international best practices.
Secondly, both legislative and presidential elections
are necessary and should be held within a clearly
identified and reasonable timeframe. Thirdly, broad
intra-Palestinian agreement must be reached on the
modalities of holding elections.

As Palestinians hopefully accelerate their efforts to
hold elections, the Israeli-Palestinian political deadlock
continues to manifest itself in the continuation of
negative trends on the ground. On 1 November, some
2,600 housing units were advanced by the Civil
Administration High Planning Committee, including
182 units in Mevo'ot Yeriho, an outpost in the
Jordan Valley that the Israeli Government decided in
September to retroactively legalize as a new settlement.
Other notable plans include 382 units in the Dolev
settlement, west of Ramallah, and 609 units in the large
urban settlement of Beitar Illit, west of Bethlehem.

I take the opportunity to reiterate that we regret
the announcement made on 18 November by the United
States that it no longer views settlements as inconsistent
with international law. The United Nations position
remains unchanged. As per resolution 2334 (2016),
Israeli settlement activities are a flagrant violation
under international law and a major obstacle to the
achievement of the two-State solution and a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace.

Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures have also continued across the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Citing the
absence of Israeli-issued building permits, which are
nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain in Area C
and East Jerusalem, Israeli authorities demolished or
seized 48 structures, resulting in the displacement of
101 Palestinians, including 46 children. This practice
must immediately cease.

Violence also continues across the occupied
Palestinian territory. In the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, 46 Palestinians, including nine children,
and three Israelis were injured in various incidents,
including during clashes, search-and-arrest operations
and settler-related violence. On 11 November, a 22-year-
old Palestinian man was killed in circumstances that
indicate that he did not pose a threat. Such acts must
be thoroughly and impartially investigated and the
perpetrators held accountable. The IDF has reportedly
launched an investigation into that incident. Four days
later on 15 November, a Palestinian journalist lost an
eye after being reportedly shot by the Israeli security
forces while covering a demonstration in the village of
Surif, north of Hebron.
I remain concerned by the continuing and
sometimes escalating settler-related violence. Attacks
on Palestinians and their property in the context of the
annual olive harvest have continued despite preventive
measures adopted by the Israeli authorities. These
attacks, along with the restrictions on Palestinian
farmers' access to their land in areas adjacent to Israeli
settlements and behind the West Bank barrier, have
undermined agricultural livelihoods.

Despite the agreement reached last month between
Israel and the Palestinian Authority, which resulted in
the transfer of some $425 million of clearance revenues
to the Authority, the underlying disagreements
between the two parties remain, including over Israel's
deductions. It remains critical that both sides engage
in a constructive manner with the goal of restoring the
revenue transfers in full, in line with the Paris Protocol
on Economic Relations. The United Nations stands
ready to assist that process.

In a positive development, on 11 November UN-
Women, with support from the Government of Norway,
launched a $1.2-million programme to support the
advancement of the women and peace and security
agenda in Palestine, including the development of the
Palestinian national action plan for the next four years
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

We have regularly updated the Council and its
members on the financial challenges that the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) continues to face. Cash flow
is reaching a record low. I welcome the extension of the
UNRWA mandate until 2023, as adopted by the Fourth
Committee of the General Assembly on 15 November,
but given the stakes, I urge the swift mobilization of
support to enable the Agency to sustain its operations.

Turning now briefly to other developments
in the region, the situation in the Golan remains
calm. However, the continued violations of the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement remain of
concern, particularly in this volatile time for the region.
On 19 November, the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) observed two unidentified
objects being fired from a location on the Alpha side
and heard three explosions. The IDF informed UNDOF
that it had intercepted rockets fired from Syria. The
Syrian authorities informed UNDOF that they had no
knowledge of any firing of rockets. On 20 November,
the IDF carried out air strikes against what it described
as Iranian Quds Force and Syrian armed forces targets
in Syria. Further details of the developments in the
occupied Golan will be reported in the Secretary-
General's report on UNDOF, to be submitted to the
Security Council on 3 December.

In Lebanon, peaceful nationwide and non-sectarian
demonstrations, triggered by frustration against
Government policies, led to the resignation of Prime
Minister Saad Hariri on 29 October. Security forces
have largely responded with restraint, allowing
peaceful demonstrations to continue despite heightened
tensions at roadblocks. After one month of unabated
protests, a political deadlock hinders the nomination
of a Prime Minister-designate and the formation of
a new Government, amidst a rapidly deteriorating
economic situation. The United Nations has called for
a swift formation of Government that is responsive
to the protestors' aspirations and has the Parliament's
backing. The United Nations also encourages the
Lebanese security forces to continue to protect
peaceful demonstrators.

In the area of operations of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), following
decreased joint operations with the Lebanese Armed
Forces prompted by the popular protests, UNIFIL's
operations, in close coordination with the Lebanese
Armed Forces, returned to normal levels in early
November. The Council will be briefed on resolution
1701 (2006) on 25 November.

In closing, I would like to return to the issue of
the long-overdue Palestinian elections. The Palestinian
people have a right to vote and elect their leaders. For
too long, they have been denied that right and division
has set in. A Whole generation's voice for the future
has yet to be heard. Intra-Palestinian division is like
a cancer eating away at the aspiration for statehood,
peace and the commitment to democracy, rule of law
and human rights.

Elections are not a gift; they are a right. If elections
are to build unity, they must take place in Gaza and the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. How can we heal
the devastating division if people in Gaza are not able to
vote for their future as well? The United Nations will do

all that is necessary to support a successful Palestinian
election process, but we must be cognizant of broader
risks as well. The continuing risk of war threatens to
upend all our efforts to prevent escalation and revive a
political process. The United Nations will continue our
efforts to prevent another devastating conflict despite
all odds.

Upholding the international consensus on resolving
the conflict and all final status issues on the basis of
the two-State solution, as per relevant United Nations
resolutions, international law and mutual agreements,
is just as important. Unilateral moves fuel anger and
disillusionment and significantly undermine the
prospects for establishing a contiguous and viable
Palestinian State with Jerusalem as the future capital
of both States.

