Mr. Mayong Onon (Malaysia): At the outset, I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this important open debate, which allows non-Council
members to express their views on the worrisome
situation in the Middle East.

Malaysia wishes to associate itself with the
statements delivered earlier by the representative of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and by the representative of Bangladesh on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

We would also like to thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing on and insights into the
present situation in the region.
The adoption on 13 June, at the tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly, of resolution
ES-lO/ZO, on the protection of the Palestinian civilian
population - co-sponsored by Malaysia and supported
by 120 States Members of the United Nations - sent
a very strong message that called for the protection of
the Palestinians from Israeli aggression, particularly
in the Gaza Strip. Malaysia looks forward to the
Secretary-General's report on the establishment of an
international protection mechanism for the Palestinian
civilian population.

We also welcomed the Secretary-General's first
written report on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2334 (2016), which was presented
to the Council on 19 June (see S/PV.8289). The first
written report will greatly help the Council in advancing
the objectives set out in the resolution, especially in
the light of Israel's continued indifference towards the
Security Council and its resolutions.

The international community must therefore
continue to demand that Israel stop all violations
and illegal activities and fully comply with all its
obligations as prescribed by the relevant Council
resolutions as well as international law and the Charter
of the United Nations.

Malaysia will continue to provide assistance to the
Palestinians, within its means. Malaysia also wishes
to reiterate its position that a two-State solution, with
Palestinians and Israelis living side by side in peace,
based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
the capital of Palestine, is the only viable solution to
this long-standing conflict.

We continue to reaffirm our unwavering support
and solidarity with the Palestinian people, especially
during the recent violence in Gaza, which could threaten
peace and security in the Middle East. Malaysia will
work closely with the international community,
with multi-stakeholder participation, in finding a
peaceful, just, sustainable and lasting solution to this
longstanding issue.

