Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): It is indeed regrettable that
the Council could not adopt a resolution to establish a
new mechanism that would identify those responsible
for the use of chemical weapons in Syria. Establishing
such a tool would have sent a quick and unified message
regarding the resolve of the Council not to tolerate
impunity. That is how we view the defeat of both draft
resolutions (S/2018/l75 and S/2018/321). However, we
were not at all surprised.

We voted in favour of both draft resolutions,
consistent with our position in reaffirming the
importance of setting up an independent, impartial and
professional investigative mechanism with a view to
ensuring accountability. No doubt, such a mechanism
would clearly have addressed the existing institutional
gap in that regard, which continues to be a source of
major weakness in the fight against impunity.

Both draft resolutions sought the establishment of
such a mechanism. Clearly, there are differences, among
others, concerning some aspects of the accountability
mechanism. We believe that we have come some
distance in bridging those differences. It would have
been a major achievement, both functionally and from
the point of view of enhancing trust, which is so greatly
needed in order to address the challenge not only of
ensuring non-proliferation but also of advancing the
cause of international peace and security. That was why
we were hoping that we could achieve consensus on the
matter and unity within the Council.

Frankly speaking, we do not like what we see. At
the risk of sounding self-righteous - and the challenge
that we face makes taking the risk appropriate - we
must say that we are deeply disappointed about the
situation that we are in. Since we have no alternative, it
remains important that we all persevere in continuing
our dialogue and supporting the efforts to ensure unity,
without which the Council will not be in a position to
discharge its principal responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security, in particular repairing
the damage to the chemical weapons disarmament and
non-proliferation regime.

Yesterday, we expressed our concern about
the difficult situation we are currently facing (see S/PV.8225). We do not wish to repeat what we said,
but allow me to state in closing that we look forward
to handling the issue of the alleged use of chemical
weapons in Douma, eastern Damascus, with a greater
sense of responsibility. That is how we intend to look
at the draft resolution from Russia before us, a draft
which, in our view, is relatively similar to the draft
resolution informally made available by Sweden
yesterday, whenever the Council is ready to handle it.

