My statement today starts with a confession: I feel helpless - and responsible for not being able to do more to put things right. Europe in the twenty-first century is sitting on the safe side of the conflict line in Ukraine, taking in some of the 1.4 million Ukrainians who have fled the war in that country. But some 3.5 million Ukrainians have been left behind, in dire need of humanitarian assistance and protection. Visiting an International Migration Organization shelter in order to try to comprehend the suffering of the minors gathered there, some bearing wounds that life should never have inflicted on young people to begin with, I feel inadequate. All the things I have brought them feel inadequate too. All of us leaders, collectively, feel so inadequate. When I look into these young people's eyes, which are full of acceptance of their fate, I cannot fully comprehend. Time stands still at this point in their personal timelines, where the past was suffering and the future is insecurity. Estonia has put the principles of international law, including international humanitarian law and international human rights law, at the centre of our work in the Security Council. The Secretary-General's annual report (S/2020/366) indicates that the normative framework for the protection of civilians is not really working in real life. Indeed, we have inadequately implemented what we have already agreed. The pandemic adds a new layer of risk that we must be develop the ability to mitigate. Estonia supports the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The Security Council must really do something on this subject, making sure at least that State actors heed the call. I am particularly concerned about the most vulnerable - women, children and adolescents. In Africa, midwives are presented daily with fears of becoming infected with various diseases, not just COVID-19, while attending to mothers. Patricia Mwenyeheri, a midwife in Malawi, has access to only one hand-washing basin in her maternity ward. Is this adequate? Two weeks ago, a four-year-old girl was raped in Mogadishu. Is this gruesome sexual violence acceptable? Tomorrow a virtual "Every Woman, Every Child" high-level round table will discuss what can we do specifically in these trying times, when the only positive is that the health threats people constantly face in less developed parts of the world that are ravaged by conflict are more palpable for all of us because of COVID-19. Estonia has contributed to the COVID-19 Global Humanitarian Response Plan and to the International Red Cross appeals. In Libya, 221 schools are non-functional. Unlawful attacks against schools, universities, students and teachers are frequent in conflicts around the globe. In February, journalists Abdel Nasser Haj Hamdan and Amjad Aktalati were killed in an air strike on Idlib while they were providing us with primary-source information about the conflict in Syria. We must protect civil society organizations and human rights defenders. They are our partners, and in delivering on their mandates, are risking their lives. The war has an ever-changing face - urbanization of conflict, climate change - but the new aspects confirm the significance of the fundamental framework of international law. New technologies can improve humanitarian assistance. Artificial intelligence is already reuniting lost family members separated by conflict, as people participating in the Red Cross Trace the Face website can attest. At the same time, we have seen cyberattacks targeting critical infrastructure, including health care. Existing international law therefore needs to be applied to cyberspace, and cybersecurity must be made part of both conflict prevention and conflict resolution. Estonia has promised to bring cybersecurity to the Security Council, and I believe we have delivered on that promise. The Council has a number of tools at its disposal to enhance compliance with international law and ensure accountability: investigative and judicial mechanisms, peacekeeping-mission mandates and targeted sanctions. These tools need to be applied consistently across all conflict situations. When it comes to sanctions, we observe with concern how the global pandemic is used as a pretext to call for their termination. Sanctions are built so as not to hinder humanitarian aid. There are other developments that do. Estonia calls for unimpeded humanitarian access in Syria. All arguments not to extend the cross-border mechanism in July do not correspond to the reality on the ground. We must value accountability. Member States must cooperate fully with the International Criminal Court. United Nations monitoring missions also raise valuable awareness about the perpetrators in conflicts and their actions on the ground. The Secretary-General has repeatedly pointed to the key element of political will in moving from normative commitments to actual improvement in the protection of civilians. It is sometimes hard to comprehend how blatantly lacking this will can be. Each and every time I hear that we could not agree on wording in the Security Council I see in my mind's eye that girl with one hand, trying to care for her little sister - an image of pure, innocent suffering. Aided by international law and good people around the world, we are powerful together if we want to be.
