Mr. Sahovic' (Yugoslavia): At the outset, allow
me, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to express our
appreciation to you for convening this meeting, which
provides an opportunity for a broader debate on an
issue that is of concern to us all.

The Secretary-General and the Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), at the beginning
of today's debate, eloquently expressed their concern
and indicated the course to be followed in our future
counter-terrorism efforts. We thank them for that.

The Security Council gave substance to its
resolve to combat international terrorism by adopting a
landmark resolution - resolution 1373 (2001) -
which has become the basis for the broadest possible
international coalition against terrorism.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee - unique in
the breadth of its mandate - has become the focal
point for counter-terrorism action within the United
Nations. It provides an effective mechanism for
implementing the resolution and for enabling
continuity of international action in this field,
particularly on the basis of inter-State cooperation.
Yugoslavia fully supports the work of the CTC. We
would also like to express our appreciation for the
outstanding, energetic and committed leadership of
CTC Chairman Sir Jeremy Greenstock.

The achievements of the Security Council in
countering this global threat have once again proved
that the United Nations is uniquely positioned to serve
as the legitimate forum for an international counter-
terrorism coalition, as it can ensure that the greatest
possible number of States are able and willing to take
the necessary steps to oppose terrorism.

The fight against terrorism cannot be won solely
by focusing on mechanisms aimed at eliminating
individual terrorist groups, since terrorism is not an
isolated phenomenon. Instead, it should be viewed in
the context from which terrorist activities arise. In its
counter-terrorism efforts, the United Nations must
focus on the broader picture. As the Policy Working
Group on the United Nations and Terrorism stated in its
recent report, it is necessary for the United Nations to
reassert the main purposes of the United Nations
Charter, the core of which has been threatened by
terrorism. We have identified in this report certain
important points and recommendations that warrant the
attention of the United Nations membership as a basis
for further enhancing United Nations engagement in
the field of counter-terrorism.

Resolution 1373 (2001) notes "the increase, in
various regions of the world, of acts of terrorism
motivated by intolerance or extremism". It also calls
for the prevention of movement of terrorists or terrorist
groups by effective border controls.

Yugoslavia has been faced with both extremism
and illegal border crossings in the province of Kosovo
and Metohija. We welcome the enhanced efforts by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) to address these problems, and we
expect the Mission to continue to improve its measures
in these areas. My Government reiterates its readiness,
in line with resolution 1244 (1999), to enhance
cooperation with UNMIK and KFOR with a view to
preventing and suppressing acts of terrorism.

Regrettably, organized crime, whose close
connection with terrorism has been firmly established,
figures high on the list of acute problems affecting
South-eastern Europe.
Yugoslavia is fully committed to adequately
addressing this issue. At the national level, Yugoslavia
has recently adopted laws on combating organized
crime at both the federal level and at the level of the
Republic of Serbia, and a new law on the prevention of
money laundering took effect in Yugoslavia in July this
year. At the international level, we have ratified the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its supplementary protocols, as
well as the Council of Europe Convention on
Laundering, Search, Seizure and Confiscation of the
Proceeds from Crime. At the regional level, we are
fully committed to dealing with this issue within the
South-eastern European Cooperation Process, which
Yugoslavia is currently chairing, as well as within the
framework of the Stability Pact for South-eastern
Europe.

My country is also bound by most international
anti-terrorist treaties. We have ratified the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism and signed the Convention on the Marking
of Plastic Explosives for the Purpose of Detection as
well as the International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings. Both are now
before Parliament pending ratification. Bilaterally,
Yugoslavia has signed treaties with Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Slovenia related to the
struggle against terrorism, organized crime and illegal
migration. Yugoslavia is regionally fully engaged in
raising awareness of the danger of terrorism.

We are, of course, also engaged in a dialogue
with the CTC. My Government has submitted both the
initial and supplementary reports and would like to
take advantage of this opportunity to reiterate its
readiness for future cooperation. In order to make its
full contribution to the fight against terrorism, my
country needs, and would greatly appreciate,
international assistance.

