Mr. Arima (Japan): Japan welcomes the timely
convening of this Security Council meeting, at the
initiative of the League of Arab States, to discuss the
Arab-Israeli conflict. It is timely because the recent
hostilities in Lebanon have made us recognize anew
the need for a comprehensive settlement of the Middle
East conflict. It is therefore our hope that this meeting
will pave the way to an early resumption of direct talks
between the parties concerned for a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the region. Japan
believes that the United Nations needs to play a more
active role in facilitating and supporting the peace
efforts of the parties involved, as the peace there will
be a global blessing as well.

As we continue our concerted efforts to restore
peace in Lebanon, we must remain deeply aware of the
dire deterioration of the human condition in the
Palestinian territories, which the recent crisis in
Lebanon has overshadowed. The only cure for this
region's predicament will be a peace achieved by the
political will and efforts of the leaders of the parties.
Japan remains deeply committed to encourage and
assist such political will and efforts, in close
cooperation with the international community as
represented here at this Council meeting.

As regards the situation in Lebanon, Japan shares
the View that to rebuild stability in Lebanon, the full
and steady implementation of Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006) is essential. It is imperative that
the international community support the efforts by the
parties to secure disarmament of militias in Lebanon
and delineation of the country's international borders
in order to ensure a permanent ceasefire and a long-
term solution.

Japan intends to lend its maximum support to
Lebanon as part of its overall efforts to achieve peace
in the Middle East, recognizing that the stability of
southern Lebanon is one of the keys to comprehensive
peace and stability in that region. In this connection,
Japan calls on Syria, another party to the Middle East
peace, which has a crucial role in achieving the goal, to
join proactively in the international efforts.

The present impasse in the Palestinian question
must be dealt with with the utmost urgency. Japan
welcomes and supports the determined efforts of
President Abbas to break the impasse by establishing a
national unity Government of the Palestinian Authority.
It is J apan's strong expectation that the new Palestinian
Government will make it clear that it will pursue
coexistence and co-prosperity with Israel through
dialogue. The international community, for its part,
should seize such a moment as an opportunity to move
the peace process forward. Japan strongly expects also
that Israel will positively respond to this opportunity
and make its best efforts to resume such a dialogue.
Japan welcomes the recent statements by the two
leaders expressing their readiness to hold a summit
meeting and hopes that it will lead to a long-awaited
resumption of peace talks between the two parties.

Along with the political impasse, we should also
address the worsening security and humanitarian
situation of the Palestinian people. All our efforts are
doomed to fail if we cannot bring about a sense of
improvement in their daily lives and a hope for their
future. With this in mind, Prime Minister Koizumi,
during his visit to the Middle East last July, promised
humanitarian assistance totalling $25 million, thereby
fully disbursing the $100 million that the Prime
Minister pledged to President Abbas in May last year,
when he visited us, to alleviate the predicament of the
Palestinian people.

In addition, Prime Minister Koizumi, believing
that it was of vital importance to generate hope for all
the people in the region, proposed a programme called
the Corridor for Peace and Prosperity. That initiative,
aimed at promoting the development of the Jordan
Valley through regional cooperation, was
enthusiastically welcomed and endorsed by the leaders
of Israel, the Palestinian Authority and Jordan.
Preparations are now underway to form a consultative

body of the four parties to materialize this concept. It is
Japan's belief that, while the international community
needs to address the immediate needs of the
Palestinians to ease their lives, it is equally important
to pave the way for future coexistence and co-
prosperity by bringing the parties together to work
jointly for common purposes on a longer perspective.

Japan is determined to continue to cooperate with
all the parties both in the region and outside it to put an
end to this longest conflict, which has lasted virtually
since the end of World War II, causing so much death
and misery to so many people. I here thank the Arab
League, the United Nations and all others who have
made the holding of this meeting possible to help
revitalize the Middle East peace process.

