Mr. Adorn (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): You
have not been very democratic today, Mr. President, as
you have subjected us to this barbaric tool, but we will
make do.

We note with interest that the mandate of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) will end on 15 October, as envisaged
by the Security Council. The encouraging gains made
by the Mission in several areas must not obscure the
many challenges facing the transition to a new United
Nations presence in Haiti. In that regard, my delegation
would like to comment on three major issues relating to
human rights, the fragility of the current sociopolitical
situation and the activities planned for the new
United Nations mission in the wake of the withdrawal
of MINUJUSTH.

With regard to human rights, Cote d'Ivoire
welcomes the efforts of the Haitian authorities aimed
at their promotion, which is a key component of the
MINUJUSTH mandate and a necessary condition
for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
My country welcomes the development of a national
action plan on human rights, pursuant to the April
2017 recommendations of the Human Rights Council,
and the launch of the new action plan to address
prolonged pretrial detention, as well as the adoption of
the draft criminal code and the draft code of criminal
procedure to fill structural gaps. My delegation remains
concerned, however, about the conditions of detention
in prisons and the persistence of activities by armed
gangs. In that regard, we urge the Haitian authorities to
redouble their efforts to address the persistent problems
associated with prison overcrowding.

In addition, Cote d'Ivoire appreciates the efforts
of the Haitian Government to implement the national
plan for gender equality and the national plan for the
elimination of violence against women, which are
part of the policy to promote gender equality and
empower women. My country believes that actions
taken to promote human rights should also consider
the improvement of the existing humanitarian system
in place and the allocation of adequate resources to the
humanitarian aid programme in Haiti.

With regard to the fragility of the sociopolitical
situation in Haiti, my country regrets that the
recurrence of social disputes is jeopardizing the long-
sought sociopolitical stability. It would therefore seem
necessary to take urgent multisectoral measures to
restore and strengthen public trust in public institutions
and to attract national and foreign investment. To that
end, Cote d'Ivoire encourages the Government to
intensify dialogue with all Haitian actors, including
civil society, so as to forge a common vision on the
priorities concerning peacebuilding and the responses
needed to meet the immediate needs of the population.

In addition, my delegation welcomes the
commitment of the Government of Haiti to the holding
of the 2019 elections on the agreed dates. It therefore
calls for a consensual reform of the electoral process
that would guarantee the holding of transparent,
credible and inclusive elections.

With regard to the new United Nations mission,
following the withdrawal of MINUJUSTH, my country
supports the Secretary-General's recommendations
and encourages Haitian stakeholders to strengthen
cooperation with the United Nations so as to identify
together the priorities of the special political mission,
which will be called on to consolidate democratic gains
and contribute to socioeconomic development.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire calls on the entire
international community to support the Haitian people
and Government in their efforts to create the necessary
conditions for the restoration of lasting peace and
stability in Haiti.

