Mr. Celem (Turkey): At the outset, I would like to
express our appreciation to Secretary-General Kofi Annan
for his comprehensive, to-the-point and valuable report on
the situation in Afghanistan. We concur with the
observations and recommendations in his report.

Since the last meetings of the General Assembly and
the Security Council on this subject and the meeting of
interested countries here in New York, a considerable
amount of time has passed. In this period the United
Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan, headed by Mr.
Holl, has made concerted efforts to make further progress
in bringing together the warring parties and to achieve the
urgent task of establishing a ceasefire, which could then be
the basis for an improvement in the political and
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. There have also been
efforts, including those of my country, in support of United
Nations efforts to bring the same parties to the negotiating
table to help them reach a certain common ground and thus
contribute to finding a solution to the crisis.

As we understand from the Secretary-General's
report, very limited progress was achieved during the
Intra-Afghan Working Group meetings convened by the
Special Mission. However, a notable aspect of that
Working Group was that it brought together, for the first
time, the Taliban and the Supreme Council for the
Defence of Afghanistan.

As confirmed by the report of the Secretary-General,
the political situation in Afghanistan has not improved
over the past months. The humanitarian situation has even
worsened. It is most unfortunate for the long-suffering
people of Afghanistan that the warring factions, and in
particular the Taliban, appear determined to pursue the
military option. It is therefore necessary to bring the
Taliban into the negotiation and reconciliation process. As
has also been emphasized in the Secretary-General's
report, the possibility of an increase in the military
activity of the Taliban will emerge when favourable
weather conditions prevail in the coming months. This is
the imminent threat that we are facing.

Within the context of trying to contribute to the
efforts aimed at finding a solution to the crisis in
Afghanistan, the Foreign Ministers of Iran, Pakistan and
Turkey met in Istanbul on 5 January 1997. The three
Ministers reaffirmed their readiness and determination to
give their full support to the Afghan people, in the
direction of the goals set by the United Nations. Turkey
also carried out contacts with each of the warring factions
with a view to exploring whether we could be of any
assistance in bringing them to the negotiating table.
Although initial reactions from all the sides were
favourable, at a late stage one of the parties indicated that
it was unable to attend.

In the light of all these developments, it is our
opinion that the immediate goal, as clearly set out in the
report of the Secretary-General, and as pursued by the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan, should be
to convince the sides that military ascendancy by one
over the others will not serve, in the long run, the
interests of Afghan people. We strongly believe that there
is no better way to achieve peace in Afghanistan than by
initiating a healthy dialogue between the various factions.

One of the major obstacles to convincing the faction
leaders that a military solution is not only undesirable but
also unattainable is the continuing supply of weapons,
military equipment and ammunition from outside. As long
as such foreign interference continues, the sides, and

 

especially the Taliban, will see no incentive to desist from
pursuing the military option.

In this respect, we all should realize that, under
present conditions, not only are the well-being and
humanitarian requirements of the Afghan people at stake,
but, above all, its national unity. There exists a real and, in
fact, a growing threat of division along ethnic lines. We
should not lose sight of the fact that the developments in
Afghanistan seriously threaten the stability and security of
the region as a whole.

My country has close ties, deeply rooted in history,
with Afghanistan and the Afghan people. We feel very
strongly about the sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and national unity of Afghanistan. For the unity of
the country and for the benefit of the people of
Afghanistan, the Afghan leaders should respond without
delay to appeals of the friends of Afghanistan to cease the
hostilities and to engage in negotiations for a peaceful
solution.

We, the Member States of the United Nations, and
especially those closest to Afghanistan, should try only to
bring about a negotiated settlement of the Afghan problem.
We should, in particular, strictly refrain from military
involvement and interference in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan.

For its part, Turkey is ready to do what it can to
contribute to the normalization of the situation in that
friendly country. We will wholeheartedly continue to
support the Secretary-General's efforts to this end, as well
as those of the United Nations Special Mission to
Afghanistan. I would also like to remind the Council once
again that, if and when the Secretary-General decides that
an intra-Afghan meeting among the warring parties will
contribute to peace efforts, Turkey stands ready to host
such a meeting.

