Mr. Daeic' (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English interpretation provided by the delegation): For seven
long years now, I have taken part in the meetings of the
Security Council. This is my twenty-second statement.
Regrettably, this is the twenty-second time that I have
had to say that nothing has been done in Kosovo to help
the Serbs and other non-Albanians lead decent human
lives there. My obligation is therefore to continue to
speak on behalf of those whose voices are not heard,
whose rights are not respected and who have not been
able to return home for more than 20 years.

Some of those present may remember that the

phrase "standards before status" was used for many
years in the Security Council. All ofa sudden, following
the unilateral declaration ofindependence by so-called
Kosovo, the standards of respect for human rights and
the rule of law have disappeared from the Council's
considerations. Today standards are a rare topic, given
that, by and large, most of the discussions in this organ
are focused on the need to achieve a so-called lasting
solution for the question of Kosovo and Metohija.
Nevertheless, it is the duty of all of us not to allow the
people of Kosovo and Metohija to be held hostage to a
solution that we have yet to find.

Even before any agreement is reached, the physical
safety, freedom of movement, employment and property
rights, the right to return, religious freedom and the
right to participate in political life of the people of
Kosovo and Metohija must be ensured. Ordinary people
in GoraZdevac, Orahovac, Klina, Musutiste, Zubin
Potok and Zvezdan have no time to wait for us to reach
an agreement, for they have to go on with their lives.
Unfortunately, as elsewhere, the quest for solutions to
conflicts is not an easy or short-term process.

The Brussels Agreement that I signed in my
capacity as Prime Minister six years ago was
perhaps a ray of hope. The Agreement was the result
of difficult negotiations and of even more difficult
political decisions. It was the manifestation of my
country's willingness to compromise, and it has been
borne out by our implementation of the Agreement. That
is why I can credibly say that the people of Kosovo must
not be dependent on Pristina's whims and one-sided
acts aimed at aborting the continuatin of dialogue.

Let me be clear. Serbia is ready to resume
negotiations as of tomorrow, provided that the
conditions are right. Let me remind the Council that
last November, Pristina decided to increase tariffs on
goods from central Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
by 100 per cent. That decision was taken in the wake
of so-called Kosovo's unsuccessful attempt to join
INTERPOL. Considering that two weeks ago we
saw Pristina abandon its renewed attempt to join
INTERPOL, I now wonder what the purpose of the
tariffs was and how Pristina justifies them. Instead of
resuming the dialogue after two years of failure, Pristina
submitted a new application to INTERPOL only two
months later. At INTERPOL's General Assembly, held
in Santiago earlier this month, it decided to take back
the application at the very beginning of deliberations,
once it realized that it would end in an even bigger
debacle. I spoke with 82 Foreign Ministers before the
General Assembly, and far from supporting Kosovo's
actions, many disparaged them.
I want to emphasize once again that since the
beginning of the Brussels dialogue, Serbia has insisted
that all matters, including the issue of membership
in international organizations, should be subject to
negotiations. The constructive way in which the question
of Kosovo and Metohija's participation in regional
forums was resolved, through dialogue and mutually
acceptable agreements, provides telling evidence of the
advantage of resolving all issues by agreement. The
damages arising from these illegal measures amount to
several hundred million dollars and increase with each
passing day.

Let me point out that attempts in this regard to
establish a false equivalency between Belgrade's and
Pristina's responsibilities for the breakdown in the
dialogue - and the explanation that the decision on
tariffs was taken in response to Serbia's campaign to
have so-called Kosovo's recognition withdrawn- make
no sense and are unacceptable. Serbia's actions in that
regard are motivated by the campaign by so-called
Kosovo for recognition since its unilateral declaration
of independence, with the wholehearted assistance
of some Council members. Accordingly, if Council
members are calling on Serbia to cease its campaign,
they should also call on Pristina to stop its lobbying,
and they should stop doing it themselves.

While they are asking Serbia to stop, representatives
of so-called Kosovo are working all over the world hand
in glove with Albanian diplomats on the recognition of
its independence. While the Council is asking Serbia
to stop its campaign, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation is calling on all Muslim countries to
recognize so-called Kosovo. While the Council is
asking Serbia to stop its campaign, representatives of
the United States and the United Kingdom in particular
are calling on Member States at nearly every Security
Council meeting to recognize the independence of so-
called Kosovo. We may be small, but we are not dumb.

Let me remind those who allege that our activities,
and the withdrawal by 15 countries of their recognition
of so-called Kosovo, are undermining the dialogue
that after the negotiations began in 2012, 25 countries
recognized the unilateral declaration of independence
while all along Serbia participated in the dialogue,
despite Pristina's refusal to fulfil its obligations under
the Brussels Agreement. How can the Council say
now that the withdrawal of recognition undermines
dialogue? Serbia continued to pursue dialogue even
though Pristina refused to fulfil its obligations under the
Brussels Agreement for more than six years, including
through its failure to establish the community of Serb
municipalities. It was not Serbia that discontinued
the dialogue.

I repeat, trade blockades are virtually unheard of
in today's world. We can only hope that Pristina will
realize that it cannot achieve anything without an
agreement with Serbia, that unilateral acts diminish the
prospects for solutions and that there is no alternative to
dialogue. For its part, Serbia is ready for that moment.

Allow me to say a few words about the recent
general elections held in Kosovo and Metohija. Before
they took place, Serbia warned that the election
campaign would be used for political purposes and
for propaganda hype against the Serbs. Regrettably,
that is what came to pass. The Serbs were attacked,
their shrines were vandalized, and there were multiple
provocations. Nevertheless, despite these incidents and
such administrative obstacles as a ban on the use of
Serbian documents in the election process - despite
the fact that their use had been permitted in previous
elections - and a ban on Serbian officials entering
the provinces, and other bans, Serbs participated in
the elections and managed to survive in Kosovo and
Metohija and fight for their future.

We saw that Pristina was not pleased with the
election results, and in the days following the elections,
it once again attempted to meddle by fabricating
stories and incidents such as the alleged poisoning of
members of the Central Election Commission through
contact with election materials brought from central
Serbia. After melodramatic scenes reminiscent of
forensic television series parading investigators in
surgical masks and gowns as if Ebola or a smallpox
epidemic were involved, blood tests done in Pristina on
those allegedly infected showed that there had been no
poisoning. The epidemic was one oflies churned out by
Pristina. Manipulations of this type may have worked
in the past, but this time around the international
community will surely recognize Pristina's true
intentions and call them out.

The issue is very simple: either poisoning occurred
or it did not. Doctors in Pristina established that there
was no poisoning. Why, then, were poll workers
dressed in space suits or the clothes we have seen
on TV shows about Ebola while they were counting
Serbian votes? Was that racism towards Serbian voters?
We are asking for an answer. When Albanians vote in
Serbia, should someone count votes as Serbian votes
are counted in Kosovo? Is this the democracy and the
democratic society the Security Council fought for
when it supported Kosovo?

The situation in so-called Kosovo and its society
is illustrated by the rise of its new leader, Albin
Kurti - a man who throughout his entire political
career has called for the creation of a greater Albania.
After he won the largest number of votes, we have seen
him with the Albanian flag, not the flag of so-called
Kosovo. He wants to be the Prime Minister of so-called
Kosovo by flying the flag of Albania rather than the
flag of Kosovo.

We therefore have a very serious question. If some
diplomats from countries on the Security Council are
photographed against that background, does that mean
that members of the diplomatic community approve of
those intentions? For years, the Council has asserted
that Serbia is undermining the territorial integrity of
Kosovo. But now that its representatives are sitting in
Pristina in front of the Albanian flag with the newly
elected Prime Minister of so-called Kosovo, who
denies the territorial integrity of Kosovo? Where was
the flag of so-called Kosovo in this picture? Why are
Council members silent about this? The next time they
visit my country, what would happen if I received them
under the flag of Republika Srpska from Bosnia and
Herzegovina? Would they be silent, as they are now?

I would like the Council to remind its diplomats
that they are ambassadors to Pristina, not Tirana. I
am being put in a very unpleasant position. It will be
difficult to defend the territorial integrity of so-called
Kosovo when Albin Kurti, who is supposed to be the
next prime minister of Kosovo, says that he does not
want to talk to the Serbian List, which, as the party
that won in the parliamentary election, is the legitimate
representative of the Kosovo and Metohija Serbs. How
can a prime minister refuse to accept the results of
an election because they are not to his liking? All the
agreements reached to date will be re-examined once
he assumes power and declares that the most important
part of the Brussels Agreement, the establishment of a
community of Serbs, is a dead letter.

Albin Kurti's statements have become increasingly
sharp lately. He has said that he is going to demand
that Serbia pay war reparations for Kosovo's alleged
financial claims. Perhaps he is not familiar with the
fact that Serbia has been paying annuities on the nearly
$1 billion in loans taken out by users in Kosovo and
Metohija. If it is an independent State, as it claims, why
does it not pay its own debts?

All of these counterproductive actions and rhetoric
are very far from creating the atmosphere necessary
for overcoming existing differences and building
confidence among communities. I firmly believe that
all who oppose dialogue are determined to undermine
both Serbs and Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija. I
hope that after the formation of the new Government,
Pristina will remove the tariffs and thereby create
conditions conducive to dialogue and the quest for
peaceful compromise solutions to all outstanding
issues. I also hope that Pristina will do away with the
policies of hatred, intolerance and discrimination that
radicalize the Albanian community, for which the
Pristina Government bears outright responsibility.

The consequences of such policies are patently
evident. The past year has been very difficult for Serbs
and other non-Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija. The
right of Serbs to life, freedom and property has been
targeted. According to the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Mission in Kosovo, there
were 183 inter-ethnic incidents in the first half of this
year, which is almost 30 per cent more than in the
preceding six months. These facts must not be ignored.

The most dangerous methods of intimidation used
against the Serbian population are the frequent raids
in northern Kosovo and Metohija carried out under
the guise of anti-organized-crime operations by the
special Regional Operational Support Unit police.
After the incident of 28 May, which we discussed in
the Security Council in June (see S/PV.8541), there was
another special-unit operation two weeks ago in which
arrests were made. I want to explain that the raids in
northern Kosovo and Metohija by heavily armed units
composed exclusively of ethnic Albanians, conducted
on various pretexts for various reasons using excessive
force, are merely provocations with immense potential
to destabilize the already fragile security situation on
the ground. It is of paramount importance in that regard
that the Brussels Agreement be strictly honoured and
that the Kosovo Force (KFOR) act decisively to deter
these kinds of actions, which may increase instability
and spark a spiral of violence that would be hard
to control.

Let me remind the Council that in addition to
the Serbs who have been injured, a Russian national,
Mikhail Krasnoshchekov, was declared persona non
grata by Pristina, in contravention of every possible
rule and regulation, while Mr. Dejan Dimovic continues
to be the subject ofjudicial proceedings. What are the
Serbs of Kosovo and Metohija to expect if personnel
from international missions are treated this way? I call
on all Council members to condemn these unlawful
acts by Pristina and demand that proceedings against
the staff of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) cease.

Iwould like to express my gratitude to the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2019/797). I would ask the
Council to pay attention to the report's conclusions
because at the most recent Council meeting on this
subject, the UNMIK staff members were accused of
abusing their power and of not being on duty when
they were arrested, and it was said that no violence was
used against them. However, the report says otherwise.
They were on duty and force was used against them, in
breach of their privileges and immunities as members
of UNMIK. They were gravely injured and one of them
was declared persona non grata. The conclusion in the
report and by Mr. Tanin is that those responsible should
be brought to justice, which Serbia was not expecting.
We do expect the Security Council to respect the
Secretary-General's Mission, reports and expertise,
and that charges will be brought against those who
breached the immunity of the UNMIK staff members.

Let me draw the Council's attention to a very
important issue mentioned in the report, which is the
return to Kosovo and Metohija of foreign terrorist
fighters and their families from the Middle East, and
Syria in particular. There are more than 250 of them,
the greatest number of members of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham in any country in Europe. As the
Secretary-General notes in his report, there have been
arrests of people who have attempted to set up terrorist
groups in Kosovo and Metohija, North Macedonia
and Albania, with a View to attacking the Kosovo and
Metohija Serbs and KFOR, which validates our warning
about the real danger of terrorism not only in Kosovo
and Metohija and the Balkans but throughout Europe.

The report of the Secretary-General also provides
telling evidence of Pristina's arrogance with respect
to the Serbian cultural and religious heritage in
Kosovo and Metohija and the flagrant desecration of
monuments and attempts to pirate cultural identity.
Novo Brdo, Decani, Bogorodica Ljeviska and other
cultural and religious shrines have never been nor will
ever be Kosovar, regardless of Pristina's efforts to
create a chasm between communities in Kosovo and
Metohija and to usurp and falsify history so as to erase
every trace of the centuries-long Serbian presence in
Kosovo and Metohija.

This is the idea behind falsehoods such as the
nonsense uttered by Vlora Citaku at the June meeting,
when she referred to decolonization, with no political
or moral foundation. Let me remind the Council that
Kosovo and Metohija have never once been mentioned
in any United Nations document in connection with
decolonization. That is an insult to all States that have
been victims of colonization and have had to go through
the process of decolonization.

Proof of a serious outbreak of the mendacity
epidemic in Kosovo and Metohija today is the big lie
proffered by Ms. Citaku in these Council meetings that
Albanians in Serbia had no right to use the Albanian
language and script. The document I am now showing
the Council, which was issued by the Serbian authorities
in the 19905, when Vlora Citaku was 10 years old, is
evidence of that lie. It is a birth certificate issued in
Kosovo and Metohija at that time. It is written in two
languages, first in Albanian and then in Serbian, and
it says, "Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" and
"birth certificate". Would Ms. Citaku like to see it? She
had one just like it, in Albanian and Serbian. How can
she not be ashamed of lying about being unable to use
Albanian in Serbia? Even Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija
had documents in both languages, first in Albanian and
then in Serbian.

With regard to documents, I would like to point
out that Ms. Citaku is still a citizen of the Republic
of Serbia. Her name was entered in the Pristina birth
register for the year 1980 under the number 6194. If
Council members do not believe me, I can show them
the entry. Perhaps she will now say that while she never
asked to be released from her Serbian citizenship, her
Serbian citizenship is irrelevant to her. She should
discuss that with the representative of Germany in
the Chamber today, as his country requires every
Kosovo Albanian to submit a certificate of release from
Serbian citizenship.

Pristina continues to spread misinformation and
manipulate facts, even here at the United Nations. Look
at how many people who work at the United Nations
with Serbian citizenship are actually Albanian. How
is it that when people want to get a job or claim their
rights, or when Serbia has to repay their loans, they
are Serbian? And yet while trying to fight for Kosovo,
Ms. Citaku should have asked to be released from her
Serbian citizenship, but she has not, and she should
know that it is not good to speak as she does about her
own country.

Pristina claims that there have been 20,000 victims
of conflict-related sexual violence, but its numbers are
not supported even by its own commission set up to
establish the status of victims of violence. The total
number of applications received so far is 1,057, of
which 406 have been granted survivor status. Let me
point out once again that Serbia is firmly committed to
establishing the facts and to punishing the perpetrators
of these horrible crimes. 1 reiterate that we have
called constantly for justice for all victims and for the
depoliticization of the issue. The report before us shows
that the numbers are quite different from the 20,000
victims claimed.

The report states that the reparation process falls
short of being fully inclusive, needs a strengthened,
rights-based approach, and currently excludes cases
of sexual violence that occurred in the aftermath of
the conflict. Serbia firmly believes that every crime
should be punished, and we have cooperated with
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia to that end. We hope that the Specialist
Chambers, which have already summonsed 110 former
Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) members, will soon
issue their first indictments and that justice will finally
be served for all the victims of the conflict in Kosovo
and Metohija.

The review of the situation on the ground gives
us reason to believe that the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo, KFOR and UNMIK, with
mandates as defined in resolution 1244 (1999), play
a key role in ensuring the physical safety and fate of
many in Kosovo and Metohija. As Under-Secretary-
General for Legal Affairs Miguel de Serpa Soares
pointed out in his briefing to the Council in June,
UNMIK's legal framework continues to apply. We must
therefore continue to discuss Kosovo and Metohija in
the Security Council. The importance of the issue is
evidenced by the fact that the United States appointed
two representatives to address it.

I know that Council members have prepared
statements, and some will say that we do not need
UNMIK anymore. Both sides will be called on to
resume the dialogue, and some will extol the democratic
achievements of so-called Kosovo. I would ask,
however, that instead we proceed to discuss the issue
of Kosovo and Metohija in a matter-of-fact manner.
We have not had such discussions in the Security
Council for years. But I have asked some very pertinent
questions in our meetings and I will ask them again. Is
it acceptable to the Council that democratic institutions
do not implement agreements and fail to abide by
their commitments? Will the international community
stand aside and allow the Brussels Agreement and the
community of Serb municipalities to truly remain a
dead letter, as Kurti keeps telling us? Can the Council
accept the daily intimidation of returnees, and attacks
and other forms of discrimination against members of
non-majority communities, as a normal state of affairs?
What is the Council's response to the provocations,
incidents, assaults and injuries, the stoning of buses, the
destruction of clinics, the desecration of churches and
tombstones, hate speech and KLA graffiti on Serbian
houses? Does the return of 1.9 per cent of internally
displaced Serbs meet the threshold of respect for human
rights? Does it mean that the expulsion of200,000 Serbs
is a closed chapter now, never to be reopened?

Could the Council please make an effort to answer
those very relevant questions? It is not I who am owed
the answers to them but the Serbian children in Kosovo
and Metohija whose future will most certainly be bereft
of fundamental human rights. The Council owes it to
them, to the Serbs living in enclaves, the internally
displaced and the Serbian Orthodox nuns living their
lives behind barbed wire. Serbia will continue to bring
the trials and tribulations of these people, as well as
violations of international law, to the attention of
the international community. However, we will also
continue to demonstrate in good faith our dedication to
peace and to the quest for a compromise solution with
a view to making the space where Serbs and Albanians
have lived together for centuries a better place to live in
the twenty-first century.

