Mr. Armani (Morocco): I would like to express
our deep appreciation to the Republic of Azerbaijan for
convening this important and timely meeting. The
initiative demonstrates the importance that your
country attaches to strengthening international
cooperation against terrorism.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his statement and commend him for his personal
commitment to strengthen United Nations leadership in
combating terrorism. The Secretary-General's
Symposium on International Counter-Terrorism
Cooperation, held in September 2011, produced
concrete recommendations that were a welcome
development.

We are now looking forward to engaging
constructively in the upcoming discussions on new
proposals that seek to further enhance coherence and
effectiveness of United Nations counter-terrorism
efforts, including the establishment of a United Nations
counter-terrorism coordinator.

Our debate today is taking place in an
international context marked by clear progress in many
counter-terrorism fields. We are encouraged by the
results achieved so far in many areas. However,
terrorist acts continue to occur, and a significant
number of terrorist plots are foiled each year in various
regions. That provides clear evidence that the terrorist
threat persists and our mobilization and cooperation
should be sustained in that connection.

Indeed, despite all our efforts, terrorism remains
a pressing challenge and one of the most serious threats
to international peace and security. The international
efforts to combat terrorism are essential, and they must
maintain the same determination and commitment. In
that regard, the United Nations remains the appropriate
and legitimate framework for Member States to adopt
multilateral responses to terrorism.

The Security Council, within its mandate of
maintaining international peace and security, has taken
important steps against terrorism and continues to
strengthen the work of its counter-terrorism bodies
through a number of additional resolutions.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, adopted by the General Assembly in 2006,
represents the most comprehensive and effective
decision taken by the international community to
eliminate that dangerous threat and to improve United
Nations action to that end. We are now looking forward
to its third review, which will provide an additional
opportunity to consider an improved and more
effective translation of its four pillars into concrete
actions and measures.

The role of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force in implementing the
Strategy must be further strengthened. The United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre was established
during the current session of the General Assembly,
thanks to initial funding from the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, and it constitutes an important mechanism
allowing the Task Force to further develop its capacity-
building activities and enhance international
coordination in the field of counter-terrorism.

The establishment of the Centre in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia provides an important tool, and we are
committed to working together with the King of Saudi
Arabia and other members of the Centre's Advisory
Board to achieve its important objectives.

Morocco fully shares the resolute determination
of the international community to stand firm and united
in the fight against terrorism. On that basis, Morocco
has established a comprehensive and multidimensional
counter-terrorism approach that converges with the
United Nations strategy and complies with the Charter
of the United Nations, as well as with other relevant
United Nations resolutions and international legal
instruments to which Morocco is party.

The proactive Moroccan approach was
successfully translated into firm and preventive law-
enforcement measures, as well as national initiatives
aimed at addressing the numerous social, economic and
cultural factors that are at the root of violent and
extremist ideologies.

Our approach is based on a number of factors.
The total rejection of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations by all Moroccan citizens has been of
vital importance. Morocco's long-standing commitment
to the values of tolerance and peaceful coexistence has
remained strong and has also played a key role within
our society. Above all, it is Morocco's firm determination
to pursue its irreversible democratic path - paved
with genuine reforms with human development as the
driving force - which has provided the best protection
against the spread of extremist and violent ideologies.

Yet no matter how successful, actions pursued by
individual States cannot manage to face alone the
scope, diversity and continuous sophistication of the
terrorist threat. Despite all our efforts, terrorism
remains a real cross-border threat that can strike any
region and any nation, regardless of its religion, culture
or level of development. For that reason, nothing can
replace an effective and coordinated international
commitment to cooperate against terrorism.

Morocco has consistently expressed its deep
concern with regard to the spread of terrorist activities
in the neighbouring subregions, namely West Africa
and the Sahel region, but also in the Gulf of Guinea
and in the Horn of Africa. Our continent has in recent
years witnessed an increase not only in the frequency
but also in the degree of sophistication of violent acts
committed by terrorist networks, often striking in areas
already faced with many difficulties and socio-economic
problems, especially environmental and food security
challenges, and unresolved conflicts. Thus, these
terrorist activities have dramatically increased the
number of innocent victims, undermined the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
threatened regional stability as a whole.

Recent developments have also confirmed that
there is an established interconnection between
terrorist groups, separatist movements and criminal
networks involved in arms, drugs and human
trafficking, as well as piracy and kidnapping activities.
This interconnection has allowed terrorist networks to
tap into the financial resources arising from illicit cross
border flows, and consequently to enhance their
operational capabilities and even expand their control,
in some instances, over territories of sovereign States.

The Council has repeatedly expressed its concern
and condemnation of the presence of and attacks
perpetrated by terrorist groups in these regions. Today,
there is an urgent need to establish a sustainable
framework for dialogue, cooperation and solidarity that
encompasses all States concerned with the security and
stability in the region in order to address in a holistic
manner the political, security and human development
dimensions of the region. Priority should also be given
to development. Narrow political calculations must
give way to shared responsibility and constructive
partnership, particularly in the case of West Africa and
the Sahel. Without partnership and shared
responsibility, we cannot move forward.

Consistent with its long-standing commitment to
peace and security in Africa, Morocco has been an
active partner in assisting other African countries in
enhancing their individual and collective capacities to
face terrorist groups, as well as the numerous
transnational organized crime networks with which
they are affiliated. In this regard, the Conference of
Justice Ministers of Francophone African Countries for
the implementation of universal instruments against
terrorism and the Ministerial Conference of African-
Atlantic States represent key initiatives to which
Morocco actively contributes. Morocco will also host
the second edition of the Regional Ministerial
Conference on Border Security, following the first
meeting held in Tripoli last March, which comprises a
number of States of North Africa and the Sahel region.

In line with this commitment, Morocco will spare
no effort in continuing to support all initiatives aiming
at building genuine partnership and mutual confidence
conducive to effective regional and international
cooperation. Within these parameters, we are equally
committed to contributing to the activities of the
Global Counter-terrorism Forum in a manner that
complements and reinforces existing multilateral
counter-terrorism efforts, in particular those conducted
by the United Nations.

In conclusion, we are deeply convinced that the
United Nations should remain the universal framework
to reinforce our clear and strong message that the
international community stands united in expressing
our rejection of all violent ideologies and in working
together to promote dialogue among our civilizations
and to prevent the stigmatization and indiscriminate
targeting of particular religious groups in the ongoing
fight against terrorism.

