Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Now that the
Malian parties will be meeting again, most likely at
the very beginning of February, in order to sign off on
the draft peace proposal that was circulated to them in
November, I think we can say that the Malian peace
process is at a critical stage. This a time, it must be
said again, when the security situation in northern
Mali remains extremely volatile and worrying, creating
continued challenges to restoring the State in the
area, to human rights, to humanitarian access and to
development programmes.

The Secretary-General's report (S/20l4/943),
to which the President referred, gives a great deal of
information on all those problems, as well as on the
deployment of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
and the action that has been taken to strengthen
the Mission's capacity to operate in viable security
conditions in northern Mali, where once again the
threats to Mission personnel remain very serious. Today
I would like to focus on the peace process, particularly
the developments that have occurred during the period
covered by the Secretary-General's report, from
16 September to 16 December.

As the report states, the progress made in the peace
process since the last time the Council was briefed, in
October (see S/PV.7274), has been relatively modest.
The parties did indeed meet in Algiers to conduct
new negotiations, which for the first time included
direct discussions between the armed groups and
the Government. The mediation, led, as the Council
knows, by Algeria, circulated a draft peace agreement
in November, and the parties are currently reviewing
it. As I said, it is based on that that a new meeting is
supposed to be held, most likely at the very beginning
of February. The three weeks since 16 December, the
end of the period covered by the report, have featured
serious clashes on the ground. I would like to take this
opportunity to offer my condolences to the people and
the Government ofMali, since, as the Council has heard,
yesterday, 5 January, some unidentified assailants
attacked the Malian army garrison in Nampala, in the
Segou region, very close to the Mauritanian border,
resulting, regrettably, in about a dozen victims. We are
still waiting for exact numbers.

A few days earlier, on 29 December, fighting broke
out in the Bamba area, fairly close to Gao, between
militia from the Groupe d'autodefense touareg Imghad
et allies and the Coordination of the Mouvement arabe
de l'Azawad. The net result was three dead and five
wounded. The situation on the ground remains tense,
with all the parties threatening to escalate military
action. MINUSMA had troops deployed in the Ber,
Zarho and Bamba sectors and intervened with both
sides in order to try to reduce tensions.

More generally, during this period MINUSMA
increased its efforts to render the ceasefire mechanisms
operational. To that end, the first meeting of the
expanded Mixed Technical Commission on Security
was held in Gao on 16 December. In that context,
the Government and the armed groups agreed, first,
that from then on the Commission would meet on the
fifteenth of each month, and then that the Timbuktu
joint observation and verification team would be
operationalized on 10 January, as would the Kidal team
on 16 January. In the past few days, a first joint team
arrived in Timbuktu on 2 January to conduct an inquiry
into the incidents Ijust mentioned in the Ber, Zarho and
Bamba areas.

Bearing that in mind, I believe it is more important
than ever that we appeal to all the parties to end all
these violations of the ceasefire and show good faith
both on the ground in Mali and at the negotiation table
in Algiers. We can certainly expect that the negotiations
will take a little more time, since it must be said that
direct interaction between the parties has so far been
limited, and some of them have yet to move from the
positions they held at the start, although that does
not apply to all. Therefore, what we are asking is that

they demonstrate a spirit of decisiveness, leadership
and willingness to compromise in order to reach an
agreement.

We know the crisis in Mali is complex and
deep-rooted. Inter-community tensions and weak
governance have created fertile ground for terrorism
and transnational crime to develop. It is clear that if
a lasting agreement is to be reached, those underlying
causes must be dealt with. During the past 50 or 60
years the crisis in Mali has gone through various stages,
including several negotiation phases, but none of them
have really addressed the underlying causes. And we do
not want the same causes to produce the same effects in
future. I think the difference between this stage of the
crisis in Mali and previous ones is that for the first time
the international community, with the United Nations at
the forefront, is directly involved and actively engaged.
We must try not to repeat past mistakes.

What is at stake here is re-establishing the Malian
State in every aspect and coming up with lasting
solutions. For that we need courage, determination and
vision. We should not, by the way, ignore the fact that
reaching an agreement in Algiers is only a first step,
and while it is necessary, afterwards each delegation
will need time to explain and "sell" the terms of the
agreement to its members. The peace agreement will
also have to include detailed arrangements for its
implementation, since that is what will determine the
credibility of the process and MINUSMA's capacity to
do everything necessary to support the implementation.
Again, I think the ball is in the parties' court. It is up to
them to show genuine political will and leadership. The
international community supports the Malian parties,
but it cannot stand in for them.

I would like to say one more thing about the security
environment, which continues to be extremely difficult
and costly for our forces. In the past few days we have
seen our Blue Helmets attacked almost daily, with rocket
attacks on MINUSMA's bases, and often on bases that
also belong to Operation Barkhane. There have been
targeted attacks using improvised explosive devices,
between 29 December and 1 January, for example.
No fewer than 20 rockets were launched against the
Tessalit base. There was an improvised explosive
device attack on a convoy in the Gao region on Sunday
4 January, resulting in four Blue Helmets wounded. I
repeat, the cost is high, and this is an opportunity to
recognize and express our admiration and sadness to
the troops, the police and their contributing countries.

Since 1 July 2013 we have suffered a total of 33 dead
and 109 wounded. No other mission in this era has seen
so much bloodshed.

In order to be able to continue operating in what
remains a very complex environment characterized
by the presence of terrorists and criminals, we have
continued to develop ambitious plans for construction
and for action against mines and explosives - efforts
that I believe are unprecedented given the scale of
the threat. The implementation of all of that will take
some time. We are doing everything possible with the
resources we have, but it will not happen overnight.

I shall conclude my remarks here and refer Council
members to the report of Secretary-General for updates
on a number of aspects that I have not gone into.

Allow me to thank all partners of the United Nations
involved in the mediation, led by Algeria, including
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and all other countries participating
actively in the process. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank former Special Representative
Bert Koenders, Deputy Special Representatives David
Gressly and Arnauld Akodjenou, and the Special
Representative-designate, Minister Hamdi, who is
also present here today and whom I wish the greatest
of success in his role. I would also like to express my
gratitude to the former Force Commander, General
Kazura, who the Council will recall left his functions
in December. We are in the process of selecting a new
Force Commander, but for the moment General Bikimo
of Chad has taken over command ofthe force. He led the
meeting of the Joint Technical Security Commission.
I express my gratitude and admiration to him for his
work.

