Miss Moglia (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
are taking part in decision-making at a decisive
moment in the history of peacekeeping operations. The
international community has recognized on many
occasions that responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security is a basic function of
this Organization. Unfortunately, we have suffered
from the weaknesses of a system that was not able to
adjust to reality. On several occasions we have been
overwhelmed by this reality. A new generation of
conflicts found us poorly prepared to ensure peace and
even forced us to try to establish it in truly adverse
conditions.

We have learned from past experiences. The
Secretary-General's initiative of convening a Panel of
experts to examine the causes of these mistakes was
wise. The Brahimi Report made an accurate diagnosis
and formulated specific solutions to tangible problems.

The Security Council has responded. The
resolution we have adopted today includes as an annex
a document that is the outcome of extensive and in-
depth deliberations of the Working Group established
by the Council for that purpose. I wish to especially
thank Ambassador Ward of Jamaica for his dedication
and superb leadership of this Working Group.

We are aware that we are in the first stage of a
long-term process. Just a few months ago, Argentina
declared in this very Council that we should take
advantage of the propitious political moment to make
progress in improving the system of peacekeeping
operations. Today we are delighted to see the first
results of a common political will.

We are convinced that success in implementing
the report is rooted in the will of Member States, which
should be translated, for example, into a decision to
provide the Organization with the human and financial
resources necessary for it to fulfil its peacekeeping
responsibility. Without a genuine commitment on the
part of its Members, the United Nations will not be
able to move forward in carrying out its principal
functions under the Charter.

Convinced of this, Argentina has been involved in
this process in the Security Council, as well as the
General Assembly, through participation in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.

Having said that, I wish to refer briefly to some
recommendations to which my country attaches
fundamental importance.

Peacekeeping is the responsibility of all. Lack of
significant participation by Member States with a
greater capability, in resources and means, could have a
deterrent effect on the other troop-contributing
countries, which often make great efforts to fulfil the
commitments made to the Organization. All initiatives
geared towards obtaining a stronger commitment from
the most capable States is attractive to countries of
moderate resources, such as mine, which could
contemplate increasing or diversifying their
participation under the protective umbrella of the
former. Clearly, greater participation by these States
will yield tangible improvements - for example, in
logistical aspects and in security in the field.

We are pleased that the Council recognizes the
importance of improving the existing mechanism for
consultations with the troop-contributing countries and
is to implement specific proposals in this regard. The
message to this group of countries must be clear. We
need to maintain an open line of mutual
communication and to have interactive meetings where
their concerns and interests can be expressed.
Strengthening the consultation process implies, on the
one hand, facilitating access to consultations, and, on
the other, increasing the number of opportunities to
hold them. We note with satisfaction that the document
includes the idea that these consultations can also be
held at the initiative of troop-contributors themselves
and that consideration is being given to a wide range of
opportunities to convene them.

The need for solid rules of engagement was, in
our View, one of the most sensitive issues in drafting
the document. Finally, we recognized that the general
framework, the legal basis for actions to be taken in the
field, stems from the very mandate of the mission.
Once the mandate has been defined, the rules of
engagement will be developed in accordance with its
objectives, taking especially into account the particular
circumstances of a given conflict.

We cannot avoid linking this question with the
need to give United Nations forces a deterrence
capability that allows them to fulfil their missions.
However, underlying this affirmation there are doubts.

In this context, we share the Views expressed by
the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Guehenno, when he introduced his
report to the Fourth Committee a few days ago. He said
that peacekeeping means making peace, not war, but
that there is a very fine line between peacekeeping
based on a credible deterrent capability and making
war. Under-Secretary-General Guehenno concluded
that the challenge was to deploy operations with a
credible capacity that remain faithful to the basic
principles of peacekeeping.

The need for troops to be well equipped and
trained is intrinsically linked to their deterrent
capability. On several occasions, Argentina has
reaffirmed that this is a key component that contributes
to the success of any operation. The annex to the
resolution stresses the importance of having the
Member States take the steps necessary to ensure
training for their troops and highlights the importance
of international cooperation. I should like to recall that
during the Millennium Summit my country made
available to the United Nations our two existing
training centres for military personnel and security
forces. The possibility of having troops with uniform
training standards will certainly improve the command
of these forces on the ground and make it possible to
optimize their effectiveness.

Finally, I should like to reaffirm our continuing
concern about security conditions in the field.
Unfortunately, recent events have shown us that
personnel are facing increasingly dangerous situations.
We need security provisions to be included at the
planning stage of missions, and we support the
recommendation in the annex to the resolution by
which troop-contributing countries can ask for a
private meeting with the Security Council in the event
that an unexpected deterioration of conditions on the
ground threatens the security of their troops.

During the Millennium Summit, President de la
Rua reaffirmed Argentina's commitment to continue
participating in peacekeeping operations established by
the Security Council. We hope that the political will
that has made it possible for us to adopt this resolution
will not disappear and that it will allow us to pursue
this process so that the United Nations can enhance its
credibility in carrying out this paramount function. For
as long as this Organization can continue to ensure
international peace and security, we will be working for
the benefit of all the peoples of the world.

