Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having kindly agreed to convene this
important briefing on the situation in Colombia. This is
a major concern for all members of our Council.

Before I continue, I would like to hail the presence
of His Excellency the Vice-President of Colombia in the
Chamber and welcome him to the Security Council. We
congratulate Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Jean Arnault on the excellent briefing he just
gave us, which affords us a clearer picture of the peace
process under way in Colombia. We would also like
to thank him and encourage him in the light of the
tremendous work undertaken by the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia.

Cote d'Ivoire joins its voice with those of previous
speakers in welcoming the remarkable progress that
has been achieved in the peace process uunder way
in Colombia. This progress is especially reflected
in the signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a stable and Long Lasting Peace
of November, 2016 and the effective disarmament of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC) and its transformation into a political party.
It is also reflected with the ceasefire reached between
the Government of Colombia and the Ejercito de
Liberacion Nacional (ELN). We further commend the
determination of the various parties to work to achieve
peace and national reconciliation.

Notwithstanding these gains, Cote d'Ivoire remains
troubled by the delays observed in the implementation
of certain relevant provisions of the Peace Agreement,
specifically the political, economic and social
reintegration of the FARC and the implementation of
the necessary reforms to improve the living conditions
for people in the areas of Colombia that have been
plagued by war - people who aspire to better lives.

Cote d'Ivoire deplores the relapse into insecurity,
violence and myriad forms of trafficking in the areas
previously occupied by the FARC. Criminal groups and
militias are now vying for control of these areas. My
delegation further notes that the numerous murders of
social leaders and the observed return of former FARC
combatants to the areas they previously occupied,
which is the result of their lack of prospects, compound
the situation in Colombia. We are convinced that
peace and security are prerequisites for all harmonious
and sustainable development, and we call upon all
Colombian stakeholders to commit themselves further
to the political process under way. All parties must
assume their responsibilities and obligations.

My delegation welcomes the tremendous efforts
already undertaken by the Government of Colombia in
implementing the Peace Agreement, and we encourage it
to persevere in order to ensure the success ofthis process
through tangible measures and the implementation
of the structures set up within this framework. In
that regard, the next parliamentary and presidential
elections, in March and May, should strengthen the
national reconciliation process and guarantee genuine
peace, by ensuring adequate security conditions for all
participants. Peace can be sustainable and lasting only
if the reconciliation process is inclusive and involves
all Colombians.

My delegation urges the Government and the
Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional to continue their
negotiations with a view to a swift renewal of the
ceasefire as part of a comprehensive peace agreement.
We regret the fact that they have violated the ceasefire,
according to the most recent reports available to us.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the readiness
of my country, which has emerged from a decade of
crisis thanks to the support of the United Nations and
the international community, to do its part, with all
other members of the Council, for the success of the
peace process in Colombia.

Finally, allow me personally to thank the
Ambassador of the United Kingdom, my friend
Matthew Rycroft, for the friendship and the support
that he has willingly afforded our delegation since our
arrival here in New York. He is leaving us, but I believe
that his spirit will continue to support us. We wish him
well in his new responsibilities.

