Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Sir, for having organized this important debate.

(spoke in English)

Let me congratulate you on your successful
presidency of the Security Council and once again
thank you for convening this very important open
debate on the African Union Silencing the Guns in
Africa initiative.

While fully aligning myself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European
Union, I would like to offer a few additional remarks in
my national capacity.

My delegation supports the African vision of an
integrated, stable, peaceful and prosperous continent.
It is in this context that we welcome the African
Union Commission's decision to silence the guns
by 2020, which has great potential to contribute to
peace, security and stability in Africa. In this spirit,
we strongly support every opportunity to strengthen
the cooperation between the African Union and the
United Nations in support of African solutions to
problems facing the continent. Naturally, Slovakia
strongly supports every opportunity to strengthen the
cooperation between the African Union and the United
Nations in support of that particular endeavour.

In that context, we also decided to co-sponsor
resolution 2457 (2019), which the Council adopted
earlier. I would like to congratulate you, Sir, and all
other members of the Security Council on that important
step. Allow me to emphasize two points of substance.

First, we believe that all States should uphold
their responsibility to protect populations by taking
effective measures to address the root causes of violent
conflicts, including the detrimental impact of small
arms and light weapons trafficking. The consequences
of the devastating impact of the illicit transfer of small
arms and light weapons across Africa can be witnessed
today, for example, in the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and
elsewhere. I would like to highlight the importance of
the Arms Trade Treaty, which contributes to improving
regional security and stability, as well as the promotion
of accountability, by establishing better controls for
the transfer of conventional arms. Slovakia strongly
encourages all Member States to ratify the Treaty.

Weapons are force multipliers. If the weapons
situation is not consistently dealt with, exacerbation or
relapse into renewed fighting remains a paramount risk.
We therefore call for the full implementation of existing

international, regional and subregional instruments
addressing the illicit trafficking and destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons in Africa, including the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects.

Today's concept note (S/2019/169, annex) noted that
post-conflict countries' increased risk of relapse into
conflict is also attributable to weak State institutions.
We very much welcome that focus, which brings me to
my second point. In that regard, I would like to highlight
the important role of security-sector governance in
conflict prevention and sustaining peace. In this respect,
Slovakia welcomed the second African Union Forum
on Security Sector Reform, convened in Addis Ababa
on 22 October 2018, which discussed key challenges to
moving this agenda forward in Africa. We were proud
to be one of the international partners of the Forum,
acting also in our capacity, together with our colleagues
from South Africa, as Chair of the Group of Friends of
Security Sector Reform, along with the African Union
itself, the European Union and other partners.

During that initiative, we focused for the most
part on similar issues, including the situation in the
Central African Republic, which many speakers
have mentioned today, and the recent signing of the
agreement there, but also other issues, such as the role
of women. In that context, I want to emphasize that in
the next couple of weeks, two Groups of Friends - of
Security Sector Reform and of Gender Parity - will
co-convene an important event on 13 March that will
focus on the issue of gender and the security sector and
the nexus between them.

Returning briefly to the second African Union
Forum on Security Sector Reform, I want to point out
that it also identified challenges for the implementation
of the security-sector reform component of the African
Union Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence
the Guns in Africa by the Year 2020. The Forum
recommended that the African Union Commission
develop a three-year strategic plan on security-
sector reform and establish a steering committee on
the subject, in coordination with regional economic
communities and regional mechanisms for conflict
prevention, management and resolution. Along with
the European Union, the United Nations is currently
focused on supporting the African Union Commission
in making progress in these activities in the context
of the triangular partnership that we have been very
supportive of.

I want to further highlight the importance of the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union on security-sector reform for the
implementation of the African Union Master Roadmap.
As a result of the Forum I just mentioned, the partnership
remains focused on assisting the Defence and Security
Division ofthe African Union Commission in finalizing
the three-year strategic plan on security-sector reform.
We welcome the development of the plan and urge all
partners to support its implementation. It will serve as
an important vehicle for advancing the African Union's
leading role in security-sector reform. It will also
mobilize assistance for implementing related security-
sector reform tasks and the linkage to the AU Master
Roadmap by 2020.

I want to once again congratulate you on this
important initiative, Mr. President. and to assure you of
our continued support in that regard.

