Mr. Bliss (Australia): We thank you, Mr. President,
and your entire United Kingdom team, for your able
leadership this month. I will focus my remarks on the
Security Council visit as well as our enduring interest
in and responsibilities for conflict prevention, a key
theme of our work in August.

The Council's visit to the Peace Palace in The Hague,
established following the 1899 Peace Conference there,
was a reminder that for more than a century the inherent
link between peace, justice and the rule of law has been
understood. The Peace Palace is of course now home
to the International Court of Justice. The Council's
exchange of views with the Court, the International
Criminal Tribunals established by the Council and
the International Criminal Court (ICC) reinforced
the role those bodies can play in conflict prevention.
It underlined the central role of accountability in our
joint efforts to prevent and deter conflict and to build
sustainable peace. The visit was a vivid reminder of the
challenge of agreeing on and upholding international
norms concerning the conduct of conflict.

A year after the Peace Palace opened its doors,
in 1913, the First World War broke out. Our visit to
Belgium underlined the horrific consequences of that
entirely preventable conflict. Of course, during that
conflict many of the fundamental norms established at
The Hague Peace Conference were blatantly violated.
Just 24 hours after leaving The Hague, we were at a
protection site at an United Nations Mission in South
Sudan base in Malakal. We saw the consequences
of conflict, including large-scale displacement and
desperate humanitarian need. We heard testimonies of
massive human-rights violations, massacres and ethnic
targeting. United Nations staff told us of approaching
famine. Civil society representatives pleaded with us to
do more to end the conflict.

That jarring juxtaposition of lofty international
aspirations and the harsh reality of conflict is reflected
in many of the crises before the Council, including
Syria, Iraq, Ukraine, the Central African Republic,
South Sudan, Gaza and Libya. While the causes and
consequences differ, there is a common element
to the conduct of those conflicts * the erosion of
fundamental norms. We see that in the brazen defiance
of fundamental provisions of human rights and
international humanitarian law. In Iraq, the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is committing
unspeakable atrocities against civilians on the basis
of their religion or ethnicity. That is a stark challenge
for the Council - a terrorist group acting as a rebel
insurgency, acquiring and holding territory and brutally
repressing the civilian population. The role of foreign
terrorist fighters in such groups deserves the Council's
urgent attention.

We see that erosion of norms in the frequent use
of civilian facilities, including schools and hospitals,
for military purposes, and in the deliberate targeting of
such sites. That has been a feature of conflicts in Syria,
Iraq, South Sudan, the Central African Republic and
Gaza. We see it in attacks on cultural heritage, often part
of a deliberate strategy to destroy the very foundations
of cultures and religions. ISIL's destruction ofthe Musa
Bin Oumair Mosque in Iraq's Diyala province is only
the latest shocking example.

We see that erosion of norms reflected in the
deliberate targeting of humanitarian actors. As we
marked World Humanitarian Day on 19 August, we
heard that 155 humanitarian workers were killed in
2013, the highest level for a decade. We have also
seen it in the use of chemical weapons in conflict. In
adopting resolution 2118 (2013) a year ago, the Council
reaffirmed the absolute prohibition of the use of such
weapons anywhere. The completion of destruction
processes for Syrian chemical weapons on the United
States vessel MV Cape Ray this month was welcome,
but the job is not yet complete, and allegations of the
use of toxic chemicals in the Syrian conflict must be
investigated.

We have even seen violations of the very foundations
of the Charter of the United Nations, the obligation of
non-interference and the prohibition on the use of force,
with the annexation of part of Ukraine's territory and
active destabilization of other parts of the country. And
we have seen the tragic and far-reaching consequences
of this, including the downing of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17.

It is tempting to think that, having established
the normative framework for international peace and
security and its supporting institutions through treaties
and Council resolutions, ourjob is complete. We cannot
take such a view. We cannot just work at the margins.
We must protect the very foundations. We must take
every opportunity to reinforce these fundamental
norms - through Council resolutions such as 2170
(2014), on ISIL, and 2171 (2014), on conflict prevention;
through the inclusion of listing criteria in our
sanctions regimes for those who violate international
humanitarian and human-rights law, as we have just
done on Libya (see S/PV.7251); through accountability
mechanisms, including commissions of inquiry and
support to the ICC; and through timely Council visits at
critical moments, such as the one to South Sudan.

There was one another important event in The
Hague: the Council's meeting with Dutch Prime
Minister Rutte, who conveyed his gratitude for the
adoption of resolution 2166 (2014) and called for its full
implementation. As Council President, Sir, you laid a
wreath on our behalf at the memorial site at Schiphol
Airport for the victims of Flight MH-17. It was a
powerful reminder of the awful and unpredictable
consequences of conflict, and the stake that every United
Nations Member State has in the Council fulfilling its
primary responsibility to maintain international peace
and security.

