The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Snmaida'ie
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq
announcement of 10 February 2006 of the
certified election results for the Iraqi Council of
Representatives. The Security Council is
particularly encouraged that political parties
representing all of Iraq's communities
participated in the election, demonstrated by the
high voter turnout across Iraq. The Council
commends and congratulates the people of Iraq
for demonstrating their commitment to a
peaceful, democratic political process, and for
having braved difficult conditions and the threat
of violence to cast their votes.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of inclusiveness, national dialogue
and unity as Iraq's political development moves
forward. The Council calls on Iraq's political
leaders to work with resolve towards the
formation of a fully inclusive Government, which
will strive to build a peaceful, prosperous,
democratic and united Iraq. The Council urges
that all Iraqis participate in the peaceful political
process and calls upon those who continue to use
violence to lay down their arms. The Security
Council unanimously condemns acts of terrorism
in Iraq. Such acts should not be allowed to
disrupt Iraq's political and economic progress.

"The Security Council gives special
recognition to the Independent Electoral
Commission of Iraq for its role in organizing and
administering the elections. The Council also
commends the Secretary-General and the United
Nations in successfully assisting election
preparations, and notes in particular the role of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). The Security Council also appreciates
the assistance given by other international actors,
including European Union electoral experts and
the International Mission for Iraqi Elections
(IMIE).

"The Security Council underlines the need
for continued and enhanced international support
from all States and relevant international
organizations to assist Iraq's wide-ranging
political, economic and social development. The
Council calls on the United Nations to play the
fullest possible role in Iraq. It also calls on all
other international actors, particularly Iraq's
neighbours, to conform to relevant Security
Council resolutions and consider also how they
can reinforce their contribution at this important
time. In this context, the Council also looks
forward to the continued efforts of the League of
Arab States in support of the political process
endorsed in Security Council resolutions 1546
(2004) and 1637 (2005).

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for a federal, democratic, pluralist and unified
Iraq, in which there is full respect for human
rights."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2006/8.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.20 am.

