Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Like other delegations,
we would like to thank the Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), Ambassador Denisov, for
his detailed and substantial briefing, which my
delegation fully endorses. We express our appreciation
to him for the able way in which he has been
conducting the CTC's work for almost three months
now. We also thank the Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
Mr. Ruperez, for his report on the establishment of the
Executive Directorate and for his efforts to make it
fully operational.

As Germany fully subscribes to the forthcoming
statement by Ambassador van den Berg on behalf of
the Dutch Presidency of the European Union, I would
like to limit my intervention to the following points.

Recent terrorist attacks in Egypt, Pakistan and
Russia remind us that the terrorist threat remains real
and global. The tragic loss of hundreds of innocent
victims, many of them children, has deepened our
grief, and has at the same time strengthened our
resolve to intensify our common efforts in countering
the terrorist scourge.

Eleven days ago, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1566 (2004), thereby
making it clear that the United Nations remains at the
heart of the global counter-terrorism effort. In
particular, the new resolution reaffirms that it is the
United Nations Charter and international law, including
international human rights, refugee and humanitarian
law, as well as the 12 United Nations conventions and
protocols relating to terrorism, which constitute the
basic legal framework of counter-terrorism worldwide.

Resolution 1566 (2004) highlights the special
role of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) in that
context and tasks the CTC and its new Executive
Directorate with becoming more proactive in their
dialogue and interaction with States and international
organizations, in coordination with other relevant
United Nations bodies, such as the Al Qaeda/Taliban
sanctions Committee and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). As the Chairman
outlined, the CTC has proposed a variety of means of
interaction in its new work plan. Interested States can
contact the CTC's subcommittees or its able expert
team and, hopefully very soon, a fully functional
Executive Directorate. States should, in our view, also
play a more active part in the monthly briefings offered
by the Chairman. They could consider the possibility
of inviting the CTC for a visit to discuss all aspects of
resolution 1373 (2001), including possible technical
assistance needs. That instrument of visits to States
with their consent should also be useful in adapting the
reporting process to the specific situation on the
ground, since future State reports could be conceived
as a follow-up to the issues raised during such visits.

Resolution 1566 (2004), in paragraph 6, calls
upon international organizations to intensify their
interaction with the United Nations and, in particular,
with the CTC. In that context, I am pleased to note that
Interpol is at present in the process of establishing a
liaison office with the United Nations here in New
York. The office will be headed by an experienced law
enforcement expert, Mr. Ulrich Kersten, who until
recently served as the president of the German Federal
Office of Criminal Investigation. We are convinced
that Interpol's presence in New York will be of mutual
benefit to Interpol and to all United Nations bodies
dealing with law enforcement and counter-terrorism
issues.

To conclude, let me reaffirm Germany's
conviction that the best way to promote
implementation of resolution 1566 (2004) is to ensure
its broadest acceptance by all States Members of the
United Nations with a view to securing their active
cooperation. Here I fully agree with what the
representative of the Philippines has just said. In
particular, the new working group foreseen in
paragraph 9 should be open to interacting with and
receiving input from interested United Nations
Member States, as well as from relevant United
Nations bodies and international organizations. Such
an open and transparent process would both improve
the quality of United Nations counter-terrorism action
and strengthen the political and judicial coherence of
the global counter-terrorism coalition.

