Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
certainly want to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this meeting. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for the important statement he
delivered this morning. Allow me also to thank
Ambassador Levitte for his introduction of the report
of the mission the Security Council sent to the Great
Lakes region, and to reiterate our great appreciation for
the sense of leadership he demonstrated throughout the
visit as head of the Council's delegation. The briefing
given by Ambassador Levitte faithfully reflects both
the assessment and the expectations of the Council
with regard to the prospects for peace in the region.

We have listened attentively to all the statements
made by the representatives of the countries concerned.
Their participation in this meeting is for us of great
importance in that it is another positive contribution to
our discussions with the leaders and parties of the
region. It also shows the possibility of continuing the
discussions here in New York.

The visit was undoubtedly a success in so far as it
made it possible to achieve certain objectives that the
Council had set for itself in its various resolutions and
in the mission's mandate. We are pleased to note that
the ceasefire is still holding, that the disengagement
process is under way, that the deployment of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) has taken certain
important steps, that the withdrawal of foreign forces
from Congolese territory is in progress, and that the
inter-Congolese dialogue will begin on 16 July with a
preparatory meeting.

In other words, the progressive momentum
generated by this mission made it possible to clarify
the positions of one and all on substantive issues
related to the implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, which, during the mission, benefited from
a new impetus and from the unconditional support of
the different parties to the Agreement. We welcome
that impetus, and it should be maintained and closely
monitored by the Council because the process remains
fragile and requires all the parties involved to fully
assume their responsibilities in order to avoid any
slippage, which would be very harmful to the entire
region.

There are still important aspects of this process
that must be settled, namely, the definitive withdrawal
of the foreign troops from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as stipulated in resolution 1304 (2000), and
the establishment of a civilian administration in the
areas to be evacuated by the military forces. We
consider that the parties concerned must scrupulously
fulfil their commitments in this regard. The partnership
established just last year and strengthened this year
between the Security Council and the Political
Committee has been extremely useful, because it has
allowed a direct and frank dialogue between all of the
stakeholders and made it possible to overcome certain
difficulties in the peace process. The recent Security
Council mission cemented this partnership in the
interest of peace and security in the region and was
able to properly gauge the intensive and commendable
efforts made in very difficult working conditions by all
the personnel of MONUC and the Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Morjane.

As for Burundi, the mission of the Council
conveyed very clear messages to the different
Burundian parties on the need to continue dialogue and
to end all forms of violence. The Council is aware of
the difficulties of the internal process, and those
difficulties could worsen with the evolution of the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The Council must remain vigilant in this
regard, but the parties concerned in Burundi are also
called upon to grasp the opportunities for peace that are
offered to them in the framework of the Arusha talks,
with the facilitation of Nelson Mandela, and also
through a standing follow-up mechanism entrusted
with the ongoing monitoring of the situation.

The results of the Council's mission will require
ongoing assessment in the light of the evolution of the
situation and the implementation by the different
parties of their obligations. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo as well as in Burundi, the mission was
convinced that the peoples of the region aspire to real
and irreversible peace. The international community
must help them in their quest with political assistance
and also with short-term economic assistance, as
Ambassador Levitte spoke of with respect to the quick-
impact projects, and with long-term economic
assistance to ensure lasting peace and lasting
prosperity, going hand in hand.

