Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation is grateful to
the Permanent Representative of Spain, Mr. Roman
Oyarzun Marchesi, for his briefing on the work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). We would like to thank
him personally and all of his Spanish team for their
successful and conscientious leadership of a difficult
subsidiary body of the Council this year. We are looking
forward to fruitful cooperation in future.

We note the important and useful work of the Group
of Experts and its Coordinator, Mr. Terence Taylor,
which has given significant support to the work of the
Committee on a daily basis. This year saw some major
outreach events in the work of the Committee. These
events, including the successful holding of a training
course for the 1540 points of contact in the Asia-Pacific
Region and the development of cooperation with the
African Union for the purposes of recruiting technical
assistance providers for African States, will help to
effectively implement the provisions of resolution
1540 (2004). It is fundamentally important for the
1540 Committee to be able to effectively play the role
of a central coordinator of efforts to implement the
resolution and to determine the aims and objectives of
this assistance.

There is no doubt that the main goal in 2015 of
the Council's subsidiary body was to prepare for the
Comprehensive Review of the Status of Implementation
of Resolution 1540 (2004). The aim of this Review is to
identify existing shortcomings in collating, processing
and disseminating information, to improve the
predictability and systematic nature of work, to foster
coordination within the Group of Experts, and to find
ways to improve the effectiveness of the work of the
Committee as a whole. Currently, in cooperation with
Member States and specialized international agencies,
we have developed modalities for holding the Review.
In this regard, we hope that all the necessary work will
be carried out and conducted in an effective and timely
manner.

Resolution 1540 (2004), which was developed in
2004 by the Russian Federation and the United States of
America, is the main universal international document
in the area of weapons of mass destruction and
non-proliferation. It obligates all countries to establish
effective national control systems to prevent weapons of
mass destruction and their delivery systems and related
material from being acquired by non-State entities. This
is of crucial importance, given the numerous regional
conflicts that are being exploited by the numerous
terrorist organizations for their interests as they strive
to gain access to weapons of mass destruction. This has
been confirmed, for example, by the challenges that
the Islamic State is posing for the world, and by the
challenges presented by other terrorist organizations in
Syria and Iraq.

We are against attempts to water down the central
role of the Committee or transfer part of its functions
to non-specialized and regional structures, the business
community and non-governmental organizations.
We consider that there is a need to clearly determine
the areas where such structures can make a concrete
contribution to achieving the aims and objectives of
resolution 1540 (2004), but we underscore that the
international and legal responsibility for implementing
this important Security Council resolution is borne by
States.

For our part, we are planning to continue to actively
participate in the work of the Committee. We are
counting on the constructive and fruitful cooperation
of all partners, in the interests of the fullest possible
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004), so that weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery systems are not obtained by non-State entities.
In the light ofthe upsurge ofthe terrorist threat and the
danger of toxic substances and other types of weapons
of mass destruction falling into the hands of non-State
structures, the aims laid out in the resolution are more
pertinent than ever.

If I may, I would like to express our gratitude to
the Permanent Representatives of Nigeria, Jordan,
Lithuania, Chile and Chad.

