Mr. Pamir (Turkey): I would like to join my
colleagues in extending to you, Mr. President, our
warm congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October.

Turkey deplores the recent acts of violence at
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, in the vicinity of Jerusalem, in the
West Bank and in the Gaza Strip, as well as in other
Palestinian areas, which, as a result of the use of
excessive force, have led to the killing of more than 50
innocent civilians and the injuring of over 1,500. We
would like to extend to the bereaved families of the
victims our heartfelt condolences and profound
sympathy.

During the period preceding the regrettable
developments, tension in the region had mounted as a
consequence of the difficult phase in which the peace
process found itself. That tension should not have been
exacerbated by blatant provocative actions.
Unfortunately, the events we have seen did precisely
that, fanning the die-hard dynamics of confrontation.
Nothing can justify the loss of innocent lives, no matter
how charged the atmosphere.

We think that it is time now for de-escalation. We
call on both parties to restore calm through the exercise
of utmost restraint.

We believe that the withdrawal of Israeli security
forces would constitute a first step towards normalizing
the situation on the ground.

A transparent and impartial investigation, with
the involvement of both Israel and Palestine, into the
causes of the recent upheaval should be undertaken as
soon as possible. It is of the utmost importance that due
procedures should be initiated against the perpetrators
of these criminal acts, so that the bereaved families can
find solace.

Turkey continues to follow the developments in
the region, in close contact with the parties. The
Turkish Government has also expressed its outrage and
concern in the face of the escalating violence through
its direct contacts with President Arafat and Israeli
Acting Foreign Minister Ben-Ami. Furthermore, in
response to the request for emergency humanitarian
assistance made by the Palestinian side, my
Government has decided to contribute $500,000 as well
as medical supplies and medicine. It is incumbent upon
all of us to alleviate the plight of those who have fallen
victim to this senseless violence.

Turkey maintains its hope that these events,
however excruciating, will not deflect the parties from
their principal course, the Middle East peace process.
We, as members of the international community, should
assume our responsibility to help revive this process.

We continue to believe that a lasting settlement will be
the best answer to provocateurs of all sorts.

