Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile's
position on the Middle East conflict is based on strict
adherence to the norms and principles of international
law, in particular those relating to the peaceful
settlement of disputes, the inadmissibility of the use or
threat of use of force, good-faith fulfilment of
international treaties and agreements, and full
implementation of resolutions of the United Nations
and its constituent organs. Here, we would underscore
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002).

Consistent with that commitment, my delegation
condemns this act of violence: the assassination of
Sheikh Ahmed Yassin and a number of companions. As
we have stated in this Chamber, extrajudicial
executions are reprehensible acts that constitute an
assault on international law and that impede
understanding between the parties. Together with the
building of the separation wall, we increasingly see a
political wall of separation is being erected between
Israelis and Palestinians; this imperils the road map.

President Ricardo Lagos Escobar of Chile said
today that the assassination of Sheikh Yassin "makes
preserving the road map increasingly complex and
difficult and obliges us to review what has happened
and to give fresh impetus to the peace plan".

But I do not wish simply to condemn this
assassination; I wish also to take this opportunity to
reaffirm our strong condemnation of Palestinian suicide
attacks on Israeli targets, which have so often caused
suffering among innocent civilians.

Any act of violence in the area is
counterproductive in terms of achieving peace. Israel's
legitimate right to safeguard its security must be
exercised in conformity with international law. The
excessive or disproportionate use of force cannot be
justified. Israel should protect the safety and security
of its citizens without harm to the human rights of
Palestinians.

We urge the parties to do their utmost to help
restore dialogue by genuinely fulfilling their
commitments, including implementation of the road
map, in order to attain peace and stability in a region in
which two States, Israel and Palestine, should be able
to live side by side within secure and recognized
borders.

