Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): We are
grateful to the French presidency for having organized
this discussion on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, a Council agenda item that is both critical and
of high priority. This important initiative reminds us of
the primary purpose for which United Nations was
founded: promotion of the dignity of the human
person. The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
an essential facet of its mission. Let us acknowledge
that the Organization has succeeded in making that
mission truly meaningful by striving to promote the
development of international instruments on human
rights and international humanitarian law to govern the
conduct of States and individuals.

But in recent years we have seen the emergence
of a pernicious phenomenon: the constant erosion of
respect for the norms set out in those instruments. In
several parts of the world, the deliberate infliction of
totally unwarranted random violence on peaceful
civilian populations has become common, most often
in the context of internal conflicts of varying intensity,
in particular in Africa.

The atrocities that civilians endure are totally
unacceptable, whether they be committed by
Government troops engaged in punitive operations, by
armed rebels or by terrorist movements that defy
Governments in their sovereign function of
safeguarding public safety. Nor is it uncommon for
serious human rights violations affecting civilian
populations to stem from unrestrained intercommunal
confrontations motivated by ethnic hatred and to
trigger flows of refugees and internally displaced
persons.

Likewise, the phenomenon of random violence
above all affects the most vulnerable sectors of the
civilian population: women, children and the elderly, as
well as the humanitarian workers providing them with
relief. We cannot here turn our backs on the
particularly repellant cases of children forcibly
recruited into armed bands and turned into war
machines to perpetrate grave crimes against their own
communities or used as cannon fodder to blaze a trail
through minefields for fighting troops. We
unreservedly condemn such crimes. Moreover,
deliberate violence against United Nations and
humanitarian personnel and sexual and other abuse
perpetrated against women and girls must also be
harshly condemned.

The specific situations just described by Mr. Jan
Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, indicate the
scale and gravity of the assaults on human dignity
perpetrated against civilian populations. We are
grateful to Mr. Egeland for having placed special stress
on the genuine risk of widespread humanitarian
disaster not only because of the lack of security and the
difficulty of ensuring humanitarian access to affected
populations, but also, and above all, because of a
certain indifference and the lack of appropriate
financial resources.

Here, I would note that my country is hosting a
large number of Togolese refugees and that we have
appealed for international assistance so that we can
provide relief for them. To date, there has been no
significant response to that appeal.

We reaffirm the primary obligation borne by
belligerent parties - whether States or non-State
actors - to provide civilians with the protection
required under international humanitarian law. Here,
we would recall article 48 of Additional Protocol I to
the Geneva Conventions, which states that "In order to
ensure respect for and protection of the civilian
population the Parties to the conflict shall at all
times distinguish between the civilian population and
combatants".

Immediate, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access is of crucial importance to provide victims with
the humanitarian assistance that is often so desperately
needed to save their lives. In that regard, the
international community's fight against impunity
should include among crimes against humanity the
actions of those who in any way hamper access to
humanitarian assistance. The International Criminal
Court should prosecute such persons.

Moreover, international bodies such as the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and Mr. Egeland's
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
need to cooperate closely, in coordination with relevant
regional organizations and other structures, to set up an
early warning network for critical situations requiring
immediate action, for the purpose of protecting
civilians from violence. We support the proposal that
the protection of civilians be included in the mandate
of peacekeeping operations, wherever they are
deployed.

An integrated and coherent approach in the
overall activities of all actors is essential. In my
delegation's view, an effective conflict-prevention
strategy is another key element in the protection of
civilians. This requires a long-term strategy to address
the deep-rooted causes of conflict, which in turn means
that we must consider measures to promote sustainable
development, poverty eradication, national
reconciliation, democracy and good governance.

The protection of civilians is a key area in
fulfilling the "responsibility to protect". The
international community must remain vigilant so that it
can do everything in its power to oppose the barbarism
that some have no hesitation in making a way of life
and an approach to the settlement of conflicts. The
protection of civilians affected by armed conflict must
be viewed as a major challenge to international peace
and security.

