Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): As this is the first time that I am taking the
floor since the Plurinational State of Bolivia assumed
the presidency of the Council, allow me to sincerely
congratulate you, Madam, on the dynamic activity
and important programme of work of the Council
throughout the month of October, particularly its visit
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I would also like to commend and express gratitude
for the comprehensive report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/912) that was introduced to us by Mr. Jeremiah
Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative for Darfur
and Head of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). His briefing fully
illustrated the current situation in the Darfur region.

The briefing that we have just heard highlights a
relative improvement in the general security situation
in Darfur, where there were no significant clashes
between the Government forces and the armed groups
during the period covered by the report, which is worthy
of note. However, the Government of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea is concerned about the humanitarian
situation in the region, which remains precarious.
While we commend the Sudanese Government for
providing an environment conducive to a continued
improvement in the situation in Darfur, we urge it to
keep working in that respect, as it did in deciding to
unilaterally extend the ceasefire until 31 December. In
that regard, Equatorial Guinea lends its full support
to the Sudanese Government in seeking a definitive
solution to bring irreversible peace to Darfur.

In order to achieve that goal, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea believes that in the current phase,
the United Nations, the African Union, the international
community and the donor countries should lend greater
support to the Government of the Sudan and UNAMID
so that they can together address the root causes of the
crisis, which continue to cause isolated acts of violence
over land disputes, such as intercommunal attacks,
which require mediation and reconciliation efforts in
order to prevent and put an end to those conflicts.

The other aspect is the overriding need to support
the Government of the Sudan in its weapons-collection
campaign. The full implementation of that programme
is necessary not only to improve the relative calm that
prevails in Darfur, but also with a view to restoring
definitive peace in the region, particularly since that
important programme is now being carried out in the
Jebel Marra area.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea urges the
Government of the Sudan to ensure that, just as we
have seen in the security situation, improvements
also be achieved in the political situation through the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur to reach a total ceasefire. In that regard, support
must be lent to the political process being carried out
by the African Union High-level Implementation Panel.

To that end and to show the Council how it can
support efforts to break the deadlock in the negotiations
between the Government and the rebel movements
in Darfur with regard to the implementation of Doha
Document for Peace, which was adopted in 2011, we
believe that it is necessary to invite the Chair of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel,
former President Thabo Mbeki, to brief the Council
about the efforts being undertaken to that end. The last
time President Mbeki delivered a briefing to the Council
was on the 12 January 2017, almost two years ago.

My delegation warmly congratulates the
Government of the Sudan, Joint Special Representative
Mamabolo and all UNAMID personnel for the
commendable work they are doing. We encourage them
to continue in their intercommunal and governmental
mediation efforts to improve the lives of the people
of Darfur, so that the precarious and relative peace
and tranquillity in the region at the moment become
sustainable peace throughout the Darfur region.

I conclude by expressing our resolute support for
the recommendation made by Mr. Mamabolo for the
Council to consider taking action against recalcitrant
groups of rebels and armed groups that do not yield to
reason and come to the negotiating table, by adopting
sanctions as was done is the case of the leader
Abdul Wahid.

