Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My country condemns and rejects in the
strongest possible terms any use of chemical weapons
or of any other weapon of mass destruction, as this
constitutes a crime against humanity and an unethical
and unjustifiable act, under any circumstances. The
real target of such weapons is the Syrian people, who
remain the primary victims of the crimes committed
by armed terrorist groups, which have not hesitated to
use chemical weapons against them. I reaffirm before
the Security Council that my country has sought, and
continues to seek, to identify the real perpetrators
responsible for the use of chemical weapons in my
country, Syria.

Based on those steadfast principles, my Government
joined the Chemical Weapons Convention and has
honoured all of its commitments thereunder. My
country achieved an unprecedented and definitive feat
in the history of the Organization by ending the Syrian
chemical-weapons programme in record time. That was
corroborated in the report of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism to the Council in June 2014.

My country is the party most desirous of uncovering
the truth. We have always supported, and will continue
to support, in principle any initiative by the Council
whose aim is to establish the truth, identify those who
are really trading in the blood of the Syrian people and
using toxic chemical substances against Syrian civilians,
including armed terrorist groups, as well as levelling
false accusations against the Syrian Government.

In that regard, on behalf of the Government of my
country, I once again reiterate our condemnation of
all American and Western allegations accusing us of
committing chemical-weapon attacks in our country.
I reaffirm that those accusations are groundless and
cheap lies. International public opinion and the majority
of United Nations Members now know that this is but
standard procedure for the United States and its allies
in the Council each and every time they learn that the
armedterrorist groups that they finance, arm and support
on the ground in Syria are at an impasse and losing
ground to the advancing Syrian army and its allies. The
latter are today waging a war, on behalf of the entire
world, against terrorism, which, unfortunately, is being
supported by certain Governments that have no interest
in ensuring international peace and security and are
solely seeking to advance their own political agendas.

My Government reaffirms once again that the
United States, the United Kingdom and France are
fully responsible for the paralysis of international
investigative mechanisms concerning the use of toxic
chemical substances, as the Governments of those States
are seeking to shield the armed terrorist groups that they
support. We recall before all present here that it is Syria
that originally called for an investigation into instances
of the use of toxic gas by armed terrorist groups.

False accusations against my Government of using
toxic chemical substances are attempts to cover up its
efforts to reveal to the world that certain armed terrorist
groups and their sponsors have continued to perpetrate
crimes against innocent civilians through the use, more
than once, of toxic substances. The Syrian Government
has provided the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) with
evidence that proves that such groups possess banned
toxic substances. We have repeatedly called for the
carrying out of investigations to corroborate such
evidence. However, our calls have been ignored.

All of my colleagues here recall that the United
States and its allies destroyed the JIM. Through their
practices here in the Council, they put an end to the
Mechanism. They brought pressure to bear on its
Chair and its members by pressuring them to refuse
to visit Khan Shaykhun. Rather than conduct a field
visit to collect real evidence, they merely sought to
level accusations and offered up evidence trumped up
by Western countries to undermine Syria, to support
terrorist groups and to cover up their responsibility for
this incident. That occurred after the United States and
its partners rejected the call by the Russian Federation
to stop the politicization of the work of the JIM. and to
rectify its methodology by refraining from using false
evidence and, instead, limiting itself to scientific and
legally sound and reasonable proof.

My country continues to honour all of its
commitments f the ones we assumed when we joined
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction. We shall persevere in our fight
against terrorism - a war that we will wage despite
any political or media blackmail or any exploitation of
the blood of innocent civilians in Syria. The Permanent
Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic will today
circulate a letter of the National Committee for the
Implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention,
in response to the United States allegations vis-a-vis
the work of the JIM. and the Fact-finding Mission of
the OPCW. The letter proves with scientific and legal
evidence that the accusations against my country are
false and that Syria has never used such chemicals, and
will we ever use them, because we do not possess them.
Let us recall that those who level such false accusations
against Syria are the Governments of the same States
with a dark history of using such internationally
prohibited weapons against millions of innocent
people - in Viet Nam, Cambodia, Algeria and the list
goes on.

Finally, on behalf of my Government, I would like
to extend our gratitude to the Russian Federation and
to friendly countries in the Council, countries that seek
to establish truth based on their awareness about the
pernicious aims behind the false accusations. They
have demonstrated their commitment to the supremacy
of the principles of international law and the Charter
of the United Nations, as well as their conviction that
such abnormal practices undermine the credibility of
international actions and institutions and jeopardize
international peace and security.

The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.
