Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Allow me to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of October. I
also wish to express our appreciation for the convening
of today's important meeting. We are grateful to
Mr. Tom Koenigs, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his detailed briefing. I should
also like to express my delegation's appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his recent report (S/2007/555) on
Afghanistan, which offers a comprehensive overview
of the overall situation in the country.

Less than a month ago, we gathered at a special
high-level meeting on Afghanistan that was co-hosted
by the Secretary-General and President Karzai and was
held prior to the General Assembly's general debate at
its sixty-second session. The meeting, which brought
together foreign ministers and senior representatives of
the 22 States members of the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board (JCMB) of the Afghanistan Compact
and various international organizations, was another
opportunity to assess ways of enhancing greater
coordination of international efforts to strengthen
peace, stability and development in Afghanistan. We
were pleased with the outcome of the meeting, which
attested to the overwhelming consensus among
Member States on the need to keep Afghanistan among
the top priorities of the international community and
the United Nations. We would also like to welcome the
unity with which participants reiterated the need for
improved strategic coordination in four key areas,
namely, security, counter-narcotics, regional
cooperation and governance. Such coordination will be
fundamental to achieving the vision of a peaceful and
stable Afghanistan.

Significant gains have been made in Afghanistan
since the signing of the Bonn Agreement, six years ago.
Thanks to the support of the Council and other partners in
the international community, Afghanistan no longer
serves as a base for international terrorists; rather, it has
become the frontline from which countries have joined
hands in the fight against terrorism. We have regained our
legitimacy among responsible members of the
international community. We are continuing to make
steady progress in consolidating our democratic
institutions.

At the same time, we should not lose sight of the
fact that daunting challenges continue to confront a stable
and prosperous Afghanistan. That is why we continue to
focus on defeating terrorism and improving security,
strengthening the rule of law and governance, enhancing
the reconstruction process, and eliminating the menace of
narcotics as our top priorities.

Terrorism is the main challenge facing us. Recent
events of the past two weeks are a clear illustration of
the ongoing campaign by the enemies of peace in
Afghanistan that is aimed at destabilizing the situation.
In their most recent acts of sheer brutality, terrorists
carried out suicide bombings in the frontier town of
Spin Buldak and in the Afghan capital, targeting
civilians and members of the National Army and
Police. At least 80 civilians lost their lives in suicide
attacks in September. The carnage was a stark reminder
of the continuing challenge facing the people of
Afghanistan as they seek to live in peace and security.
Additional attacks have come in the form of increased
use of sophisticated explosive devices, abductions and
intimidation, and daily attacks on schools and health
centres, and on Government officials and humanitarian
aid workers. Terrorists have also resorted to the brutal
tactic of using human shields during counter-terrorism
operations, which constitutes the main cause of loss of
civilian lives.

I should like to reaffirm here that such heinous
acts will in no way weaken our resolve to achieve our
stated goals. That is why our security forces continue
to serve in the most difficult of conditions alongside
forces of our international partners in order to
consolidate security throughout the country and stop
the explosion of violence.

Over recent months, we have made substantial
progress in weakening the command and control
structure of the terrorist networks in Afghanistan. Joint
combat operations by Afghan and international forces
resulted in the capture and elimination of an
unprecedented number of commanders of the Taliban
and extremists. As a case in point, the deaths of Mullah
Akhter Osmani and Mullah Dahdullah at the beginning
of this year were among numerous achievements in the
fight against terrorism. In this regard, we remain
concerned over the increased use of foreign extremist
elements in the campaign of terror against our people.

We have also taken action to strengthen the
sanctions regime against terrorists, in accordance with
resolution 1267 (1999). Just last month, Sayeedur
Rahman Haqani, the mastermind behind numerous
suicide bombings in various parts of the country, was
listed on the consolidated list of the 1267 Committee at
the request of the Afghan Government.
Improving overall security in Afghanistan is
dependent on a variety of factors. Ensuring a fully
efficient and operational National Army and Police is
vital to our fight against terrorism. Despite substantial
progress in reforming our security institutions and
increasing the size of our National Army and Police,
we call for continued assistance in strengthening and
enhancing the training of our security forces.

Meanwhile, it has also become evident that
addressing terrorism and improving security in
Afghanistan will not be achieved by military means
alone. While the military campaign remains an
important pillar in the fight against terrorism, we must
also redouble our efforts on all aspects of a
comprehensive strategy to achieve long-term security
and stability. We must focus more on expediting the
delivery of basic services and creating employment
opportunities through large scale reconstruction and
development projects, in order to bring about real
change in the lives of our citizens. In doing so, we will
prevent the possibility of subversive elements enjoying
local sympathy. In this regard, we call upon on our
international partners to ensure greater military
coordination with Afghan security forces during
combat operations in order to prevent the loss of
civilian lives during counter-terrorism operations. All
measures must be implemented to avoid harm to
civilians during armed hostilities.

Furthermore, more must be done to address
terrorism in its regional and international dimensions.
The presence of terrorist infrastructure outside of
Afghanistan's territory is a source of continuing
concern to Afghanistan and the region. In the printed
version of his address to the General Assembly at its
sixty-second session, President Karzai emphasized

"that we were the prime victim of terrorism and
that terrorism was never, nor is it today, a home-
grown phenomenon in Afghanistan. Therefore,
this threat can only be overcome if addressed
across its regional and international dimensions.
Consistent with our belief as expressed in the
past, we remain convinced that tolerating the
presence of sanctuaries and terrorist
infrastructure will only broaden the scope of
terrorism".

As part of the initiatives to ensure long-term
stability, Afghanistan continues to focus on
reconciliation as a measure to encourage non-terrorist

Taliban to refrain from subversive activities and join
the process of building a prosperous Afghanistan. Such
measures, which take place within the framework of
national reconciliation, are welcomed by our people. In
this regard, we are working with the 1267 Committee
to update and improve the quality of the consolidated
list.

Regional cooperation is indispensable for success
in our efforts to achieve peace and stability in
Afghanistan. There is a greater consensus in our
neighbourhood on the notion that the advent of a
peaceful and stable Afghanistan is a precondition for
the security and prosperity of all countries in the
region. This year we maximized our efforts to
consolidate relations with our neighbours and the wider
region in the areas of security, trade, investment,
border cooperation and counter-narcotics. The
convening of the sixth meeting of the Joint
Coordination Body (JCB) in Kabul on 3 October was
an important step in that regard.

As a country that once served as a land bridge
connecting cultures, countries and civilizations,
Afghanistan is surely but gradually reassuming its role
in promoting trade and development in the region. In
that regard, I am pleased to announce that we are
preparing to host the upcoming international meeting
of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of members of the
Economic Cooperation Organization in the city of
Herat on 19 October. This meeting will be the first
international gathering to be held in one of
Afghanistan's historic provinces.

The Afghanistan-Pakistan jirga that took place
just over a month ago was the most recent among
numerous meetings initiated by Afghanistan to
strengthen cooperation between the two countries in
order to jointly address the threat of terrorism in
Afghanistan and throughout the region. We have every
reason to believe that that assembly will yield the
anticipated results. We also look forward to the second
session of the jirga to be held in Pakistan in the near
future.

Another major challenge is narcotics. Why this
menace remains of concern to Afghanistan and the
international community can been attributed to a
combination of factors. It has become evident that
eliminating the scourge of narcotics from our society
and the region is an endeavour unattainable by
Afghanistan alone. Real progress towards reduction
and elimination requires a more robust effort from the
transit and consumer countries. Greater focus should
also be given to breaking the link between the
production and trafficking of illegal drugs and the
financing of terrorist activities.

In adopting the Afghanistan Compact, we
committed ourselves to a second phase of cooperation
with our international partners in order to consolidate
our achievements. Now that we have reached a turning
point in the effort to achieve a stable and prosperous
Afghanistan, the time has come for us to intensify our
focus on the implementation of the Compact.
Additional measures are necessary if we are to ensure
that the goals of the Compact are met within the
designated timelines.

In that context, we acknowledge the need to exert
greater efforts to improve the effectiveness,
accountability and utilization of development
assistance. While expressing gratitude to our
international partners for their assistance to
Afghanistan, we emphasize the need to ensure delivery
of pledges in a timely manner. Also essential is the
need for increased financial assistance in achieving our
development goals.

If we are to accomplish tangible results across
key pillars of the Compact, we must ensure greater
coordination of international assistance to Afghanistan.
We call on our international partners to increase the
level of coordination and cooperation among
themselves and with the Afghan Government.
Enhanced coordination will result in greater unity of
assessment, unity of approach and unity of action. In
that regard, we commend the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for its continuing
commitment to implement the effective coordination of
the international community's efforts with Afghanistan.

We are also grateful to the Council for its
adoption of resolution 1776 (2007), extending the
mandate of the International Security Assistance Force
for an additional year. In that regard, allow me to
express our appreciation to all of those countries that
have committed troops and resources to ISAF for the
consolidation of peace and stability in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan greatly values the ongoing role of
the United Nations and the efforts to secure peace and
stability in the country. We welcome the expansion of
the presence of UNAMA to additional areas of the

country as a clear sign of United Nations efforts to
reach out to various parts of the country. I also wish to
seize this opportunity to express my delegation's
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his personal
engagement and commitment to improve the situation
in Afghanistan, as illustrated by his visit to Kabul in
June and by his initiative to convene the high-level
meeting on Afghanistan on 23 September.

I would like to express my country's gratitude to
our international partners for their ongoing
commitment to Afghanistan. We remain confident that
together we will fulfil our commitment, our common
vision of a peaceful, democratic and prosperous
Afghanistan.

In conclusion, I would like to pay special tribute
to Mr. Tom Koenigs for his tireless efforts during his
tenure in Afghanistan as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. We wish him every success in
his future endeavours.

