The President: I thank Mr. Hortas-Ramos for
his briefing.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2017/781, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Algeria, Australia,
Belgium, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bulgaria,
Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Indonesia, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal, the
Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Peru, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, the Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United Republic of Tanzania,
the United States of America, Uruguay and Viet Nam.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay

The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
unanimously adopted as resolution 2378 (2017).

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Prime Minister of Ethiopia.

Let me start by expressing my appreciation to
Secretary-General Guterres for his remarks and his
efforts to strengthen United Nations peacekeeping.
We also thank Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat for being here
with us today and for his commitment to enhancing
the United Nations-African Union partnership. We are
also grateful to President Jose Ramos-Horta forjoining
us and for his insightful briefing on where we are in
terms of the reform of United Nations peacekeeping
operations two years after the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations, which he chaired. presented
its report (see S/2015/446).

Ethiopia welcomes the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2378 (2017), and we thank all the
member of the Security Council for their inputs and
contributions during the negotiations. We also thank
all those members that co-sponsored the resolution in
a demonstration of their commitment to strengthening
United Nations peacekeeping as one of the important
tools in the promotion and maintenance of international
peace and security.

The adoption of this important resolution has
particular significance for Ethiopia as one of the
leading troop-contributing countries to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Our contingents were among
the peacekeepers deployed in the early days of United
Nations peacekeeping. They were also among the
peacekeepers deployed in the Congo to stabilize the
country in the early days of that country's independence.
Ethiopian peacekeepers also played an important role
in the aftermath of the Rwandan genocide and the civil
war in Liberia. More than 8,000 Ethiopian peacekeepers
are serving today as Blue Helmets in Darfur, Abyei
and South Sudan. Ethiopia takes pride in its important
role in United Nations peacekeeping, and today we
are pleased to have made a modest contribution to
advancing the reform of United Nations peacekeeping
by proposing the resolution we just adopted.

We are meeting here today two years after major
reviews were conducted focused on the United
Nations peace and security architecture, as well as
two years after the holding of the leaders' summit
on peacekeeping. We therefore hope that this debate
will afford us an opportunity to reflect on how far we
have come in undertaking a reform of United Nations
peacekeeping and to chart the way forward. I am glad
to highlight four points in that regard.

First, we believe the Council has a key role in
strengthening United Nations peacekeeping, as its
mandates authorizes the missions' deployment.
Therefore, adequate implementation and follow-up by
the Council of United Nations peacekeeping reform,
in accordance with existing mandates and procedures,
is extremely important. We welcome the decision
by the Council today to entrust its Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations with reviewing reform
initiatives, in close cooperation with other Member
States, including troop- and police-contributing
countries and host countries.

Secondly, as much as United Nations peacekeeping
reform is important, the Council has not held a
dedicated debate to discuss this issue comprehensively
and assess the progress made. That is why we welcome
the decision to hold this annual debate on the basis
of a comprehensive annual briefing by the Secretary-
General. It is also essential that the discussion take
place at this time of the year, when world leaders gather

in New York for the opening of the General Assembly's
annual session, in order to keep peacekeeping reform
high on the agenda.

Thirdly, we all know that the environment under
which many peacekeepers operate has dramatically
changed, but peacekeepers are not equipped with the
necessary capabilities to carry out their mandates and
protect civilians while also ensuring their own safety
and security. That is why, two years ago, a number
of commitments and pledges were made to address
this issue. We welcome the updates provided by the
Secretary-General to the Security Council as part of this
comprehensive briefing on the continuous efforts made
in filling the existing gaps in terms of force-generation
and capabilities and other relevant aspects necessary for
peacekeeping to effectively and appropriately respond
to peace and security challenges.

Fourthly, we appreciate the Secretary-General's
initiative to reform the United Nations peace and
security architecture, both in the Secretariat and in the
field. It is important that the Council send a political
message to the Secretary-General welcoming his reform
efforts. We believe that his continuous engagement
with the Council and the General Assembly's various
intergovernmental committees will be very important
in moving the reform process forward.

Last but not least, enhancing global and regional
partnerships is one of the most important pillars of
reforming United Nations peacekeeping. Given the
current global security dynamics, the United Nations
cannot handle new and emerging peace and security
challenges alone, and forging effective partnerships
with a regional and subregional organizations is the
most sensible and logical thing to do. Tht has already
been well recognized, but what matters at this stage
is taking practical steps in that direction, in the spirit
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
including through the sharing of burdens.

Let us be frank: there is a great deficit on this issue,
and it is high time that the contributions and sacrifices
of United Nations peacekeepers and of those deployed
after having been authorized by the Security Council
be acknowledged in an earnest and meaningful way. It
is encouraging to note that the Council has expressed
its intention to give further consideration to practical
steps that can be taken and to the necessary conditions
to establish the mechanisms through which African
Union-led peace support operations authorized by the

Security Council and under its authority under Chapter
VIII of the Charter could be partly financed through
United Nations-assessed contributions on a case-by-
case basis.

Our hope and expectation was that the Council
would go further than that. What Chairperson Mahamat
just told us today encapsulates the sentiments in Africa
on this important issue. Nevertheless, we understand
the dynamics in the Council and we will continue to
engage with members to make progress on this issue,
while building on what has been agreed to today. We
believe this is not only fair and appropriate; it is also in
the best interest of our collective security.

I now resume my functions as President of the Council.

I now invite His Excellency Mr. Macky Sall,
President of the Republic of Senegal, to take the floor.

