Mr. O'Brien: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the humanitarian
situation in the Lake Chad Basin. I also thank my
colleague, Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman,
and endorse his clear and powerful statement.

The Lake Chad Basin region, which hosts Africa's
fastest growing displacement crisis, needs our urgent,
united and collective attention. Violence and brutality
to the most heinous, barbaric and unconscionable
extent-almostunimaginable-asperpetratedbyBoko
Haram are resulting in massive forced displacement,
human rights violations, severe disruptions to
livelihoods, and unprecedented humanitarian needs
in a region that was already endemically and deeply
vulnerable.

As I witnessed during my travels to north-east
Nigeria and south-east Niger and their capitalsjust a few
weeks ago in May, boundless insecurity has deepened
the vulnerability of communities in that fragile region,
which was already impacted by severe climate, climate
change, progressive desertification, environmental
degradation - including the massive drying-up of
Lake Chad itself, straddling the unpoliceable borders
of four countries - the highest population growth in
the world, and our planet's most widespread, chronic
and deepest extreme poverty. The region remains
precarious for every one of the millions of our fellow
human beings there, and the current exacerbated crisis
vastly surpasses the capacity of national and local
authorities to respond. People across the Lake Chad
Basin desperately need our help.

Across the Lake Chad Basin, spanning parts of
Nigeria, the Niger, Chad and Cameroon, the United
Nations estimates that over 9 million people need
humanitarian assistance. About 2.8 million of these
people have been displaced, fleeing violent attacks
in their towns and villages. They include people like
52-year-old grandfather Mustafa, newly relocated into
a 7x7-foot wood and sheeting shelter, after having fled
from his torched lifetime house in Bama 11 months
earlier, when Boko Haram brutes ransacked his village.
He bravely held his shard of mirror to tell me he was
still trying to be the barber he had always been, but his
stoicism could not hold back the tears provoked by his
fears or his plea for our help.

Many are in camps, where living conditions
are grim, but the vast majority are living with host
communities that are themselves among the world's
poorest and most vulnerable people, living in the Sahel
zone which faces chronic drought and food insecurity
that place over 1 million children's lives at risk year in,
year out. Using next season's seeds to feed those they
have taken in, hundreds of thousands of farmers have
missed three successive years of planting, leaving them
without any stocks or income whatsoever to live on.

Vital trade routes have been severely disrupted,
leaving an estimated 5.2 million people severely food
insecure. People in the Lake Chad Basin are some of
the toughest in the world. They are used to coping with
extreme hardship, exploiting every and any option they
can to keep their families going. But as many of the
affected people themselves told me during my visit,
this suffering has pushed them to the absolute limit; it
is unlike anything they have felt before. Personally, I
have been traveling throughout that region on and off
for the past 37 years, and I have never heard such fear
and desperation. This is a new terrible.

Children are particularly vulnerable, especially
the 1.7 million who have been displaced across the
Lake Chad Basin. Children risk being abducted and
forcibly recruited by Boko Haram to take part in the
violence, including by acting as suicide bombers. From
January to June this year, more than 50 children have
been coerced into carrying out suicide bombings across
the four countries. Gender-based violence and sexual
exploitation are widespread, and women and girls are at
great risk of forced abduction into sexual slavery.

Nigeria is bearing the brunt of the crisis, despite the
significant efforts undertaken by the federal and local
authorities to address this burgeoning catastrophe.
Seven million of the nine million people in need across
the Lake Chad Basin are in Nigeria. As the Nigerian
army has progressively regained control of a number of
towns and villages in Borno state, up in its north-east
centred round Maiduguri, aid agencies have gradually
been able to access new areas. What we have uncovered
and assessed is deeply, distressingly alarming even
for those of us who have witnessed such depths of
humanitarian need before..

Last month, the Nigerian authorities rightly
declared a nutrition emergency for Borno state.
Direct reports from the field indicate that affected
communities are rapidly running out of food. We have
no time to lose. The lean season, which puts millions
at real risk of hunger and malnutrition each year across
the Lake Chad Basin region, has already started. If we
do not act now, the human suffering will only become
more extreme. Children are no exception. UNICEF
reports that in Borno state alone, 244,000 children are
suffering from severe acute malnutrition. Among them,
almost one in five risks death this year if they are not
treated. That is 134 children dying each day from a
preventable condition. We have to stop this - and we
can with will, money, urgency and coordination.

While the sheer number of people suffering is
mainly in Nigeria, all of the affected countries are
deeply vulnerable. In the Niger, one single attack by
Boko Haram left over 70,000 people displaced in Bosso
town in June, bringing the total number of displaced
people in the Diffa region to over 160,000. The Niger
is the poorest country in the world; yet despite living
on virtually nothing, families there have welcomed
the displaced into their homes and shared their meagre
supplies of food and water with the newcomers, as I
saw for myself with utter humility and total admiration,
in equal parts, when I visited Fatimah in Diffa, who
had voluntarily taken in two families, 11 people in all,
sharing her diminishing staple food supplies and her
very modest home.

Needs are also dire in Chad's Lac region, where
there are over 60,000 registered displaced persons, and
tens of thousands who have not yet been registered.
In the Far North region of Cameroon, which has been
under a state of emergency and lock-down for security
reasons, the number of people in need of immediate
food assistance has quadrupled since June 2015, to
over 200,000 today, and the total number of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) increased in the same period
to around 190,000. Severe acute malnutrition rates
for children under 5 have surpassed the emergency
threshold in the three neighbouring countries, as is the
case in Nigeria. And the three departments along the
east of Cameroon were already food-insecure because
of taking in over a quarter of a million refugees from
Central African Republic's violent conflict over the past
two years, with as yet few of those people returning to
that country.

Humanitarian actors have been scaling up their
assistance, despite a dangerous operating environment.
Since January, the humanitarian country team has been
able to reach 2 million people with primary health-care
outpatient services in north-east Nigeria, including
close to 91,500 people in the areas of Borno state,
where the State has re-established a presence. As of
the end of June, the World Food Programme (WFP)
had provided 54,000 children at risk of malnutrition
with supplementary food, and the agency is targeting
1 million people for food assistance this year. In the first
half of 2016, 148,000 girls and boys were reached with
psychosocial support through child-friendly spaces
across the four affected countries. However, as is clear,
considerably more needs to be done - and now.

Humanitarian agencies are taking a regional
approach. Last week, the humanitarian country teams
in Cameroon and Nigeria partnered to provide vital
cross-border assistance to people in Banki, Nigeria,
where up to 20,000 IDPs had been cut off from aid since
last year. The food and relief items were transported
by road from Cameroon and then distributed by WFP
staff from Nigeria, in close cooperation with national
authorities in both countries.
It is urgent that we continue those efforts and
complement them with increased development
assistance. We must be ready to capitalize on the
advances made by the Nigerian State to regain control
of territory, as evidenced by the recent reopening of
the road leading east from Maiduguri to Dikwa, along
which I could not travel even on 19 May. That is essential
to promote trade and income generation along that vital
road axis. But we must be clear - to ourselves and to
the Nigerian Government also: this is notjust a security
issue. The Lake Chad Basin, and the protracted violence
of the terrorists of Boko Haram, is for the millions of
people there, caught up in this for years, as much, or
now even more, a humanitarian catastrophe as it is a
security priority. We, the international community and
the Nigerian Government, must act accordingly.

Protection must be at the core of the humanitarian
response, particularly for women and children, who are
at severe risk of exploitation and abuse. Without more
help, villagers are left to defend themselves. In the town
of Baga Sola in Chad, villagers have erected their own
checkpoint to try to fend off further attacks. It is nothing
more than a flimsy rope. Said a youth manning it,

"We are unarmed, so if anybody comes with
explosives or attacks us, we will hold him down
until the police arrives".

The affected countries have themselves recognized
and drawn attention to those protection concerns. Last
month, the Governments of Nigeria, Cameroon, Chad
and the Niger held a regional protection dialogue and
agreed on a set of comprehensive actions to enhance
protection and respond to the most urgent needs
of refugees, internally displaced persons and other
affected populations. I commend the four countries for
that strong initiative, and urge them to fully implement
the commitments made.
Despite the best efforts by the regional authorities
and humanitarian actors to expand their reach and
scale up life-saving assistance, the means to support
the humanitarian response in north-east Nigeria,
and throughout the Lake Chad Basin, do not match
the staggering scale of need. The 2016 humanitarian
response plan for Nigeria is only 28 per cent funded,
while those for the Niger, Cameroon and Chad are
similarly underfunded. In noting that the United
Kingdom has provided $18.5 million in humanitarian
support for people in the Lake Chad Basin States, I
earnestly appeal again to Member States to make their
first, or to increase their contribution, to the ongoing
humanitarian operation rapidly - and now.

Earlier this month, at the initiative of the
humanitarian community, including the Regional
Humanitarian Coordinator and the country teams in
Nigeria, the Niger, Cameroon and Chad, developed a 90-
day plan highlighting the priority humanitarian needs.
A united call for $221 million in funding between July
and the end of September to address life-saving needs
was made. I welcome the generous new pledges and
contributions that have been made following the release
of the 90-day plan. That adds to the Central Emergency
Response Fund (CERF) allocation of $13 million for
Nigeria that I approved at the end of June - and the
nearly $90 million already provided by the CERF to the
Lake Chad Basin since last year. The scale of CERF's
allocation is something of a record in terms of the
quantum for one, albeit regional, crisis. CERF funds are
being made available nimbly and rapidly, which Ijudge
to be wholly necessary and proportionate. But - please
note - it is intended to jump-start, not be a substitute
for, Member State contributions.

I am working with my counterparts in humanitarian
agencies to take measures to continue to quickly scale
up capacity at the field level, where it is most required.
That includes deploying additional United Nations
staff, establishing operational hubs, mobilizing relief
supplies and deploying international non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), which is central to the
response. Agencies such as UNICEF, the WFP and the
International Organization for Migration, as well as
their NGO partners, have ambitious scale-up plans that
require urgent resources to implement.

We urgently need to strengthen international
attention to this neglected crisis. For months, I have
been shouting into what feels like an empty room to
highlight the dire situation in the Lake Chad Basin.
My trip to the region in May was part of that effort.
Ambassador Power's visit to the region in April was
also vital in shedding light on this dreadful situation.
I also want to take this opportunity to thank the
Government of the United States and the European
Commission for partnering with the United Nations
and the affected countries on an event focused on the
humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad Basin during
the Economic and Social Council session one month
ago. It was also highlighted in a packed side-event at
the World Humanitarian Summit on 23 May.

We all know that the humanitarian response in
itself is insufficient to re-establish people's lives and
livelihoods. We must move from delivering aid to
ending need - a crucial outcome endorsed at the World
Humanitarian Summit. That means that, in parallel to
providing life-saving assistance and protection, which
we as humanitarians do, we need a concerted effort
with political actors to address the root causes of the
violence, as Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
highlighted moments ago. To move from delivering
aid to ending need, we must work with development
partners to address the drivers of vulnerability across
the region. It is also important to recognize that national
authorities in the four countries have been investing in
ensuring greater security for their people, but that they
cannot do it alone. We need to give them our support
and partnership in this effort.

Finally, during my mission, I visited a camp in
Konduga, Nigeria, that hosts some 1,600 displaced
people. During my visit, I met a group of displaced
women and men who had fled from Bama, some 35
kilometres away. As we sat on the ground, Aissa,
Amina, Falmata and Bukar - all of whom had had to
flee Bama - described vividly how venturing outside
the camp to fetch firewood carried the risk of attack
or abduction by Boko Haram, and how they continued
to live in abject fear. They also shared with me their
concerns for their children, who were not getting
enough food and no longer went to school.

These displaced persons who I met, and so
many others affected by this crisis, desperately need
assistance and protection. In the camp, I witnessed not
only human suffering, but also the aspirations of so
many individuals and families to a better future - or
perhaps I should say to be more accurate, a future.
They are looking to the United Nations, to the Security
Council and to all of us for urgently needed help. It is
within our power to be relevant, and to do the right
thing for our fellow human beings who need us most
requires our determination, our decision and the will to
provide- in very real resources - the means. I urge
the Security Council today not to fail the people in and
around the Lake Chad Basin.

