Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): First of all, my
delegation would like to express its profound gratitude
and appreciation to you and to the delegation of the
Russian Federation for convening this important open
meeting of the Security Council in a timely manner.

The humanitarian situation in Iraq remains one of
the most critical problems before the Council and
continues to be a focus of its attention. Consistent and
purposeful efforts undertaken by the Council and the
Office of the Iraq Programme to enhance the
effectiveness of the humanitarian programme have
made it possible to improve the humanitarian situation
in Iraq and to alleviate the critical situation in some
sectors.

As was correctly noted by the Secretary-General
in his report to the Council of 18 May 2001
(S/2001/505):

"Over the past four years, the humanitarian
programme has contributed not only to arresting
the decline in but also to improving the living
conditions of the average Iraqi."

At the same time, the Secretary-General notes
further that "the achievements should not lead us
into a sense of complacency." In this room we have
repeatedly heard the view that the oil-for-food
programme will not lead us to a comprehensive
solution of the humanitarian crisis in Iraq; decisive
measures by the Council are needed based on a
completely new approach to the implementation of the
humanitarian programme.

Just over a month ago, before the end of another
regular phase within the humanitarian programme, the
Council began very important work that, in our view,
has far-reaching consequences and is aimed at
developing new arrangements for its implementation.

In its resolution 1352 (2001) of 1 June, the
Council expressed its intention to consider new
arrangements that would significantly improve the flow
of commodities and products to Iraq and would
facilitate civilian trade and economic cooperation with
Iraq. Today nobody has any doubts that this work
should bring about serious changes in the functioning
of the programme, which in turn should lead to drastic
changes in the humanitarian situation in the country. It
is in the context of these considerations that my
country views the tasks facing the Council with regard
to formulating a draft resolution that would lay the
foundation for the future phases of the humanitarian
programme.

It is exactly from this standpoint, from the
viewpoint of the humanitarian challenges and security
tasks facing the Security Council in Iraq, that we have
been considering the draft resolutions submitted by the
United Kingdom and France and that we will consider
the draft resolution introduced by the Russian
Federation.

We sincerely hope that today's discussion will
help us address the current situation in the most
comprehensive manner and hopefully find ways to
solve the existing problems.

To change the status quo and improve the
humanitarian situation the Council should reconsider
the mechanism currently in place, which regulates the
sale or supply of commodities to Iraq. We believe that
a rule of the type everything is permitted that is not
prohibited is the right approach to the problem, but this
requires that the Council ensure that everything banned
for supply to Iraq is thoroughly itemized and specified.
Only such an approach will allow the Office of the Iraq
Programme and the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission to process
Iraqi contracts more efficiently.

Although we are legitimately concerned over the
possible uncontrolled use of dual-purpose goods,
especially when an effective international monitoring
mechanism in Iraq is not in place, we must,
nevertheless, thoroughly weigh all the possible
consequences of approving a control list of goods to
deal with the contracts put on hold. In his reports the
Secretary-General has repeatedly given examples of
how seriously the practice of putting contracts on hold
affects fulfilment of the tasks within the Iraq
Programme.

If we ignore these concerns, the problem will
relentlessly plague us by reducing to nothing all our
efforts to improve the humanitarian situation in Iraq.
We are convinced that this problem should be taken
into account in the process of adopting the Goods
Review List. The Council should provide for approval
of contracts that include goods from this list as key
elements without which the contract becomes useless.
To this end, it is necessary to put in place United
Nations mechanisms to monitor the end use of these
goods within the limits determined by the contracts.

We also think it necessary to create appropriate
conditions for the economic restoration of the country
that can provide a basis for self-reliant development
and generate additional resources needed primarily to
meet civilian needs of the Iraqi people. In this regard,
we support the provisions that would make it possible
to attract foreign investments, primarily in the oil
sector of the country's economy, and to render various
services in the process of implementing programmes
and projects. Besides, utilization of the so-called "cash
component" in all sectors in Iraq in accordance with
the resolution 1330 (2000) will also contribute to
drastically changing the humanitarian situation and
revitalizing the national economy.

The issue of ensuring Iraq's cooperation in
implementing the decisions taken by the Security
Council is a separate matter. Our delegation has
consistently called upon Iraq to cooperate with the
Council as a precondition that could lead to lifting of
the sanctions. We still maintain that Iraq's compliance
with the provisions of Security Council resolutions,
and in particular resolution 1284 (1999) related to the
establishment of the international inspection
mechanism, could be a concrete step leading to the
lifting of sanctions. At the same time we cannot ignore
concerns expressed by a number of delegations over
the ambiguous character of some provisions of that
resolution. It is obvious that Iraq's cooperation could
be ensured by making its voice and its concerns heard
and taken into account in an impartial manner by the
Council.

We think that a continuation of the dialogue
between the United Nations Secretary-General and Iraq
that began in February 2001 has a special role to play
in this regard.

The fact that we discuss the Iraqi issue in this
format today, together with non-members of the
Council, proves once again that finding a solution to
this problem is not an exclusive prerogative of Council
members. It generates legitimate concerns among
neighbouring States and States that are far from the
region. It is of great importance to take into
consideration the views and concerns of those countries
and to provide for their participation in developing the
Council's new approaches. When doing this, we should
be guided by the principle that cooperation between
those States and Iraq should, by all means, be
preserved.
The Council should have a clear understanding of
the extent to which the measures it is going to
introduce can be implemented. It should also make sure
that those measures represent a step forward and not
lead to another impasse in dealing with the Iraqi issue.
To achieve this, it is important that they be supported
by the countries of the region and should help ensure
Iraq's cooperation in their implementation.

