Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I should like
to join you, Mr. President, in paying tribute to former
President Bourguiba of Tunisia. By attending the funeral
tomorrow, President Chirac will express the sentiments and
solidarity of all of the people of France, who are united
with the people of Tunisia in their grief.

I, too, should like to congratulate Ambassador
Chowdhury, and I should like to welcome you, Mr.
President, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada, to
our Council.

I am grateful to Ambassador Listre for the
information that he has given us, and I should also like to
thank the Secretariat for providing us with a detailed and
comprehensive briefing. The situation in Afghanistan is
still extremely disturbing, whether with regard to the
continuation of fighting, interference with the work of
humanitarian organizations, violations of human rights -
in particular, the situation of women - support for
international terrorism or the increase in the production of
and trafficking in drugs.

In all these areas, the Security Council has already
taken a firm position. It will do so again after this
meeting through a statement by the President. France
fully supports the draft presidential statement to be issued.
Indeed, it is important to make clear that that statement
reflects the unanimity of the membership of the Council.

Unanimously, we recall the principles for a political
settlement in Afghanistan and, in particular, the objective
of attaining a fully representative government, acceptable
to all. Such a consensus among members of the Council
must be highlighted. We hope that the particularly strong
message being sent to the Afghan parties, in particular the
Taliban, will be heard and acted upon.

I should like to make two specific comments. First,
with regard to the military situation, hostilities have
resumed, and members of the Council have already
expressed concern about the offensive launched by the
Taliban at the beginning of March. My delegation is
particularly worried about the involvement of foreign
elements in the fighting that is taking place. The
Secretariat has just stressed the fact that several thousand
foreigners are involved in the military operations, most of
them fighting on the side of the Taliban. My delegation
therefore fully supports the appeal by the Security
Council for a halt to such outside interference.

My second comment relates to the political
prospects. France fully supports the current efforts being
made by the new Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Vendrell, aimed at achieving a
political settlement. I am referring to his participation in
recent meetings organized by the Organization of the
Islamic Conference in Jeddah. Here, I should like to
emphasize that the Rome process, which was launched at
the end of last year with a view to convening a loya
jirgah, or grand assembly, is very important. We believe
that this peace initiative, coming from Afghan civil
society, deserves special attention. The advocates of this
initiative have decided to send delegations to the

 

belligerent parties to encourage them to join in that effort
at reconciliation. We believe that it would be useful for the
Secretariat to consider ways of getting all the Afghan
parties to support that initiative.

