Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
am grateful to you, Mr. President, for having taken
the initiative to organize this briefing. Luxembourg
shares Australia's view of the importance of a proper
implementation of the sanctions imposed by the
Security Council. That is even more important now, as
the number of sanctions regimes has never been higher.
We hope that a draft resolution that will allow us to
strengthen and better coordinate the United Nations
system's capacity to implement the sanctions regimes
will be adopted as soon as possible.

I would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, and
the Secretary General of the International Criminal
Police Organization (INTERPOL), Mr. Jurgen Stock,
for their very informative briefings and their concrete
recommendations.

Luxembourg has actively participated in the work
of the high-level review of the sanctions imposed by the
United Nations, and we await the final document of that
process with interest. We thank Australia in particular
for having chaired the working group on integration
and coordination within the United Nations system.

As Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006) concerning the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, I fully agree with the
objective of achieving better coordination within the
Secretariat and better awareness among Member States.
This is not about affecting the primacy of the Security
Council or constraining the sanctions committees, but
about streamlining their work, making the support
to Committees more effective and improving the
implementation of the measures imposed by the
Council. The efforts of the Department of Political
Affairs, especially the Security Council Affairs
Division, to that end are commendable.

To move forward, we support the idea of
establishing a coordination and policy unit within
the Security Council Affairs Division. The unit
would be responsible for identifying good practices
and facilitating exchanges of such practices among
the various sanctions committees, managing the
roster of experts and the consolidated sanctions list,
and identifying and mobilizing within the United
Nations system the expertise required for the effective
implementation of sanctions. The unit could also
support the Security Council's efforts and those of its
subsidiary bodies aimed at providing practical guidance
to Member States, building their capacity and providing
them with technical assistance for the implementation
of sanctions.

We commend the work done by the Secretariat to
standardize the format of all United Nations sanctions
lists and establish a consolidated list of Security
Council sanctions in all the official languages of
the Organization, to facilitate their implementation
by Member States. To go further, each committee
should be responsible for maintaining and publishing
a document that consolidates all existing measures for
the regime being applied. That would further enhance
the readability of sanctions for Member States and
private sector actors.

The assistance of panels of experts is essential to
allowing sanctions committees to fully discharge the
mandates entrusted to them by our Council. All panels
of experts must receive the administrative and technical
support needed to do their jobs. Similarly, Member
States and all stakeholders should be encouraged to
cooperate fully with the panels of experts, including
by providing them with any information they have
about possible violations of sanctions. This cooperation
is essential to ensuring the safety of experts and
unhindered access for them, particularly the access to
persons, documents and sites necessary to successfully
carry out their mandate.

We also believe that the Council and its
sanctions committees could benefit from increased
interaction with the relevant international and
regional organizations. I will cite as one example the
cooperation between INTERPOL and several sanctions
committees concerning the publication of Special
Notices. Secretary General Stock has just described the
scope of those notices. Luxembourg supports that tool
for disseminating information that educates Member
States on their obligations under the sanctions regimes.
In the spirit of enhancing the coherence of the work
of the various sanctions committees, we hope that all
committees will be able to cooperate with INTERPOL
in the future.

In its resolutions establishing sanctions on Iran
and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the
Security Council has recognized the value of standards
and further guidance from the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF) for the implementation of financial
sanctions. The FATF recommendations provide useful
guidance to Member States on the requirements they
must meet in order to effectively implement these
restrictive measures. The FATF guidelines also provide
particularly useful guidance to banks and other
financial institutions, which are on the front lines,
so to speak, in terms of sanctions implementation. In
our view, it is also essential that, in its management
of sanctions regimes, the Security Council take into
account its cooperation with the International Criminal
Court (ICC). A practical way to do this would be to
include individuals subject to an arrest warrant from
the ICC on the lists of relevant sanctions committee of
the Security Council.

Let me conclude my remarks by turning to a matter
that quite rightly figures in the concept note (S/2014/793, annex) that you circulated, Sir, prior to this meeting. I
am talking about the reconciliation of sanctions with
the principles of the rule of law, in particular respect for
due process and for human rights. Targeted sanctions
are an important tool of the Security Council. They
are intended to apply restrictive measures against
individuals or entities that contribute to threats against
international peace and security. But if sanctions are to
be effective, the processes of listing and delisting must
be guided by the principles of fairness, respect for the
rule of law, credibility and transparency.

The establishment and strengthening of the tools of
the Ombudsperson for the Al-Qaida sanctions regime
helped to affirm these principles. As an independent
and effective sanctions review mechanism, the Office
of the Ombudsperson plays an indispensable role to
ensure the accuracy and legitimacy of the sanctions
list. At present, only individuals and entities on the
list of sanctions against Al-Qaida have access to the
Ombudsperson. Yet individuals and entities covered by
other sanctions committees should also be entitled to
fair process. That is why I would like to reaffirm the
conviction of Luxembourg that the Security Council
should expand the mandate of the Ombudsperson to
cover the other sanctions regimes.

