Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish at the outset to thank you, Sir, for having
convened this open debate as part of the intensified
programme of the Japanese presidency of the Security
Council for this month, especially in the light of the
current delicate situation in the Middle East. I wish
also to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his comprehensive
briefing on recent developments in the region.

It is only natural that we support the statements
made by the representative of Kuwait on behalf of the
Group of Arab States, by the representative of Syria on
behalf of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
and by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. Nonetheless, I wish to make
a number of points in my national capacity.

Let me begin by saying that no neutral observer
of recent developments in the Middle East could fail to
notice the stark contrast between the international
community's tireless, constant efforts and initiatives,
on the one hand, and the unfortunate facts on the
ground, on the other. Every time there are prospects on
the horizon for the peace process to move forward, the
Israeli party takes opposing measures in order to block
and stifle those positive efforts to resume the
negotiating process in their infancy. The international
community has repeatedly taken note of the very grave
decisions taken by Israel over the past two months. In
addition, however, only a few days after the decision
taken by the ministerial-level Arab Peace Initiative
Committee at the beginning of March, and despite all
attempts and measures to counter this, Israel
announced its immoral and illegal decision to construct
1,600 additional housing units in East Jerusalem.
10-31422

Following that, the most recent Arab summit,
held in early April in the Libyan Arab J amahiriya, took
several important decisions, including a reaffirmation
that negotiation remains a strategic option for the Arab
side to regain usurped rights and consequently to
achieve the just and comprehensive peace desired by
all. But instead of responding positively, the Israeli
side chose a policy of escalation and took an extremely
grave decision last week, declaring its intention to
deport tens of thousands of Palestinians from the West
Bank, thus labelling them foreigners in their own land
and declaring their presence there illegitimate.

However, however grave they are, these decisions
are further links in a long chain of procrastination on
these issues. This can only lead to further deterioration
of the situation and to the further strengthening of
extremism and violent fundamentalism, thus hindering
dialogue and weakening the prospect of peace that
would enable the Palestinians to regain their legitimate
rights under the aegis of the international community
and within the framework of international legitimacy.
It is evident that the recent decisions taken by Israel
were only meant to stall negotiations and vitiate the
process, particularly because those who wish to see the
negotiations succeed and an independent State
established on the Palestinians' own land will be
deported from that land.

Based on our responsibility under the leadership
of His Majesty the King of Morocco as Chair of the
Al-Quds Committee, we reiterate our serious concern
over the grave decisions that the Israeli authorities
continue to take in East Jerusalem. In this regard, we
are also following with grave concern the escalation of
the illegitimate settler policies in the occupied
Palestinian territories in general and in East Jerusalem
in particular, in an attempt to change the demographic
composition of the city, to create a new fait accompli
and to reduce the contiguous Arab presence as much as
possible. This in turn undermines the possibility of
establishing a viable Palestinian State.

In its insistence on these unilateral actions, Israel
has continued its rejected campaign against Islamic
holy sites, targeting the Al-Aqsa mosque by covering
up provocative actions by Israeli extremists to prevent
people from safely reaching houses of prayer, and by
its ongoing excavations and tunnelling under and
around the Al-Aqsa mosque.
10-31422

In this context, my delegation has previously
expressed its total rejection of the recent decision to
place Islamic sites in Hebron and Bethlehem on the list
of Israeli heritage sites, which is a direct provocation
to the feelings of hundreds of millions of Muslims and
of all those who advocate peace and coexistence in the
holy city. Considering the central position of Jerusalem
in the Middle East crisis and its symbolic value to all
religions, we appeal to the international community,
and especially the Security Council, to shoulder their
responsibility and translate their words into action to
put an end to these practices, in order to pave the way
to meaningful and firm negotiations.

The international community's awareness of the
gravity of the recent developments in the occupied
Palestinian territories and the resulting consequences
for international peace and security should be
accompanied by firmer and more effective positions
that guarantee the minimum necessary for a relaunch of
genuine negotiations that preserve the vital mutual
interest of all peoples of the region to live in an
environment of peace, security and cooperation.

In order to attain this objective, the Kingdom of
Morocco will continue to carry out its best efforts
within the framework of the Arab Peace Initiative
Committee, with a view to achieving a comprehensive
and lasting solution through negotiations on final status
issues, particularly with regard to Jerusalem,
considering its importance and status. However, such a
just and comprehensive solution can come about only
with Israel's withdrawal from all occupied Arab
territories, including the Syrian Golan and the occupied
Lebanese territories, and with the establishment of a
viable and independent Palestinian State with
Jerusalem as its capital.

We continue to follow with great interest the
intensified efforts of the United States and the Quartet,
and we take note of the obstacles on the path of the
negotiating process. We also value other international
efforts, including those of the European Union, and
hope that they will lead to the launch of new, serious
and genuine negotiations, based on relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, the Madrid
terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Road Map, which all have the blessing of the
international community.
