Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I wish to express our gratitude to the three
briefers for their enlightening briefings and for their
ongoing commitment to peace in South Sudan.

I would like to focus on three main points: the peace
process, the humanitarian situation and the Regional
Protection Force of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS). My first point is that we must
give the peace process a full chance.

The signing on 12 September of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan presents a historic opportunity
to emerge from the conflict. That opportunity must
not be missed. The current pre-transitional phase is a
moment that is crucial to the success of the Revitalized
Agreement. The pre-transitional structures have
begun to meet, which is a step in the right direction.
The ceasefire is generally being respected, which is
encouraging.

But I want to be very clear - the hardest part of the

process still lies ahead. The pre-transitional institutions
must become fully operational in order to ensure the
success of the pre-transitional phase and the formation
of the new unitary Government. Those institutions must,
during the transition phase, set security arrangements,
which include the cantonment of armed groups and the
training of the joint security force. Further anticipated
efforts include concrete progress on the drafting of a
transitional constitution and the redrawing of internal
borders. France encourages the parties to address all of
those issues head-on and to seek political agreement on
them. The ongoing suffering of people underlines the
urgent need to move forward in the peace process.

That brings me to my second point, concerning our
outrage at the suffering of the peoples of South Sudan,
especially the women. The humanitarian situation in
South Sudan remains unbearable. The figures speak for
themselves - 2 million people have been displaced,
7 million people in South Sudan require humanitarian
assistance and nearly half of the population suffers
from severe malnutrition. South Sudan is now the
most dangerous country for humanitarian workers.
That seriously hinders the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. We must therefore do everything we can to
protect humanitarian workers, who continue to be the
target of attacks, and we must continue our efforts to
ensure that those heinous crimes do not go unpunished.
It is also essential that we ensure safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access throughout the country so that we
can meet the extensive needs of the population. The
efforts of UNMISS to protect humanitarian convoys
are crucial in that regard. The Council can count on
France's constant commitment to those issues.

The level of sexual violence that Ms. Patten has
described is also deeply appalling. The mass rapes
that took place in Bentiu at the end of November are
atrocious, and those despicable crimes must not go
unpunished. Following the Council's press statement
of 7 December (SC/13611), France condemns in the
strongest terms the use of sexual Violence against
civilians, which can constitute a war crime, especially
when it used as a tactic of war. My delegation calls
once again on the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan to fully
mobilize itself against those who commit and sponsor
sexual violence. South Sudan must take all necessary
measures to ensure that the crimes committed do not go
unpunished. That is essential if we are to put an end to
the cycle of Violence and counter-Violence, and it is key
to any national reconciliation process. In that regard,
the establishment and operationalization of a hybrid
court for South Sudan must remain a priority.

My third point concerns the Regional Protection
Force. I would like once again to commend the valuable
contribution that the region - in particular the Sudan
and Uganda - has made to the peace process in South
Sudan. The Revitalized Agreement would not have
been possible without the investment and commitment
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD). We understand that the IGAD countries want
to participate in the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement by deploying troops to the UNMISS
Regional Protection Force, but we must recognize that
the safe return of opposition leaders and the cantonment
of armed groups can be ensured only through a political
agreement. The deployment of additional troops to the
UNMISS Regional Protection Force cannot compensate
for the lack of political agreement on those issues.
We must also ensure that we maintain a single chain
of command within UNMISS and that the Regional
Protection Force is part of that chain of command.
Finally, the rules and requirements - particularly those
relating to capacity, training, the prevention of sexual
violence, the provision of care for victims of sexual
violence and the respect for human rights - must apply
to the troops deployed in the Regional Protection Force.

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to the
women and men who have been deployed in UNMISS
for their important work, particularly in the area of
civilian protection.

