Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over the
Security Council during the current month. We are
confident that your skills and experience will ensure a
successful stewardship. We wish also to thank your
predecessor, Stefan Tafrov of Bulgaria, for his able
leadership of the Council last month.

The Security Council is debating today the
current situation between Iraq and the United Nations
against the sombre backdrop of ominous precursors of
an imminent war in one of the most sensitive and
strategic regions of the world, which would have a
direct impact on the crucial lifelines of the world
economy and subsequently on global stability.

The debate has taken on even greater significance
in view of the complex and difficult situation of the
international community as it endeavours to channel
substantial energies and resources to the combat
against terrorism and to identify its underlying causes,
uproot it and resolve any problems that might be
perceived as justifications or pretexts for the
commission of such heinous crimes.

In the face of this common threat, the world must
be united in its goals, in shouldering its responsibilities
and in taking action. This should be done only within
the framework of the United Nations system, because
unilateral actions taken as a result of being in a
position of power could prove, down the road, as
ineffective as a reluctance to pitch in due to weakness.
Truly effective and meaningful action should therefore
be driven by a sense of our common destiny in the face
of a threat that is blind to nationality, religion, race and
culture.

This, perhaps, explains the overwhelming
international support for the statement made by the
Secretary-General when on 12 September last he
introduced his annual report on the work of the
Organization at the beginning of the General
Assembly's general debate. In that introduction, he
stressed the need to strengthen collective action to
ensure respect for international law and to abide by the
legality of the United Nations in confronting any threat
to international peace and security.

The President of the United States of America,
speaking on the same day and from the same rostrum,
stated that the United Nations should take on that
obligation. That position can be considered as an
endorsement of joint international action within the
framework of the United Nations, which must
characterize any approach to issues relating to
international peace and security.

Kuwait feels very strongly that any action taken
must be taken within the United Nations legal
framework. Without such a framework, Kuwait would
probably not have been liberated from Iraqi occupation
early in 1991. Furthermore, the issues that emerged as
a result of that occupation, and which are still
unresolved with regard to Iraq, would not have
assumed such great international significance.

In this respect, my delegation supports the
convening of this open debate in the Security Council.
Indeed, we consider it as further evidence that the
current situation with regard to Iraq must be resolved
between Iraq and the United Nations, not between Iraq
and any particular country or group of countries.

Over the past few months the Security Council
has been involved in intensive efforts to find a peaceful
solution to the current crisis, which arose as a result of
the rejection by Iraq of resolution 1284 (1999) by
blocking the return of United Nations weapons
inspectors to Iraq. That position prompted the
international community to insist that the United
Nations continue to play its essential role and that the
Security Council's credibility be reaffirmed through the
implementation of its relevant resolutions, as required
by the Charter.

Kuwait hopes that the current international
momentum can be maintained so as to ensure that Iraq
fully implements all relevant resolutions. The unity of
the Security Council is essential; without it, the
message from the Council will not reach Iraq with full
force and the Council will not achieve its true
objective- full compliance with the relevant
resolutions. Only such compliance will ensure peace
and security throughout the region and allow the dark
clouds of war that are looming on the horizon to
dissipate.

I would like to sum up the position of the State of
Kuwait regarding the current situation. First, we
welcome the steps taken by the Iraqi Government to
readmit United Nations weapons inspectors without
restrictions or conditions. My Government considers
that to be a move in the right direction.

Second, we consider that full compliance by the
Government of Iraq with all the operational
procedures, rules, controls and requirements set out by
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission to ensure an effective and
fruitful inspection process within the time frame that
has been set out to be the only yardstick for evaluating
Iraq's seriousness and credibility with regard to the
unconditional and unfettered readmission of the
inspectors.

Third, ever since the early clouds of war began to
gather as a result of Iraq's persistent rejection of the
return of inspectors, Kuwait has declared that it was
not in favour of the use of military force against Iraq
because we feared serious negative consequences that
would exacerbate the suffering and hardship of the
brotherly people of Iraq, who have already endured so
much.

We in Kuwait are very sensitive to the suffering
of the Iraqi people. That is why we have called on the
Government of Iraq time and again to save the people
of Iraq from their grave situation by fully
implementing all relevant Security Council resolutions
without selectivity or procrastination, and by putting
the welfare of the people ahead of all other narrow
interests.

Fourth, force must be used only as a last resort
after all other available means have been exhausted,
and must be within the United Nations legal
framework. The Kuwaiti position is completely in line
with those of the Gulf Cooperation Council, the Arab
Summit that took place at Beirut last March and the
ministerial meeting of the League of Arab States, held
at Cairo last September. All of those forums rejected
the use of military force outside the United Nations
framework against any Arab State, especially Iraq, as
well as any measures that might jeopardize Iraq's
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Fifth, Kuwait maintains that the Secretary-
General's 1998 concept of diplomacy backed by force
aimed at ensuring the necessary compliance with
Security Council resolutions has been shown to be
valid once again in the context of seeking a peaceful
solution to the Iraqi question.

Ongoing efforts to ensure compliance by Iraq
with the provisions of relevant Security Council
resolutions relating to Iraq should not be confined to
the question of the return of inspectors to Iraq and the
elimination of weapons of mass destruction. Despite
the paramount importance of that matter, it is still only
one of the major obligations that Iraq must fulfil. Iraq
has other key obligations, including some that relate
directly to my country, Kuwait, most importantly the
question of Kuwaiti prisoners of war and third country
nationals held in Iraq. Those obligations are set forth in
Security Council resolutions 686 (1991), 687 (1991)
and 1284 (1999), all of which require Iraq to cooperate
fully with the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) in order to ensure a speedy resolution of
the matter.

Regrettably, since 1998 the Iraqi Government has
been boycotting the meetings of the Tripartite
Commission, chaired by the ICRC and charged with
accounting for those innocent victims. All of the
worthy efforts of the Secretary-General and his High-
Level Coordinator on this issue, Ambassador Yuli
Vorontsov, as well as the repeated calls made by the
Council after every four-month periodic review of the
Coordinator's reports, have thus far been in vain.

Here, I would like to emphasize that no one else
can comprehend the intransigence of the Iraqi position
regarding this purely humanitarian issue, which should
not have been allowed to drag on for the past 12 years.

The Government of Iraq has been attempting to
justify its non-participation in the Tripartite
Commission, despite the fact that Iraq was one of the
States signatories to the Riyadh Agreement of 1991,
and despite the fact that such participation was set forth
as a specific obligation in section B of resolution 1284
(1999). Iraq's argument for refusing to sit down with
the representatives of the United States and the United
Kingdom is that those two countries launched military
attacks against it in 1998 and that there are no dossiers
on any nationals from those two States.

Following Iraq's acceptance of the unconditional
and unrestricted return of inspectors, my delegation
wonders how Iraq can seek to bar individuals of any
nationality from participating in the inspection teams.
Would the Council permit such exclusions? I am
confident that the Council will not condone such a
position. Also, I am sure that the Government of Iraq
will not make such a request. Following that line of
reasoning, how could the Government of Iraq refuse to
cooperate with the Tripartite Commission because of
the involvement of nationals from certain States, while
allowing those same States to participate in the
inspection operations?

Regarding the argument that there are no dossiers
on nationals from either the United Kingdom or the
United States, I wonder how Iraq can accept inspectors
of all nationalities, individuals who have the required
technical qualifications and experience in the area of
weapons of mass destruction, while the same criteria of
technical qualifications and knowledge of the military
operations to liberate Kuwait are not applied in the
case of the missing persons issue. Both United States
and United Kingdom forces were major parties in the
war to liberate Kuwait. Therefore, those two countries
are quite familiar with all the events during that
difficult period. In fact, that is all the more reason why
those two countries should participate in the meetings
of the Tripartite Commission.

We demand that Iraq respond with regard to this
issue in order to resolve it once and for all. We expect
Iraq to give concrete demonstration of the good
intentions it expressed at the Beirut Arab Summit when
it pledged to find a quick and definitive solution to the
question of Kuwaiti and third country prisoners and
hostages. To that end, we are awaiting Iraq's
participation in the coming meetings of the Tripartite
Commission on 24 October in Geneva under the
chairmanship of the International Committee of the
Red Cross. Iraq must abandon its worn-out pretexts and
justifications, which are totally unacceptable in form
and content.

The question of Kuwaiti and third country
detainees in Iraq is not a bilateral issue between
Kuwait and Iraq. Nor is the issue suited to be
considered by a regional organization, as the
Government of Iraq currently seeks to have done.
Rather it is an issue of international commitment, as
stressed in a number of Security Council resolutions.
The Council has been seized of this matter from the
very beginning and has been holding consultations on
the issue once every four months. Kuwait takes this
opportunity to call on the international community and
the Council to maintain pressure on Iraq to persuade it
that its cooperation in resolving this issue should arise
from explicit political will and not from a sense of fear
that will dissipate as soon as threats of the use of force
are dropped.

I request that the Council ensure that the question
of Kuwaiti and third country prisoners held in Iraq be a
key element in any Council resolution adopted on the
current situation between Iraq and the United Nations.
Indeed, this is the most propitious time to break the
deadlock on this humanitarian question. The Security
Council and the United Nations system cannot be true
to themselves unless they honour their commitments,
demonstrate respect for human rights and address
human suffering effectively. In that context, we expect
the Council to give as much attention to the suffering
endured by the people of Kuwait since 1990 as it
devotes to saving the region from the evils and horrors
of weapons of mass destruction. For, in the end, all
efforts of the United Nations system, and the Council
in particular, aim at protecting human life, human
dignity, families and communities. That function
constitutes the first step towards global security and
stability.

In closing, let me reiterate Kuwait's clear
position. We invite the Government of Iraq to heed the
appeals of the international community and all nations
in our area, especially those in the Gulf region, and to
make every possible effort in a spirit of sincerity to
comply with all relevant Security Council resolutions.
Furthermore, Iraq should strictly abide by the will of
the international community, represented by the
Council, in order to avoid a war and its consequences
and the additional suffering that it will cause the
brotherly people of Iraq. Such a war will certainly
affect all citizens of the region, who aspire to live in
peace and tranquillity and to devote all their energy
towards meeting economic, social and cultural
challenges.

All of us should live up to our responsibilities and
acquire wisdom and far-sightedness. God entrusted us
with the present and all its potential in order to build
the future with all its requirements. Without peace, we
shall not be able to use the present for our own sake,
nor can we ensure the future for our children.

