Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to commend Italy for its
ongoing commitment to the issue of the protection of
endangered cultural heritage. France and Italy have
always shared the objective of protecting the heritage
of humankind. That objective is deeply rooted in our
common DNA and that is what led us in March to work
together to draft resolution 2347 (2017), which was
one of the deliverables of the International Conference
on Safeguarding Cultural Heritage in Conflict Areas,
held in Abu Dhabi. As others have said, it is the first
resolution entirely devoted to the protection of heritage
in situations of conflict and that, for the first time,
covers all threats to heritage, whether or not they are
posed by terrorist groups.

Allow me also to warmly welcome Ms. Audrey
Azoulay and welcome her to the United Nations for
her first briefing to the Security Council as Director-
General of UNESCO, which was especially important
and elucidating. I wish her every success in her new
duties. I would also like to thank Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General and head of
the Office of Counter-Terrorism; Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime; Mr. Jurgen Stock, Secretary
General of INTERPOL; and Mr. Alessandro Bianchi,
Project Leader for Cultural Heritage Protection in
the Italian Ministry of Culture, for their particularly
useful briefings.

For France, as for the United Nations, the question
of the protection of cultural heritage, given its essential
and existential dimension, is and will continue to
be a top priority. I will confine my remarks to three
main points.

First, I would like to make an observation. Despite
our efforts, cultural heritage remains highly threatened
today, particularly in situations of armed conflict.
Bamiyan, Timbuktu, Palmyra, Nineveh, Mosul and
Erbil - there is, alas, no shortage of examples of
the destruction of cultural heritage by armed groups
or terrorist groups. Beyond the issue of civilization,
heritage protection is also a security issue because illicit
trafficking in looted cultural goods finances terrorist
networks and is a factor in the development of armed
conflicts. Armed groups and terrorist organizations are
strengthened by the revenue derived from trafficking
in antiquities. Stolen cultural property from war-
torn countries in turn serves to fuel conflicts. That
is why France has supported the possibility of some
peacekeeping operations providing assistance to the
authorities of the concerned countries in the protection
of cultural and historical sites.

As was recalled by the Director-General of
UNESCO, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali is already
working closely with UNESCO to support the Malian
authorities in protecting and valorizing the richness
of their tangible and intangible cultural heritage.
Resolution 2347 (2017) paves the way for the possible
inclusion in the mandate of other peacekeeping
operations, at the request of the Security Council,
the provision of such support to the authorities of the
countries concerned. In that spirit, it is imperative
that the international community as a whole remain
fully mobilized.

Secondly, I will address France's commitment.
At the European level, France has worked hard to
propose the new community instrument dedicated to
controlling the import of cultural goods, the text of
which is currently being discussed in Brussels. At the
national level, France is implementing many measures
that are in line with the objectives of resolution 2347
(2017). I will not enumerate them all, but emphasize
two particular concrete measures.

The first measure is the strengthening of French
legislation to combat illicit trafficking in cultural
property. For example, the law of3 June 2016 on the fight
against organized crime, terrorism and their financing
creates a new criminal offense aimed at punishing the
intentional participation in the trafficking of cultural
property from areas where terrorist organizations are
established. Those provisions are supplemented and
reinforced by the law of 7 July 2016, sponsored by
the Ministry of Culture, which notably provides for
the introduction of customs control over the import of
cultural goods. The second example is the cooperation
of the French police services, in particular the central
office to combat trafficking in cultural property,
with INTERPOL through information-sharing
exchanges, particularly in the context of investigations,
thanks to the organization's integrated and secure
communication system.

At the international level, France and the United
Arab Emirates took the initiative of convening an
international conference in Abu Dhabi in late 2016, at
which we brought together States, public institutions,
private partners, scientists and major non- governmental
organizations to create an international alliance to
protect endangered cultural heritage. The Abu Dhabi
conference, as Ms. Azoulay recalled, launched two
unprecedent initiatives. The first is the creation
of a network of safe havens to house endangered
cultural property and the second is the creation of the
International Alliance for the Protection of Cultural
Heritage in Conflict Areas (ALIPH). France has
contributed the first part of its pledge, and the work on
the Board of Trustees has started. UNESCO will also
sit as a non-voting member of ALIPH.

All these initiatives are complementary to the
UNESCO strategy to strengthen its action in the field
of cultural heritage protection and the promotion of
cultural diversity in armed conflict, and are in line
with existing international conventions. France is
also pursuing its cooperation with UNESCO through
a number of actions at the regional level, particularly
with regard to countries whose heritage is under
threat, particularly through the training of heritage
professionals, police and customs administrators.

Finally, and this will be my last remark, I want
to stress the key role the United Nations plays in the
protection of endangered cultural heritage. Resolution
2347 (2017) is a historic step forward in our common
struggle to protect endangered heritage. In that
connection, I would like to commend the role played by
Ms. Audrey Azoulay. The resolution urged States and
the United Nations system to redouble their efforts and
ensure their consistency.

I commend the essential role played by UNESCO
in the protection of heritage and the promotion of
cultural diversity as an instrument of peace and a
moral conscience of humankind, and recall that culture
connects men and women to their history and their land
and weaves the fabric of their future community. Thanks
to UNESCO, States have committed themselves to this
by adopting major conventions on the preservation of
our common heritage. The mandate of this institution
is more relevant than ever in a world where the values
it has embodied since its establishment are being called
into question.

In addition to welcoming the recognition in
resolution 2347 (2017) of the need to prosecute those
responsible for war crimes against cultural heritage,
France hails the recent strengthening of the partnership
between UNESCO and the International Criminal
Court. It is a very positive development and it sends
a strong message to armed and terrorist groups who
are threatening cultural heritage. Moreover, its just
confirms the recent work of the Court on this subject,
in cooperation with UNESCO and France in particular.

I would also like to pay tribute to the work of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and INTERPOL, which
both play a crucial role in the prevention of the trafficking
of cultural property by raising States' awareness of
these still largely unknown problems through technical
assistance or legal and police cooperation.
Lastly, the team of experts of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities is also conducting
outstanding analytical work on the use of trafficking
in cultural goods by terrorist groups. It is essential that
the Security Council continue to support and rely on
their expertise.

Each of these organizations and entities has a vital
role to play. Resolution 2347 (2017) invites them and
Member States to better coordinate their work and
to ensure consistency in their approaches. It is our
collective responsibility to preserve international peace
and security and to prevent the destruction of cultural
heritage by murderous attempts to deny history and
prevent its use to finance terrorism and fuel conflicts.
France will continue to play its part in these efforts and
hopes that the Security Council remains fully engaged
on this crucial issue.

