Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno for his briefing. Costa Rica
welcomes the improvement in the state of health of
President Ramos-Horta, a Nobel Peace Prize winner, as
was the President of Costa Rica, a situation that was
made possible by the very close friendship between
them. We hope that he will be able very soon to return
to his work in furthering the peace, stability and
development of the Timorese people.

We believe that no signs of fanaticism or violence
will stand in the way of Timor-Leste as it takes its first
steps on the path of independence. The international
community should provide the necessary support so
that that can be reality. For this reason, this debate is
particularly important because it provides us with an
opportunity not only to assess the situation in Timor-
Leste, but also and especially to consider the role that
is being played and should be played by the United
Nations in assisting the people and the Government of
Timor-Leste.

On the subject of national reconciliation and
democracy, the extent of the political differences
between the leaders of Timor-Leste regarding the
measures necessary to settle critical issues that the
country is facing continues to be considerable.
Nonetheless, the attitude that has been assumed by the
Revolutionary Front for an Independent East Timor
(FRETILIN) following the recent attacks must be
recognized as a sign of political and democratic
maturity.

We should channel all available energy and
resources to take advantage of the moment of political
lucidity that has been sparked by the gunshots. The
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) should promote, with renewed
determination, reconciliation and democratic
participation.
On the subject of justice, human rights and the
rule of law, the sustainability of any political
understanding depends to a large extent on the
effective participation of all sectors, including, in the
case of Timor-Leste, the so-called petitioners.
However, that cannot occur in a situation of impunity,
hence the special importance of implementing the
recommendations of the United Nations Independent
Special Commission of Inquiry.

The indivisibility and interdependence of human
rights, including the virtues of the rule of law, may
become mere empty words when some 40 per cent of
the population live in poverty and unemployment and a
further 10 per cent have been displaced by the internal
violence. That is why the support provided by the
international community in general and UNMIT in
particular is of such importance. It is not a matter of
creating a dependence on the international system; it is
a matter of generating national capacity. The Council
should reconsider whether the mandate and resources
of UNMIT are sufficient to facilitate and promote such
capacity-building.

Regarding peacebuilding and development, the
absence of Alfredo Reinado could either provide an
opportunity or constitute a threat in terms of the
peacebuilding process. Taking advantage of the
window of opportunity that has been opened by the
attacks is the main challenge facing the Timorese
authorities and UNMIT. Peace, justice and
development, promoted in a parallel - and not
successive - manner, are the keys to success.

In that regard, we recall that, a few weeks ago,
the Government of Timor-Leste expressed its belief
that an UNMIT presence would be needed for a further
five years, years that should be devoted in particular to
promoting stability and strengthening security, leading
up to the deployment of a mission with a peacebuilding
mandate for approximately three more years. Costa
Rica considers it proper that the Council consider that
request, once agreements have been reached regarding
the current renewal of the UNMIT mandate. We would
like the Council to conduct an analysis of the situation
that goes beyond the 12-month period for which the
mandate's extension is currently being considered. To
that end, the Secretary-General should provide an
exhaustive report, including options for a successful
exit strategy.

Security sector reform, economic development
and democracy-building in Timor-Leste will take place
only insofar as sufficient guarantees are provided for
stability and security. Therefore, flexible and effective

security sector reform should continue to be a priority
for the Council. Strengthening the police and
institutions that contribute to administrating justice are
essential requirements.

The stability that has prevailed in Timor-Leste
following the attacks against its democratic institutions
and against the life of President J 056 Ramos-Horta and
Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao are clear signs of the
progress that has already been achieved in this area and
of the effectiveness of the United Nations police, in
conjunction with the International Stabilization Force.
We are grateful to them, and to Australia in particular.
However, with a continuous view to building capacity
rather than generating dependence, we would like to
emphasize the need to expedite the training process
and to hand over full responsibility to the Timor-Leste
police.

Allow me to conclude, Mr. President, with some
thoughts that I am sure that your country, Panama, will
share with me, since our two countries are the two
members of this Council that do not have a standing
military institution. All too often, the hopes and dreams
of many generations of men and women all over the
world have been sacrificed on the basis of a misguided
concept of national security. Costa Rica wonders
whether the huge challenges to be overcome by Timor-
Leste on the path to building a dynamic and prosperous
democracy will be overcome or reinforced with the
proposed security sector reform, which includes a
national army as a standing institution.

Since the end of the 19905, Indonesia has been
committed to the concept of a sovereign Timor-Leste,
with the support of the entire international community.
Costa Rica wonders whether we can truly justify the
need for a military focus for the security of Timor-
Leste. Are the security challenges faced by the people
of Timor-Leste of an internal or external nature? What
is the most effective and efficient way of dealing with
them? How best can we contribute to peace and
stability in the region?

Like Timor-Leste, Costa Rica is a small country,
and we have decided that our security will not depend
on military strength, which would be small in any case,
given our economic limitations. Rather, we chose to
focus on building democracy and improving the quality
of life of our people and promoting respect for the rule
of law and human rights. We feel that that is a wise
option that Timor-Leste might consider following, and
we respectfully encourage the Council to consider that
alternative.

