Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like to begin
by welcoming Mr. Inzko back to the Security Council
and by thanking him for his report (S/2016/911, annex)
and for his briefingjust now. As High Representative, he
has the United Kingdom's full and continuous support
in his efforts to help Bosnian authorities overcome the
challenges that they face.

As penholder for the Western Balkans this
month, the United Kingdom warmly welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2315 (2016) today.
The deterrence and security provided by the European
Union-led stabilization force (EUFOR ALTHEA) are
fundamental during this period of reform in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The united show of support for the continuation
of the Mission is a clear message to the people and
the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina relaying the
Council's commitment to the country's stability,
security and territorial integrity. Such a message comes
at an important time. The past 12 months have been
eventful, both for reform and the country's future in
the European Union and for political upheaval, the
persistence of divisive rhetoric and, sadly, challenges to
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

That was most clearly seen in the decision by the
Republika Srpska authorities to hold a referendum
in September, in clear Violation of the ruling of the
Constitutional Court. At heart, that decision was not
about a national day. It was instead a direct challenge
to an integral part of the Framework Agreement. As
set out in annex 4, the Constitutional Court is vital to
the Agreement's implementation, and, as also set out
in annex 4, the Court's decisions are final and binding.
Therefore, when a decision is ignored, the legitimacy of
the Dayton institutions is threatened. Such attacks are
unacceptable and destabilizing, and I strongly condemn
them in this Chamber today.

However, it is important to note that the challenge
posed by the referendum went far beyond what is set
out in the Framework Agreement. It evoked dark and
divisive sentiments that have not been seen or heard
for many years, but that are clearly still lingering just
below the surface. It evoked words of war, hatred and
division that have no place in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I therefore call on political leaders of all sides and on
all parties to refrain from such divisive nationalist
rhetoric. It only distracts from the real issues, where
progress is so desperately needed.

Take Mostar, for example: for over eight years the
people of that town have been unable to elect their own
representatives. Instead, they have existed in a frozen
stalemate where progress has been held hostage by
division. Let us call on all the relevant parties to reach an
agreement to allow elections to be held. I also hope that
the authorities can quickly resolve the issues in Stolac,
so as to allow the failed elections there to take place as
soon as possible. Elsewhere, we hope that, following
the election in Srebrenica, the new mayor will work
for the benefit of all communities. It is crucial to see a
renewed focus on reconciliation and the local economy,
so that all citizens see a future in that municipality. For
all the challenges of the past 12 months, the leaders of
the country have also made reforms aimed at moving
away from the rhetoric and the division. In February,
Bosnia and Herzegovina applied formally to join the
European Union, and in September we saw all 28
European Union Foreign Ministers agreeing to task the

Commission to review that membership application.
Those are significant steps forward.

We should all welcome the progress made on the
reform agenda. It shows what Bosnian leaders can do
when they work together. Let us all encourage Bosnia
and Herzegovina's leadership to continue making
progress on that agenda, so that all of their citizens can
benefit from the prosperity and security afforded by
Euro-Atlantic integration. In that effort, they will have
no stronger supporter than the United Kingdom.
However, in order to make progress, further
efforts are required with regard to registering defence
property, which is needed for the activation of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization Membership Action Plan
and for progress on the 5+2 agenda. Nevertheless,
until those efforts bear fruit, we remain committed
to the continuing role of the High Representative and
his Office.

Mr. Inzko continues to have our full support as
the final authority in-theatre regarding the civilian
implementation of the General Framework Agreement,
which includes supporting the use of his Bonn powers,
if the situation requires. That is because as High
Representative, together with EUFOR ALTHEA, he
has a vital role to play in Bosnia and Herzegovina until
stability and security are firmly entrenched.

