The President: I thank Ms. John for her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States of America.

We would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix for his update on the implementation of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS), as well as to thank to him and Mr. Wais for
the discussion of political dynamics and developments
in South Sudan. We are thankful to be able to take
advantage of Special Envoy Haysom's knowledge with
only a few days left in his assignment, and we thank him
for being here. We sincerely appreciate that Ms. Grace
John joined us at such a late hour, as her perspective
helps us understand the situation on the ground in
South Sudan and is critical to our discussion here today.

The United States continues to support the people

of South Sudan and their aspirations for freedom,
peace and prosperity. We welcome the commitment of
the region to come together to address common peace
and security priorities for the benefit of its citizens.
We want to see that commitment translated into lasting
peace for the people of South Sudan.

The United States acknowledges the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan, but past failures
make us concerned about the sustainability of the
Agreement - for example, how should we interpret
the fact that military offensives have been undertaken
in violation of numerous ceasefire agreements, even
during recent negotiations? How can we reconcile
continued blockages to humanitarian access and the
killing of 13 humanitarian workers since January?
How can we explain the ongoing detention of political
prisoners, including Peter Biar Ajak? There has to be a
radical change in the behaviour of South Sudan's leaders
and a demonstrated commitment to peace, inclusivity,
financial accountability and good governance before
we, as the Security Council, should welcome any
agreement. Otherwise, we are turning a blind eye to
past failures.

The implementation of the latest Agreement must
begin with the greatest confidence-building measure of
all - an end to fighting. It must be broadly inclusive
of ordinary people across South Sudan: civil society,
religious communities, ethnic minorities and other
groups. The Kiir Government needs to ensure greater
and more representative power-sharing. There must be
meaningful checks on executive and majority power.

The United States supports the continued
engagement of the region to facilitate the implementation
of the Agreement and acknowledges the role of the
Sudan and Ethiopia in hosting recent negotiations. We
urge the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) member States and the African Union (AU)
to intensify their involvement in monitoring progress
on implementation and to hold the parties to account.
Violations of the Agreement should be highlighted, and
those responsible need to face consequences.

The United States calls on all nations to implement
the United Nations arms embargo that the Security
Council adopted just over two months ago. We must
continue to demonstrate that we will take action against
individuals or entities who threaten the peace, security
or stability of South Sudan, if these agreements are to
have any chance of successful implementation.

The United States will also prepare sanctions on
additional individuals or entities who engage in corrupt
activity. We call on regional leaders and financial
institutions to ensure the proceeds from corrupt activity
do not flow through their jurisdictions and to freeze
assets connected to illicit transactions. There must also
be accountability for the crimes of recent years. The
establishment and activation of the AU hybrid court for
South Sudan is long past due. That is an urgent priority.
We call our AU partners to make the court a reality, as
called for in the latest Agreement.

The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
has played, and will continue to play, a vital role in
keeping the peace in South Sudan. In this fragile and
uncertain transition to peace, it is important that the
UNMISS mandate continue to focus on the protection
of civilians, while properly configuring the Mission to
address evolving risks and realities on the ground.

The United States notes with deep appreciation and
deep concern the dire conflict-induced humanitarian
situation in South Sudan. An estimated 7 million
people currently require humanitarian assistance, and
over 4 million of them are children.

For the third year running, South Sudan remains one
of the most dangerous environments * if not the most
dangerous environment - for aid workers in the world.
We need urgent actions to address the egregious access
denials, rent-seeking impediments by the Government
and the violence that endangers humanitarians.
Refugees and internally displaced persons must not be
forced to return if they feel unsafe. The end of fighting
must not mean a call for forced repatriation.

Above all, we support the aspirations of the people
of South Sudan to lead lives unburdened by fear and to
experience peace, pluralism and prosperity. In a recent
interview, the Archbishop of South Sudan, Justin Badi
Arama, put it best: "peace is not something on paper;
peace is something which is deeper". It is now time for
the leaders of South Sudan to demonstrate that their
commitments on paper can lead to a genuine peace and
a prosperous future for the people of South Sudan.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

