Mr. Mayong Onon (Malaysia): We would like to
express our appreciation to the United Kingdom for
presiding over this timely and important meeting.

Malaysia aligns itself with the statements made by
the representative of Turkey, on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Mediation, and by the representative
of Venezuela, on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Malaysia strongly supports the role of mediation in
bringing about ajust, lasting, peaceful solution between
disputing parties. At the regional level, Malaysia, at
the invitation of the Government of the Philippines,
has been involved as a facilitator in efforts to bring
about peace in the southern Philippines, consistent
with the Charter of the United Nations. That effort
led to the signing of the Comprehensive Agreement
on the Bangsamoro between the Government of the
Philippines and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front on
27 March 2014. Malaysia has also played an active role
as a facilitator in the southern Thailand peace dialogue
since 2013. In line with the theme of today's debate, we
would like to emphasize the following points.

First, we should focus on conflict prevention. As
such, an early-warning system should be enhanced to
identify the initial signs of conflicts, by continuously
monitoring the situation in conflict-prone areas.
That would involve regional organizations and the
international community. Early preventive measures
are crucial, as they would help address uneasiness,
dissatisfaction or even concerns among them. In most
cases in the past, we simply reacted to the consequences
of conflicts.

Secondly, at the heart of solving various conflicts
around the world is the need to address their root
causes - be they political or economic or as a result
of disenfranchisement and so on. To that end, all
stakeholders, including the United Nations, regional
organizations, international financial institutions and
the private sector, must spare no effort in identifying
and, subsequently, addressing those root causes.

Thirdly, it is important to sustain peace to prevent
countries from relapsing into conflict. Countries
emerging from conflicts should be assisted, among
others, in the areas of socioeconomic development,
poverty eradication and capacity-building. To sustain
peace, Malaysia also encourages respect for the rule of
law, good governance, tolerance, non-violence, mutual
understanding, respect for diversity and inclusiveness,
as well as the promotion and protection ofhuman rights.

Lastly, lasting peace is important to achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals. Therefore, it is vital
to galvanize the commitment, support and political
will of all stakeholders, including local and national
actors, women and youth, regional and international
organizations and the support of the international
community and all United Nations entities.

We should make every effort to implement the
various decisions adopted by both the Security Council
and the General Assembly that call for a continuous,
cross-pillar and cross-sectoral approach to preventing
conflicts and sustaining peace. In addition, Malaysia
supports the Secretary-General's strategy for mediation
by strengthening the capacity of the United Nations and
ensuring that the Organization makes maximum use of
its assets in support of mediation initiatives.

In conclusion, Malaysia remains committed to the
promotion of mediation and the peaceful resolution
of conflicts in the various international forums, in
particular at the United Nations. We stand ready to
share our experience and assist the relevant parties in
the mediation process.

