Mr. Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I should like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, for the initiative to hold an open debate,
as the delegation of South Africa has done on previous
occasions. As stated by the delegation of Uruguay
during the most recent open Security Council debate on
this item (see S/PV.5390), in March 2006, we
encourage the holding of such debates, since they are
one of the Council's main mechanisms for improving
its interaction with the General Assembly and other
organs of the system.

However, we continue to regret the fact that the
item related to the Security Council's working methods
has, to a certain extent, been postponed and unfairly
linked to resolving the more politically complex issue
of increasing the number of Council members. That has
somehow prevented us from continuing to implement,
through various mechanisms, means of improving the
Council's working methods in a clear and defined
manner.

The delegation of Uruguay notes that the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2008/258) updates and
summarizes the information related to small arms in all
their aspects and once again alerts the entire
international community to the harmful effects of illicit
small arms on security, human rights and the social and
economic development of States. Uruguay fully agrees
that studying the phenomenon of the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons is not limited to security
issues, but includes other, broader subjects related to
human rights and development.

As shown in the Secretary-General's report, small
arms continue to be the weapons most used in
conflicts, particularly in those going on at present,
especially those which continue to be considered by
the Security Council. Once again, it is noted with
concern that the majority of these weapons are in the
hands of civilians, in much larger quantities than those
available to armies, police and national armed groups.
That is why, in the opinion of the Government of
Uruguay, one of the main problems that the
international community must face is the civilian
population's access to such weapons.

The Uruguayan Government has made great
efforts to adapt its policies and legislation to
international and regional instruments related to the
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons.
Currently, Uruguay has a body of laws, standards and
administrative procedures that are related to small arms
and light weapons in areas such as production, export,
import, transit and retransfer. Uruguay is also party to
all international instruments in this area that are
identified in the Secretary-General's report.
With regard to the most recent steps taken by our
country, I can report that, by Law 18.233 of
11 December 2007, Uruguay ratified the Protocol
against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in

Firearms, Their Parts and Components and
Ammunition. That instrument, which is a protocol to
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime - the Palermo Convention -
establishes the obligation to draw up standards for
marking in order to identify and track firearms.

Therefore, and in conformity with that Protocol,
in 2007 the Interior Ministry of Uruguay approved a
circular that requires that all firearms and ammunition
imported into the country, as well as small arms and
light weapons destined for use by the armed forces, the
national police and other authorized official
institutions, be marked. According to the INTERPOL
database, in Uruguay there is no illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons. Nor are they currently any
national firearms manufacturers in Uruguay.

Nevertheless, the Government of Uruguay has
begun campaigns to destroy small arms and light
weapons that are not duly registered or that have been
confiscated because they have been traced back to
illegal activities. Thus, in the period from 1998 to
2008, Uruguay, through its competent bodies and in
close cooperation with the United Nations, destroyed
more than 35,000 illegal weapons.

The delegation of Uruguay would like to express
its support for the recommendations of the Secretary-
General, especially those calling for the unconditional
application of all Security Council resolutions
concerning sanctions, including those that impose arms
embargoes, in order to effectively control the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons in
conflict situations.

