Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I had hoped
not to have to go through this ghastly list. By 4 October
2011, repression in Syria had already claimed 3,000
lives and Russia and China vetoed the Council's action
for the first time (see S/PV.6627). By 4 February, 6,000
Syrians had been cut down by the regime, and Russia
and China exercised their second veto on the Council's
action (see S/PV.6711). Today, 19 July, we now count
17,000 men, women and children dead. We mourn their
memory alongside the Syrian people, and Russia and
China have just exercised their veto of the Council's
action for the third time.

We have done all in our power since the double veto
in February to ensure that the international community
could finally agree on a coordinated approach that
would respond to the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people to democracy, the rule of law and respect
for fundamental human rights.

We have attempted to rally the international
community around the mission of Joint Special Envoy
Kofi Annan. On the basis ofthose proposals, resolutions
2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) were adopted. An observer
mission was deployed on the ground. A transition plan
was agreed in Geneva on 30 June (S/2012/523, annex),
in which we, alongside Russia and China, recognized
the right of the Syrian people to a democratic future,
with credible, legitimate leaders chosen by the Syrian
people themselves.

It is now clear that Russia merely wants to win time
for the Syrian regime to crush the opposition. For 17
months now, and with 17,000 dead, Russia and China
have advocated soft pressure and diplomatic contact
and have assigned responsibility for implementation of
the process to the parties alone. Contacts with President
Al-Assad are systematically deemed to be encouraging.
The only matter deemed urgent has been the need to
wait. And it would appear that one is always too harsh
with bloodthirsty dictators.

But let us look at the facts. The provisions adopted
by the Council have been systematically violated by the
Syrian regime, which has not even started to implement
the first of its commitments. Since 21 March, the
Council has demanded that the Syrian authorities cease
the use of heavy weapons and withdraw their troops
from the cities. In that time, the civilian population has
been crushed by heavy artillery and attacks by combat
helicopters. In his report of 6 July (S/2012/523), the
Secretary-General can only note the intensification
of these attacks on the civilian population. Between
bombardments, the regime sends its terrifying militias
to cut throats, kidnap, rape and generate inter-communal
fear among the civilian population.

In response, the Secretary-General and the Joint
Special Envoy have called on the Security Council to
ensure that its decisions are implemented. That message
was echoed by the Secretary General of the League of
Arab States here, a month ago, and by the 107 States
that met in Paris within the framework of the Group of
Friends of Syria on 6 July.

That simple message has just come up against
the rejection of both Russia and China. Our draft
resolution (S/2012/538) included only a mere threat of
sanctions. It gave the regime 10 days to finally abide
by its commitments. Ten days is a long time when a
single decision would be enough to immediately halt
the use of heavy weapons in civilian neighbourhoods.
It is too long, as each day brings 100 new deaths. It
was then up to the Council itself to decide whether or
not its decisions had been implemented. It was up to
the Council to choose the sanctions it deemed necessary
to apply. The Council thus remained master of the
subsequent steps.

It will be said that the veto is the result of
disagreement on the way to achieve a common objective.
That is wrong. Russia and China have today exercised
a veto to all of the laborious work undertaken by the
Council in recent months to find a peaceful solution to
the crisis. We cannot simply call for political transition
ad infinitum. We must establish a credible momentum
for transition. To refuse to grant Mr. Kofi Annan the
tools to exert pressure that he has requested in order to
implement the road map that we entrusted him with in
New York and in Geneva is to undermine his mission
itself. We must not shirk our responsibilities.

The third veto on Syria means that, for Russia and
China, there will be no consequences for the Syrian
regime's disregard of its commitments. The crimes
will go unpunished; their perpetrators will continue
to proceed with their disgusting plans; the people's
legitimate aspirations can be disregarded; and the
victims are insignificant in number. History will prove
them wrong; history willjudge them. It is already doing
so right now in Damascus.

We have gone as far as the veto in full awareness of
the situation. We cannot be complicit in a strategy that
combines a mockery of diplomatic action with de facto
paralysis. To do that would have been to give short
shrift to our responsibility as a permanent member
of the Council, short shrift to the credibility of this
Chamber, which cannot serve as a fig leaf for impunity,
and short shrift to the Syrian people.

I now turn to those men and women in Syria who,
in the face of unheard-of suffering, continue to carry
the torch of their ideal of liberty. France pays homage
to them. I will say again what I said on 4 February: no,
once again, the double veto will not stop us. We will
continue to support the Syrian opposition on its road
to a democratic transition in Syria. In every forum,
France is resolved to work unceasingly with those who
share its values - and the meeting in Paris showed
that there were many of them - so that the violence
perpetrated on the Syrian people can be ended, their
legitimate aspirations are realized fairly and swiftly,
and the perpetrators of crimes, and their accomplices,
are brought to justice.

This double veto leaves the Security Council
helpless against the violence of the Syrian regime,
but France will not leave the Syrian people to face the
crimes to which they are victim alone.

