Mr. Ligabo (Kenya): It is with great pleasure,
Sir, that my delegation extends its appreciation to you
for convening a public meeting of the Security Council
under the agenda item entitled "Small arms". My
delegation welcomes and fully supports the report of
the Secretary-General on this item, document
S/2002/ 1053, particularly its recommendations on how
to deal with the question of illicit small arms and light
weapons. The report, which was excellently introduced
by the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Dhanapala, points
out that the spread of illicit small arms and light
weapons is a global threat to human security and
human rights. The report also underscores the fact that
preventing, combating and eliminating the uncontrolled
spread of these weapons constitutes one of the key
tasks of the Security Council in discharging its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

The world has come a long way - from apparent
apathy to a deliberate and conscious effort to address
the problems of small arms at the global level. That
effort seeks to mitigate the enormous and ugly
consequences that have continued to deny mankind the
benefit of living free from threats and fear. My
delegation is therefore convinced that the diversity of
experience described at this public Security Council
meeting will broaden our approach to the problems
posed by illicit small arms.

Since the United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, held in July 2001, Kenya, as a country
ravaged by the effects of illicit small arms, has been at
the forefront in the war against the proliferation of
illicit weapons. As noted by the Secretary-General in
his report, there is no doubt that the United Nations
Programme of Action adopted in July 2001 provides an
adequate basis for further work at the national, regional
and global levels, although there is a recognition that
the primary responsibility for addressing the problem
lies with States themselves.

I should like to share with the members of the
Security Council the experience of our subregion on
this issue. As members may recall, the 10 countries of
the Great Lakes region and the Horn of Africa signed
the Nairobi Declaration in March 2000 and mandated
the Kenyan Government to coordinate regional
activities in combating the circulation of illicit small
arms and to convene a Ministerial Review Conference
on the Implementation of the Nairobi Declaration.

On 7 and 8 August 2002, the States parties to the
Nairobi Declaration held the First Ministerial Review
Conference on the Implementation of the Nairobi
Declaration. The Conference brought together the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Ethiopia,
Eritrea, Kenya, Rwanda, the Sudan, the United
Republic of Tanzania and Uganda. The Conference
reviewed progress made in the implementation of the
provisions of the Nairobi Declaration and came up with
specific recommendations on how existing
international and regional initiatives could be
harnessed for the realization of the objectives set out in
the Declaration. With regard to priority actions and
guidelines on regional and national implementation
plans, the Ministers agreed to establish national focal
points and make them operational by the end of 2002
and to develop national action plans to combat the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. The
Conference also reaffirmed the political will of
Governments in the Great Lakes region and the Horn
of Africa to tackle the proliferation of illicit small
arms.

At the national level, Kenya will continue to
work in Nairobi together with a group of friends of the
Nairobi Declaration, comprising development partners,
led by the United Kingdom and the Netherlands, and
non-governmental organizations and representatives of
the United Nations system, to harmonize strategies and
assistance to address the scourge of illicit small arms.

The problem of the illicit circulation of small
arms is multifaceted. To address it effectively, we need
to find out how, and by and for whom, these weapons
are manufactured, traded and used. How do we deal
with the driving force behind the demand for small
arms? The unresolved question concerning the role
played by State and non-State actors in the
proliferation of small arms is whether it is an
appropriate time to comprehensively address this
problem.
My delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his timely decision to send a
fact-finding mission to Kenya in August 2001 to study
and evaluate the scope and magnitude of the problem
of the proliferation of small arms and light weapons.
We appeal to the Secretary-General to look into the
recommendations of that mission with a view to
implementing them. We are encouraged by the recent
initiative of the Security Council on identifying areas
where further action is required by the Council in
addressing this global scourge. We support the
recommendation made by the Secretary-General to the
Security Council to support efforts aimed at developing
an international instrument to enable States to identify
and trace, in a timely and reliable manner, illicit small
arms and light weapons.

Kenya welcomes with growing optimism the
progress made in negotiations to settle long-standing
conflicts in the southern Sudan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Somalia and Burundi. Kenya
will continue to spearhead efforts to resolve the
conflicts in our subregion; I am happy to inform the
Council that a peace conference on Somalia will be
held in Eldoret, Kenya, on 15 October 2002.
Furthermore, the southern Sudan peace process is
scheduled to resume in Machakos, Kenya, later this
month. Kenya's determination to support these efforts
is predicated on a clear understanding that the
resolution of these conflicts will immensely contribute
to the reduction of the flow of illicit small arms in our
subregion.

In conclusion, I wish to commend the
Secretary-General once more for his report, which
contains innovative measures to deal comprehensively
with this problem. I further wish to appeal to all
members of the Security Council and the international
community at large to extend political, financial and
technical support to regional initiatives in a spirit of
true partnership, bearing in mind that we have a duty
and responsibility to prevent, combat and eradicate the
stockpiling of and illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons. We should be a beacon of hope with
which future generations will be proud to identity. For
the sake of posterity, let us collectively work hard to
tame the ferocity of this menace.

