As we convene for this debate, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to severely affect the lives of Israelis and Palestinians alike. Authorities on both sides have implemented extensive measures to contain the virus and save lives, at a high economic cost. When we addressed the Council six months ago (see S/2020/341), we commended the parties for their cooperation in responding to the pandemic. However, we note with regret that the space for dialogue and cooperation between Israelis and Palestinians has deteriorated since then. Norway has repeatedly warned against the Israeli annexation of parts of the West Bank. We call on Israel to make the current suspension of those plans permanent. Such a step could create a more conducive environment for cooperation and negotiations. The unprecedented strain placed by the pandemic on the already fragile Palestinian economy and on the Palestinian Authority's ability to operate must be properly addressed. In that regard, Norway regrets that the question of the transfer of clearance revenues from Israel to the Palestinian Authority remains unresolved. With the Palestinian economy on the brink of insolvency, we strongly urge the parties to stabilize the Palestinian Authority's budget by agreeing on fixed, regular and predictable transfers of revenues. The parties must also settle other outstanding fiscal questions in order to strengthen the Palestinian economy. Ordinary people, in particular the most vulnerable, will be the ones bearing the brunt of the problems as long as this issue remains unresolved. Preserving the fiscal viability of the Palestinian Authority is also fundamental to the prospects for a two-State solution. During this time of crisis, we urge the Palestinian Authority to continue the delivery of basic services to the Palestinian population, and, to the extent possible, to ensure salary payments to public employees in the West Bank and Gaza. As chair of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC), Norway will do its utmost to mobilize resources to Palestinians in need and to address immediate public-health issues. This work is already ongoing. We plan for the next meeting of the AHLC to take place in February 2021 and will coordinate the timing with the parties and major donors. The pandemic has exacerbated the already dire humanitarian situation in Gaza. We recognize the ongoing efforts made by the actors involved to facilitate the transfer of medical supplies into Gaza. However, this is far from enough. We call on Israel to do more to fulfil its obligations, including by easing the closure and improving access and movement of goods. Norway also encourages the Palestinian Authority to continue to carry out its responsibility of supporting Gaza's health-care system. In addition, international support to alleviate the impact of the pandemic will need to also address the critical public-health situation in Jerusalem and the West Bank. The current crisis again underscores the critical role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which supports the basic needs of millions of Palestinian refugees in the region. UNRWA continues to do so in the face of the most severe financial crisis in its history. The organization's schools, clinics and other facilities across the region are essential to avoid further instability. Norway calls on donors to increase their funding to UNRWA. Norway remains hopeful that the normalization of Israel's bilateral relations with the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain will increase the space for dialogue and cooperation between Israel and the Arab world. That development demonstrates that peaceful coexistence between the countries of the Middle East is possible and offers new opportunities for diplomatic and economic cooperation. It is positive if this can contribute to increased political stability in the region, and we hope that increased contact across the Middle East will support the efforts to secure a peaceful and just solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We encourage Israel, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain - alongside other countries in the region - to seize the momentum generated by their historic steps towards that end. Still, the normalization agreements do not resolve outstanding questions in the conflict. Norway is deeply concerned about the continued Israeli settlement activities in the West Bank, which constitute a violation of international law. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic, over recent months there has been a spike in the demolition or confiscation of Palestinian-owned structures and homes in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. We call on Israel to halt such activities. We also call on all duty- bearers to respect and protect the fundamental human rights of the people within their areas of authority and to end impunity. Let me conclude by repeating Norway's call on the parties to commit to a meaningful dialogue on the basis of existing agreements and the relevant United Nations resolutions. We encourage all supporters of the two-State solution to help bring the parties back to a path towards a lasting settlement, including talks on the final-status issues of borders, security, refugees and Jerusalem. As Norway has underlined repeatedly in these debates, there continues to be strong international consensus that a sustainable peace between Israelis and Palestinians can be achieved only through a negotiated and viable two-State solution. Norway is honoured that on 1 January 2021, it will join the Council as an elected member. We are committed to using every opportunity around this table to advance the prospects for a sustainable peace between Israelis and Palestinians.
