Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Special
Coordinator Serry for his briefing.

Obviously, the Middle East continues to experience
very dangerous conflict and instability. The intensifying
conflictin Syria andits destabilizing impact on countries
like Lebanon and Jordan are a direct threat to wider
peace and security. The political developments in Egypt
are also of serious concern, creating both uncertainty
for Egypt itself and wider implications for the region.
It is vital for Egypt's stability and development that the
transition back to a democratically elected Government
is inclusive and transparent.

One very welcome and positive development is the
agreement the Palestinians and the Israelis have reached
on a basis for resuming direct final status negotiations.
We warmly congratulate the United States for its
leadership, in particular the perseverance and tireless
efforts of Secretary of State Kerry. We also commend
Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas. It is
important that all Israelis and Palestinians support this
effort. We congratulate the Arab League and encourage
its continuing role in support of the peace process.

We recognize that the resumption of negotiations
is a first step on what will be a difficult path towards
a two-State solution. Both Prime Minister Netanyahu
and President Abbas must now seize this historic
opportunity and commit to negotiating in good faith,
aiming to achieve a lasting peace, with a secure Israel
living alongside an independent and viable Palestinian
State. As we all know, there is no Plan B.

As a friend of the Palestinians, we encourage them
to engage fully in the negotiation process. The path to
Palestinian statehood lies in negotiations, not through
United Nations resolutions nor in pursuing membership
in international organizations. For negotiations to have
any chance of success, conditions on the ground must
remain stable and rocket attacks on Israel must cease.
Equally, Israel must stop creating and expanding new
settlements in the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
Settlement activity is illegal and undermines confidence
in the peace process.

As a friend of Israel, we can say that the only
way to ensure the durability of a democratic State is
through the creation of a viable Palestinian State. All
of us in the international community must help sustain
an environment conducive to peace talks. Support for
the Palestinian economy will also remain fundamental.

Syria continues to descend into ever more brutal and
widening conflict. Seven million Syrians - one-third
of the population - need help. There are approximately
five million internally displaced persons in the country.
Over a third of housing has been destroyed, a third
of the schools damaged. Thousands of civilians are
trapped under siege in Homs and Aleppo and elsewhere.
Almost 60 per cent of the hospitals are out of operation
or severely damaged, and medical supplies are being
systematically targeted to prevent their delivery. There
are approximately two million refugees, as United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Antenio
Guterres told us last week, having accumulated at a
rate not seen since the genocide in Rwanda in 1994.
Hundreds of thousands of other Syrians have informally
sought shelter in neighbouring countries. Human
rights abuses, including war crimes and crimes against
humanity, are rampant and have gone unpunished.

Syria's neighbours - above all, Lebanon and
Jordan - are at the breaking point. The humanitarian
system itself is being stretched beyond its capacity.
We urge all countries that can do so to support the
humanitarian appeals for Syria and the region, which,
when combined with direct appeals from Lebanon and
Jordan, require $5.2 billion, making them the largest
appeals in history.

Both Lebanon and Jordan require strong support
politically from the international community. Lebanon
faces internal violence. Hizbullah's overt involvement
in Syria threatens Lebanon's policy of dissociation
and the stability of the State. We reiterate our support
for President Sleiman and the efforts of the Lebanese
Armed Forces to maintain stability.

We encourage the early formation of a Lebanese
Government to confront the challenges. We strongly
endorse the Council's recent presidential statement
in support of Lebanon and its institutions of State
(S/PRST/2013/9).

Australia's Minister for Foreign Affairs, Bob
Carr, visited Syrian refugees in the Beka'a Valley in
May and was struck by the scale of the suffering and
by the generosity of Lebanon in hosting so many
fleeing from Syria. He had earlier visited refugees in
Jordan. He announced a further $12 million increase
in Australia's humanitarian response, bringing our
current contribution to $80 million, with substantially
more to come shortly.

Lebanon and Jordan need strong support from the
international community, going beyond the immediate
humanitarian assistance to include broader recovery
assistance. The pressures from refugees and displaced
people on the essential services of the two countries
are becoming untenable, and the pressures can only
increase.

We are gravely concerned at the growing body of
evidence that the Al-Assad regime has used chemical
weapons. This week's visit to Damascus by the United
Nations for talks on investigations is welcome, but talks
alone do not address the serious allegations. Syria must
grant full access for United Nations investigations into
all allegations.

Clearly, the need for a political solution in Syria
has never been greater, and Australia supports the
central role of the United Nations in convening a second
Geneva conference on political transition. We must not
lose momentum in ending what has become the single
biggest catastrophe of the new century.

We again repeat our call for the Council to live
up to its responsibilities under the Charter - our
responsibilities - and international expectations, and
work harder to end the conflict, in order to pre-empt
a broader regional threat to peace and security and to
alleviate the terrible humanitarian disaster we face.

Most immediately, the humanitarian crisis demands
that the Council consider what additional steps can be
taken to meet the crisis. Australia remains prepared to
work with others on this as a priority.

