Mr. Westerwelle (Germany): I would like to
thank the Brazilian presidency for preparing today's
debate. Also, I wish to thank the Secretary-General,
Sarah Cliffe and the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission for their briefings. They have set the stage
for our discussions.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Delegation of the European Union on
behalf of the Union.

Almost 10 years ago, the United Nations
Development Programme's first Arab Human
Development Report identified three major obstacles to
development in the Arab world: first, a lack of political
participation, second, shortcomings in the education
system, and third, disadvantages for women in society,
the economy and politics. Those conclusions are still
valid today.

We are witnessing turbulent times in the Middle
East. The situation south of the Mediterranean Sea
perfectly fits the topic of our discussion today. Egypt is
a great country. The proud people of Egypt deserve to
enjoy the peaceful transformation of their society. It is
up to the Egyptian people to determine who will lead
their country. They must be given the chance to do so
now.

The people who are demonstrating in the streets
of Cairo are not demanding freedom or jobs; they want
both at the same time. Both belong together. People
want to decide themselves how to live their lives. They
want the opportunity to shape a better future. Where
people have little economic perspective and cannot
participate in the political life of their country, that
does not contribute to stability. On the contrary,
repression of political participation, human rights and
economic freedom will lead to instability. What the
international community can do is to offer its support
for democratic transition. Germany is ready to
cooperate. Europe has offered a partnership for
transformation. We are ready to give life to our offer.

Progress towards achieving the Millennium
Development Goals has been especially slow in fragile
or conflict-ridden countries. No fragile or conflict-
affected country has yet achieved one of the
Millennium Development Goals. Because peace and
security and development are inseparable, this
discussion constitutes an essential part of our work
here in the Security Council. Human rights are key to
human dignity. They are the third element in the
equation. Peace and security, development and human
rights together shape a world worth living in.

Almost all conflicts illustrate the extent to which
these three elements are interlinked. Let me give some
examples.

In Afghanistan, it has never been enough to look
at the conflict with an eye only on security. In that
country, devastated by decades of war, development is
urgent. That is the reason why we invest in developing
the local economy and support creating a civilian
future for the people.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
abundant natural resources should provide an income
for the local population and reliable taxes for public
tasks. Instead, we are witnessing some of the most
abhorrent crimes of our time. Sanctions and
peacekeeping alone cannot solve those problems. We
need to invest more, and more intelligently, to achieve
peace. That is why Germany supports projects for the
certification of mineral resources. The economy of the
entire region will also benefit from our ongoing efforts
to rebuild the Goma airport.

Through the referendum in the Sudan, the people
have voiced their choice in an impressive manner. I
commend the authorities of the Sudan for publicly
accepting the outcome of the referendum. Now we
need to prepare for the post-referendum process and for
Southern Sudan's independence. Germany stands ready
to assist and to counsel both sides, North and South.
We need both sides to be stable and to continue on the
road to democracy and economic progress.

Germany encourages the Security Council to
address the issue of peacebuilding as early as possible.
The idea of peacebuilding should guide our work when
we mandate, extend or downsize peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, the Peacebuilding
Commission, which my country has had the honour to
chair, can provide valuable advice to the Security
Council.

Development always has to do with institutional
frameworks. Development presupposes a fair and
efficient tax system. Respect for the rule of law is
decisive. Development requires independent judges
and a reliable police force. Development needs a public
sector without corruption and as little red tape as
possible. But, in the end, these institutional
frameworks alone do not lead to the creation of jobs;
business does. Development depends on an active
private sector. On the one hand, we need to empower
private actors so that they can create opportunities for a
better future. On the other hand, business success
brings with it responsibility. Businesses should commit
to aligning their operations and strategies with the
principles of the United Nations Global Compact in the
areas of human rights, labour, the environment and the
fight against corruption.

Every conflict is unique. There is no one-size-
fits-all-approach. In some cases climate change may be
a serious obstacle to development, and thus may
become a major cause of conflict. In other cases other
factors may be more decisive. In all stages of the
process of building peace, signing peace agreements
and introducing development programmes we need a
stronger role for women and greater protection of
children and their rights. The Security Council needs to
look at every specific case on its own merits.

Germany is and will continue to be a reliable
partner when it comes to safeguarding peace and
promoting development. This will not change. We will
live up to our responsibilities.

