Mr. El Othmani (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
last, the Security Council has been able to agree on
resolution 2118 (2013), a very important resolution on
the situation in Syria that reflects determination and
a genuine willingness to bring an end to the Syrian
conflict and paves the way for a political settlement
of the crisis. We are very appreciative of the efforts of
the five permanent members of the Council to arrive
at a solution whereby Syria's chemical weapons can be
located and destroyed and thus can ensure that they are
never used again. We also appreciate the intense efforts
of Secretary Kerry and Foreign Minister Lavrov that
led to the agreement signed in Geneva on 14 September
on Syria's chemical weapons. And we pay tribute to
the United Nations, led by the Secretary-General, for
responding promptly to the use of chemical weapons
in Syria by establishing an investigative mission led
by Mr. Ake Sellstrom, who, with his team, undertook
a major effort in a very short space of time, despite
having to deal with security problems. In that context,
I should add that the League of Arab States also
played a leadership role and has been at the forefront
of initiatives on the situation in Syria and the use of
chemical weapons, which it condemned roundly in its
1 September decision.

By any measure, the resolution just adopted is truly
historic. In addition to outlining steps for dealing with
Syria's chemical weapons based on the framework
agreement between the United States and the Russian
Federation, it endorses the Geneva communique
(S/2012/523, annex) as a path to convening a "Geneva
II" conference, which it also stresses should be held.
The resolution is also a legal precedent, because
for the first time it recognizes in general terms that
chemical weapons are a threat to international peace
and security, which will make it easier for the Security
Council to deal with such weapons in future. It will
also prevent a repetition of the terrible massacres we
have seen in the recent past and eliminate one of the
largest chemical-weapons arsenals in the Middle East
by peaceful means. And it can be seen as a precursor
to the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East.

Based on those facts, the Kingdom of Morocco
fully supports the resolution, ofwhich we are a sponsor,
and we hope that the momentum will continue with the
setting ofa date as soon as possible for holding a Geneva
II conference in order to work for a settlement that will
satisfy the Syrian people's desire for a democratic State
that preserves Syria's sovereignty and integrity.

In conclusion, I would like to recall, as some
of my colleagues in the Council have already done,
the importance of following up on the humanitarian
situation on the ground. It is a catastrophe that is being
inflicted on the Syrian people - refugees, the injured
and internally displaced persons - in the hundreds of
thousands. Every effort must be made to support the
United Nations agencies in their work in that regard.
They deserve our appreciation for what they have done
and continue to do to succour the civilians in need. We
should also give attention to Syria's neighbours, which
are suffering along with the Syrian refugees in their
lands. They too have been buffeted by the humanitarian,
political and security repercussions of the Syrian crisis,
particularly through the flood of Syrian refugees across
their borders. Once again, we value the resolution and
truly hope that it is a first step towards a final settlement
of the Syrian crisis.

