Viet Nam welcomes this timely briefing during the fifteenth United Nations Police Week and thanks Assistant Secretary-General Alexander Zouev and the four Police Commissioners from the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS), the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti for their insightful briefings. Let me start by reaffirming our firm support for United Nations peacekeeping operations and relevant initiatives aimed at enhancing their effectiveness, including the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. On the sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations police, we would like to pay tribute to the sacrifice and dedication of the women and men in the force, especially those police officers who have made the ultimate sacrifice. In this unprecedented time, we especially commend the efforts of United Nations peacekeepers, including police, in supporting countries in their efforts to achieve peace and combat both crimes and the coronavirus disease. Since its inception, the United Nations police has been an important component of peacekeeping operations and played a more and more significant role throughout the years. Its mandate has evolved to include, among others, protecting civilians, supporting training and providing advice to host States. Together with other peacekeeping activities, the United Nations police therefore contributes to the maintenance and promotion of sustainable peace, security and development of host States. As countries go through stages of peacebuilding, United Nations police work plays an increasingly important role in support of national efforts to achieve security and order for national development. To remain relevant and effective, United Nations peacekeeping, including policing, needs to uphold the basic principles of consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except in self-defence and defence of the mandate. This year is also the twentieth anniversary of the women and peace and security agenda. In this regard, we would like to reaffirm our support for the emphasis on gender-responsive policing and the goal of gender parity in peacekeeping. We note with much encouragement that United Nations police is leading in achieving targets set by the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy. We look forward to seeing more and more women in formed police units. Women's participation offers a unique approach encompassing better community outreach, greater diversity, more effective trust and confidence-building, and gender-sensitive protection, which can result in more long-term positive impacts. Women peacekeepers are also empowering protectors and role models for women and girls in the host States and communities. The 2020 United Nations Female Police Officer of the Year Award has been awarded to Chief Inspector Doreen Malambo, Gender Adviser at UNMISS, in honour of her work supporting vulnerable groups. There should be more recognition for women peacekeepers' contributions, including at the country and mission levels, and much more remains to be done to employ the full potentials of policewomen. At the same time, we again stress the need for more gender-responsive and supportive policies for women peacekeepers, including with regard to safety, security and an enabling environment for their work. United Nations police work is closely linked to the State and social system being developed in post-conflict situation. It can draw strengths from the background and preparation of the police-contributing countries. We are of the view that assistance should be provided to police-contributing countries, especially developing ones, to enhance capacity-building, including predeployment training, to ensure effective performance in missions. On our part, Viet Nam is actively preparing and training our peacekeeping personnel, including police officers, in accordance with United Nations requirements. We hope to be able to soon contribute qualified Vietnamese police officers to join the United Nations police force from 2021 onwards. In this regard, we thank the Police Division for its valuable assistance and look forward to cooperating closely with all partners.
