Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on South
Sudan in advance of the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).

Further to the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/10ll) on South Sudan published on 1 December
and Assistant Secretary-General Keita's briefing to
the Council last week (see S/PV.8115), I will focus my
remarks on some key developments and challenges over
the past year, including with respect to the security
situation in the country, the peace process and the
efforts ofUNMISS to protect civilians and build durable
peace. The Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, my friend and colleague Mark Lowcock, will
follow me and cover the humanitarian situation.

At the outset, let me repeat that we remain gravely
concerned about the precarious security situation
prevailing in South Sudan. As the dry season sets
in, we face the possibility that the military conflict
will escalate, as well as intercommunal fighting.
The economic crisis also continues to have serious
repercussions for the security environment. Civilians
will suffer the consequences of any escalation of
violence. We cannot continue to stand by and watch.
Now more than ever, I urge the Council to remain
vigilant and exert more effort to condemn and stop
the violence, protect civilians and urgently facilitate a
political settlement to the conflict.

Further to the 90-day report before the Council, I
would like to reflect more generally on the situation in
the country and the United Nations sustained efforts
to effect change on the ground, which will require the
continued support of the Council. In that challenging
environment, UNMISS has endeavoured to be more
robust, nimble and proactive in its approach to mandate
delivery. UNMISS peacekeepers have helped protect
humanitarian facilities, facilitated aid delivery in
areas plagued by insecurity and, on many occasions,
contributed to the evacuation of humanitarian personnel
caught up in active hostilities. To further deter violence
and human rights abuses, they have intervened to
protect civilians from abduction, recruitment, sexual
violence and harassment.

The efforts of UNMISS to assert its freedom of
movement have also resulted in the Mission's patrols
reaching areas to which it had long been denied access,
including areas south-west of Wau and in Equatorian
villages outside of Yei. Shortly, UNMISS will establish
a permanent presence in Yei, and has already reinforced
its presence in Yambio and Torit. The Mission is also
working with partners to halt the increasing number
of local-level conflicts through reconciliation and
peaceful coexistence activities. Meanwhile, the
brave efforts of humanitarian partners have resulted
in 5 million vulnerable people being reached with
life-saving assistance.

Those efforts have come about as conflict has spread
across the country and as the young nation struggles to
define a path towards inclusive governance. Since the
setback to the peace process in July 2016, we have seen
a new wave of armed conflict and insecurity spread
into the Equatorias. Those military offensives forced
tens of thousands of civilians to flee their homes. At
the height of hostilities, more than 2,000 civilians were
crossing into Uganda daily.
In 2017, major clashes between the Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA) and the Opposition shifted
towards Greater Upper Nile state as the Government
continued efforts to exert military dominance and take
opposition strongholds in the area. At the same time,
clashes continued in the Equatorias and Western Bahr
el-Ghazal. Civilians were displaced in droves, including
25,000 from the West Bank of the Nile, 100,000 from
parts of Jonglei and 22,000 from Western Bahr el-
Ghazal.

While members of the Council will hear more
from Mr. Lowcock in a few minutes on the impact
of the conflict on the humanitarian situation, let me
just underscore that the human cost is catastrophic.
In total, we are looking at approximately 4 million
people displaced since the conflict began in 2013.
Moreover, conflict-related human rights violations
and abuses, including looting and burning of houses,
killings of civilians, arbitrary arrests and detentions
and sexual violence, accompanied those hostilities,
with organized forces being implicated as perpetrators
in most instances.

Our fears of a further escalation of hostilities during
the dry season are not unwarranted. In the past two
weeks, we have seen a resurgence of fighting in southern
Unity state between opposition forces allied to Rick
Machar and those affiliated with First Vice-President
Taban Deng and allied to the SPLA. On 20 November,
intense clashes between the two forces took place
10 kilometres north of our temporary operating base
in Leer. Thereafter, reports of an imminent attack
on Leer town prompted local authorities to urge
civilians to move towards our base. On 26 November,
approximately 350 displaced civilians rushed into the
UNMISS base for temporary protection in response to
conflict. Further hostilities in Leer town broke out on
30 November.

In addition to protecting civilians near its base
and supporting the relocation of aid workers to safety,
UNMISS peacekeepers have continued their patrolling
in Leer in an effort to show the United Nations presence.
Meanwhile, the continued fragmentation of the
opposition * particularly in the Equatorias i remains
a source of instability. A case in point is Kajo-keji,
where SPLA in Opposition forces have clashed with
other opposition groups. Armed groups appear to
be ramping up hostilities in an effort to demonstrate
relevance as players in the ongoing political processes.

Further impacting the security situation is
intercommunal fighting. The most significant recent
example took place on 28 November, when around 45
people were killed, 19 others injured and hundreds of
huts and houses burned when members of the Murle
ethnic group attacked a Dinka village in Jonglei. The
attack came exactly six months after the signing of a
cessation of hostilities agreement between the Dinka,
Bor and Murle communities, intended to launch
a comprehensive dialogue process. This is a stark
example of the continued intercommunal tensions and
proliferation of arms at the local level, and highlights
the need for sustained engagement in intercommunal
dialogue and reconciliation efforts.

Prompted by the rapidly deteriorating situation in
the country, regional partners have stepped up their
efforts to revitalize the peace process. In particular,
we welcome and fully support the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD)-led high-level
revitalization forum, which aims to secure a cessation
of hostilities, implementation of the 2015 peace
agreement, and the development of a revised and
realistic timeline for its implementation. I welcome the
efforts of the African Union (AU), including through
its High Representative, former President Konare,
to urge the region to speak with one voice. I also
welcome its Peace and Security Council's expression
of intent to consider punitive measures against those
who aim to spoil the peace process. We hope that the
high-level revitalization forum will not be a one-off,
time-limited event, but rather that it will unfold as a
sustained process to hold all parties accountable in
order to maintain a cessation of hostilities and engage
in the inclusive implementation of the peace agreement
to ensure a successful transition. Tough issues will
need to be tackled during these discussions, however,
including on governance and security arrangements if
the Forum is to succeed, as I am sure Ambassador Wais
will tell us.

Meanwhile, at the local level, the national dialogue is
progressing, with subnational consultations conducted
on the root causes ofthe conflict. By most accounts, the
consultations have been frank and have raised legitimate
public grievances related to governance, corruption and
the rule of law. Concerns remain, however, as to how
the outcomes of these consultations will be used. The
United Nations continues to reiterate the importance
of complementarity between the national dialogue and
the implementation of the peace agreement, and of
their being transparent and genuinely inclusive of all
political viewpoints, including those of key political
actors and parties to the conflict.

The conflict in South Sudan is now entering
its fifth year. We believe that both the high-level
revitalization forum and the national dialogue can
address the spiralling crisis, if well coordinated. But
fighting cannot continue in tandem with efforts to craft
a durable peace. The two are simply incompatible. We
must not allow tactics we have seen before to frustrate
a change in course. The people of South Sudan have
simply suffered too much for far too long, and we must
not take their resilience against incredible odds for
granted. In that regard, I urge the Council to redouble
its efforts in support of the region and the ongoing
political process.

In March, recognizing the failure of the parties to
the conflict to meet their commitments to implement the
peace agreement, the Council laid out five benchmarks
to be met immediately. The first was immediate
adherence to the permanent ceasefire by all forces ofthe
parties to the conflict and all other armed groups. The
second was the urgent tackling of challenges faced by
humanitarian personnel in the delivery of humanitarian
assistance throughout South Sudan and specifically to
famine-affected areas, including through meetings of
the Humanitarian High-Level Oversight Committee and
the urgent implementation ofits decisions. The third was
unconditional support of all parties for the endeavours
of the United Nations, the AU and IGAD towards
ensuring the implementation of the agreement and the
inclusivity of the national dialogue as outlined in their
29 January statement. The fourth was the immediate
removal of obstacles to UNMISS and the Ceasefire
and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism operations, including obstacles to the
deployment of the regional protection force and attacks
on UNMISS and Monitoring Mechanism personnel.
The fifth was the immediate cessation of obstructions
to and attacks on all national and international
humanitarian personnel and facilities endeavouring to
provide life-saving assistance throughout South Sudan.

Those benchmarks are even more relevant today
as we head into the dry season and look towards the
convening of the high-level revitalization forum. I thus
urge the Council to speak with a united voice, once
again, and to use all means necessary to demand a
change of course from South Sudan's leaders and all
parties to the conflict. For our part, the United Nations
will continue to engage the parties and support the
region and the international community in order to
facilitate a political solution of the crisis.

