Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I was expecting to
listen to Mr. De Mistura first, but he has made a very
kind gesture to me and my country. My country and the
leadership of Afghanistan admire his role and
leadership. We benefit from his leadership as a leading
international coordinator in Afghanistan and here in
New York.

At the outset, I congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Council this month. I
also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his report
on the situation in Afghanistan (S/20ll/120*) and
extend a warm welcome back to the Council to my
good friend Special Representative Staffan de Mistura.

I also take this opportunity to express, on behalf
of the Government and people of Afghanistan, deepest
sympathies to the people and Government of Japan for
the tragic loss of life and destruction resulting from the
earthquake and tsunami this past week. We stand
beside the friendly people of Japan as they recover
from that tragedy.

As we come together to discuss the situation in
Afghanistan, my country is embarking on the transition
to full Afghan sovereignty, national ownership and
leadership in an effort to realize the noble vision of a
secure, democratic and prosperous nation that is able to
meet the needs of citizens independently. We in
Afghanistan know that transition is no easy task but,
with our full determination and unity and the sincere
support and commitment of the international
community, it is achievable. The logic of transition will
guide the way forward over the next four years.
Afghanistan is determined, during that time, to assume
full responsibility at all levels in order to provide
Afghans with security, opportunities for social and
economic progress and the benefits of a society
governed by the rule of law.
11-2662]
The role of the international community in
supporting the transition will remain essential for our
success. It London, Kabul and Lisbon, the international
community endorsed and committed to supporting the
transition towards Afghan ownership and leadership.
Over the next four years, the international community's
role in Afghanistan will revolve around the needs and
requirements of the transition process.

Today's meeting comes on the eve of the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). As the lead
international civilian coordinator, the role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan over the transition period and
beyond will remain crucial. We would like to convey
our appreciation for the resolute commitment of all
United Nations staff working under difficult conditions
to help to meet the aspirations of the Afghan people. As
we prepare to officially commence the transition
process, on 21 March, we look to the United Nations as
a key partner on the way forward.

Afghanistan cannot stand on its own feet if its
State institutions remain weak and undermined by
various parallel structures and its capacity is not
strengthened. Securing Afghanistan is therefore first
and foremost about Afghan ownership and leadership,
taking responsibility and operating effectively to
achieve sustainable progress. That is our ultimate goal,
to which we are firmly committed.

In the past weeks, we have engaged in
discussions about how UNAMA's mandate should
evolve in the light of the transition. In that regard, on 1
March, the Foreign Minister of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan, His Excellency Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, sent
a letter to the Secretary-General on behalf of the
Government of Afghanistan, in which he underscored
three main requests.

The first was a comprehensive review of
UNAMA's mandate and the role of the United Nations
in Afghanistan, to be conducted within the next six
months in consultation with the relevant stakeholders.
In the subsequent weeks, we agreed that such a review
would be done before the Bonn Conference at the end
of 201 1.

The second was greater coherence, coordination
and efficiency in the work of the United Nations funds,
programmes and agencies operating in Afghanistan
towards one United Nations. Such an approach, brining
each of the United Nations entities into synergy, is
11-26621
necessary for an efficient and successful transition in
the country.

The third was the reshaping of this year's
mandate for UNAMA around the transition. To that
end, the Government of Afghanistan proposed the
following adjustments to the mandate.

First, transition must be the central focus of
UNAMA. A United Nations mandate centred on
transition objectives would facilitate a smooth shift to
Afghan ownership and leadership. The underlying
imperative to transition full responsibility for security,
governance and development to Afghan leadership by
the end of 2014 should guide the work of UNAMA and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

Second, emphasis must be placed on UNAMA's
responsibility as the co-chair of the Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board to promote coherence in the
international community's support for the Afghan-
defined and Afghan-led development strategy.

Third, we stress the need to increasingly channel
aid through the Afghan budget and to align it with our
Afghan national priority programmes. We are
convinced that this will lead to more effective and
efficient utilization of development assistance.

Fourth, UNAMA plays a crucial role in
improving civil military coordination with the
International Security Assistance Force. However, that
role should be recalibrated to reflect the aim of the
transition process in order to support Afghan-led
stabilization efforts.

Fifth, national ownership of the reintegration and
reconciliation process is necessary. We are reaching out
to all Afghans who are willing to renounce violence
and join the peace process. The peace and
reconciliation process is Afghan-led and could benefit
from the support and good offices of UNAMA, if so
requested by the Afghan Government.

Sixth, the Afghan Government must have
ownership of the election process, based on the clear
requirements of the Afghan Constitution and the
principle of Afghan sovereignty. In line with the Kabul
and London communiques, the Government of
Afghanistan is fully committed to electoral reform as a
measure to ensure sustainability for the democratic
process - one that is national in nature and is
addressed by the citizens of Afghanistan. We welcome
the availability of UNAMA in helping with capacity
3
building and technical assistance with regard to
electoral law, if requested by the Government of
Afghanistan. Last year's elections in Afghanistan cost
hundreds of millions of dollars, which is not
sustainable for an Afghan-led democratic process over
time. The election process in Afghanistan must be
effective and sustainable. That is only possible through
Afghan ownership.

Seventh, a reassessment of UNAMA's work
throughout the country is necessary. While the
presence of UNAMA's offices in eight regional zones
remains important, the number, location and terms of
reference of UNAMA's offices in other provinces
should be looked at within the comprehensive mandate
review. That will help to encourage Afghan institutions
to end the culture of dependence, avoid unnecessary
security risks for UNAMA staff and streamline funding
for the relevant United Nations agencies in the country.

Eighth, UNAMA's role in supporting efforts to
enhance governance and the rule of law would be
achieved best through strengthening the efforts of the
Government of Afghanistan, in accordance with the
Kabul process. That is the reason that we request that
all efforts be made towards strengthening the Afghan
Government's capacity.

Ninth, the coordinating role of UNAMA in
delivering humanitarian assistance in accordance with
humanitarian principles is crucial. However, on the
way forward, the focus must be on strengthening the
central coordinating role of the Government of
Afghanistan, consistent with the goal of Afghan
ownership.

The realization of our requests will not only
facilitate a more efficient United Nations in the years
to come, but also a Government that functions with
greater confidence in its ability to become self-reliant.
Ten years after the Bonn Conference, Afghanistan is
adamant in its decision to take responsibility for its
country and people. That is a process that will not
happen overnight, but over time. Throughout the four-
year transition to Afghan leadership and ownership,
and beyond, the enduring partnership between
Afghanistan and the international community, the
United Nations and other partners will remain crucial.
Transition is not an end to the relationship between
Afghanistan and the international community, but the
beginning of a new chapter in an evolving partnership.
We must end the war and violence in
Afghanistan. The time has come to ensure that Afghans
have the chance to live in peace, free from the threat of
violence and suffering they have endured for many
years. The war against terrorism will not be won
without the confidence and support of the Afghan
people. While most civilian casualties are caused by
the Taliban and Al-Qaida, incidents of loss of innocent
life during military operations have increased.
However, our moral obligations place a heavy burden
on us to make the protection of civilian lives our first
priority. Civilian casualties must end and additional
measures must be taken to prevent harm to civilians.

We all have come to realize that war and violence
cannot be ended through military means alone. That is
why we continue to reach out to all those who want to
join the peace process. The support of the international
community and our enduring partnership is essential
for that process and for success in Afghanistan.
Afghans are determined to work towards their own
destiny. Let us renew our efforts to achieve peace and
prosperity in the country through the transition and
beyond.

