Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Sudan and South Sudan, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for
their informative briefings.

This meeting comes at an important time for the
Sudan and South Sudan. The situation on the ground
in Abyei is stable, there are significant improvements
in the relations between the two countries and the
signing of the peace agreement to revitalize the 2011
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan give rise to hope, even though
we are all aware that we should be cautious regarding
its implementation. On that point, we must be not only
proactive, but also clear-sighted and insistent.

In that regard, I wish to broach two points, first, on
the implementation of the requests made by the Security
Council concerning border demarcation, and, secondly,
on the Secretary-General's proposals regarding the
evolution of the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA).

In resolution 2416 (2018), the Council set out clear
objectives for the parties regarding border demarcation
and, in the light of the facts outlined by Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, our clear observation is that the progress made
does not meet our expectations. There has been some
progress, in particular the issuance of authorizations
for UNISFA patrols and Saturday's meeting of the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism. However, the overall
outcome is disappointing, especially with regard to the
establishment of operating bases for the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism or the opening
of border-crossing corridors.

We are aware of the constraints on the parties. The
rainy season is making work difficult and peace efforts
in South Sudan have monopolized the mission's efforts.
However, we strongly encourage the parties to do more,
faster, to make progress on border demarcation. In that
context, UNISFA must continue to play a vital role, but
the recommendations made by the Secretary-General
must allow us to adapt it to the situation on the ground.
In that respect, I would like to underline four points.

First, the proposed choice to strengthen the
political posture ofUNISFA must be supported. Indeed,
stabilizing Abyei and the border is essential; that has
been a major achievement for UNISFA. However, it
is also necessary for UNISFA to contribute more to
the political settlement of the Abyei issue and other
border disputes. Naturally, UNISFA is in no way a
substitute for the work of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel or the efforts ofthe Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, which we fully support.

Secondly, the proposed scaling up of the police
component would respond to the challenge of rising
crime in the region. That is a key issue, as we must
not allow a culture of impunity to develop, particularly
with regard to sexual assault.

Thirdly, the proposed redeployment and overall
reduction of the military component are also a move in
the right direction. That must be undertaken sensibly in
order to preserve the stability of Abyei and the border.
The balance that we wish to strike is of course to seek to
improve the effectiveness of the Force without running
the risk of weakening it or undermining the stability of
the region.

Finally, I would like to emphasize relations
with local stakeholders and populations. UNISFA
must support local initiatives that are useful to the
political process. It is important for the country team
to be encouraged to develop projects focused on
reconciliation and development, in the spirit of and in
accordance with the Secretary-General's sustaining
peace initiative, which must guide all our actions.

In conclusion, I congratulate and warmly thank the
Special Envoy for the excellent work he has done, and
wish him much success in his new position.

