Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I wish to express
my appreciation for this opportunity to address the
Security Council.

Canada thanks the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its ongoing
crucial work in Afghanistan and welcomes the latest
report (S/2016/532) of the Secretary-General to the
Security Council. Canada is also grateful to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Nicholas
Haysom for his briefing today and his years of service
to advance peace, development and human rights in
Afghanistan. We wish him the best as he takes up his
new role.

Canada strongly condemns yesterday's terrorist
attacks in Afghanistan by the Taliban, including the
attack on the bus carrying security guards who protect
the Embassy of Canada to Afghanistan in Kabul. I offer
my sincere condolences to the families and friends of
the Nepalese and Indian security guards killed, and
I wish a speedy recovery to those who were injured.
Many of the victims have been part of our Embassy
family for years. They will be remembered for their
service in the protection of the men and women at the
Embassy of Canada to Afghanistan.

(spoke in French)

Improved security remains essential to Afghan
stability today and to the achievement of its long-term
economic and development goals. Afghan security
forces have withstood considerable challenges as the

armed insurgency has grown across much of the country.
The international community must continue to support
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces in the
face of this challenge. The NATO Summit in Warsaw
in July will provide Canada, along with other NATO
allies and partners, an opportunity to pledge continuing
support to the Afghan Government and to stand
against the violence and terrorism that is undermining
Afghanistan's development and prosperity.
(spoke in English)

Canada supports an Afghan-led peace and
reconciliation process and calls on the Taliban to
come to the table and negotiate in good faith. Canada
recognizes the importance of ensuring that the peace
process include meaningful participation by Afghan
women and the Afghan Government's efforts to ensure
such through appointments to the High Peace Council.
So much has been invested by the Afghan Government
and Afghan women's groups to uphold women's and
girls' rights that it would be a travesty to jeopardize
them through a peace that would predominantly benefit
only half the population.

We are encouraged by the positive steps that
Afghanistan has made in recent years to promote
and protect the rights of women, including stronger
legal protection from violence, greater educational
opportunities and more inclusion in public and political
life. Canada welcomes the Afghan Government's
initiative to develop a national women's economic
empowerment strategy and a national priority
programme. Sustainable development cannot happen
without women's full economic and civic participation.
However, those gains remain fragile and Canada
calls on Afghanistan to press forward with the full
implementation of the law on the elimination of violence
against women, as well as Afghanistan's national action
plan on women and peace and security.

(spoke in French)

The promotion and protection of human rights,
especially those of women and girls, continue to be
a priority for Canada's engagement in Afghanistan.
Gender equality is the cornerstone of all Canadian
development programming in education, health, human
rights and capacity-building for Afghan humanitarian
assistance actors. At the same time, Canada's
development assistance investments in Afghanistan's
future serve to advance the rights, security and
empowerment of all Afghans.

Canada remains concerned about minority, ethnic
and religious rights in Afghanistan, as well as about the
safety ofjournalists and the ability ofthe Afghan media
to freely report the news. Recurrent attacks against
minorities by insurgents and the repeated targeting of
journalists by the Taliban are of particular concern.
Canada calls on the Government of Afghanistan and
the armed insurgents to uphold the human rights of all,
including the freedom of expression.
(spoke in English)

Canada stands with the Afghan people as they strive
for a more secure and prosperous future. We support
the Afghan Government and its people in the face of
challenging circumstances and welcome Afghanistan's
efforts to counter an escalating insurgency, broker
peace and pursue economic and social development.
We call on Afghanistan's leaders to intensify their
efforts to uphold and protect all human rights, in
particular the rights of women and girls, and to sustain
progress towards stability and security, accountability
and self-reliance.

