Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): First and foremost, I would like to thank
Mr. Pedersen, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, for his briefing.

Two weeks ago, the Constitutional Committee met
in its two formats, the large body and the small body.
The Syrian State has shown flexibility and a positive
attitude in the initial phase leading to the meeting of
the Committee. That is what the United Nations and the
Special Envoy confirmed. He explained in his briefing
today that the first round of the Committee's meetings
has witnessed positive discussions involving a number
of questions linked to its work, and the Committee has
adopted its rules of procedure.
The Government of my country reiterates the
importance of fully conforming with the mandate,
principal core terms of reference and rules ofprocedure
of the Committee, in particular respect by all Members
of the United Nations, especially those that are
members of the Security Council, for the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic. It reiterates also the importance
of Syrian oversight and ownership of the political
process and of the impartial facilitating role played by
the Special Envoy, without imposing any preconditions,
prejudgment or artificial deadlines regarding the work
of the Committee or its conclusions, because drafting a
Constitution for the Syrian Arab Republic and charting
the course of the country's future is an exclusive right of
the Syrian people that cannot be prejudiced or given up.

We are satisfied with the confirmation by the
United Nations and the Special Envoy in this context.
We hope that this will materialize during the upcoming
meetings of the Committee next week at which it will
discuss the Constitution. We are also pleased to see
that the delegation representing the Syrian State has
actively participated in the first round of discussions.
We affirm that that delegation will discuss its tasks
on its own on the basis of its national convictions and
that the dialogue is among Syrians, Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led.

The greatest risk facing the Constitutional
Committee is the attempts by some parties to interfere
in its work and hamper its efforts in order to achieve
schemes that run counter to the basic interests of the
Syrians, so this must be avoided.

All Syrians expect that all necessary and proper
conditions will be created to enable the Committee to
work in a positive atmosphere so as to ensure that the
efforts made are successful.

Nonetheless, we were surprised to see that the
support given by some regional and international parties
to the Constitutional Committee to ensure its success
took the form ofthe conquering and occupation ofSyrian
territories by the Turkish regime, as well as the killing
of many Syrians and the forcible displacement of more
than 180,000 Syrian citizens in order to assemble pro-
Erdogan terrorists and help them gain ground on Syrian
territory under the pretext of the so-called safe area.
That safe area is rejected by the Syrian Arab Republic.
We consider it occupied territory and we will treat it
based on relevant provisions of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations.
The United States Administration expressed its
support for the Constitutional Committee in its own
way by occupying Syria's oil fields and stealing the
resources belonging to the Syrian people. That was met
with silence from the Security Council penholders on
humanitarian, political and chemical weapon issues and
from those supporting them. That is how the American
occupation of parts of my country resonates with the
Turkish one in looting our resources and natural wealth.
Indeed, whenever two States agree to act against Syria,
usually another party joins them and, in this case, it
is Israel. One loots the territory, another steals oil and
the third seeks to continue its occupation of the Syrian
Golan, seizing the land of Syrians and committing
successive aggressions against my country in flagrant
violation of international law and resolution 350 (1974)
on the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli
and Syrian Forces.

The most recent Israeli evil aggression took place
on 20 November, resulting in a number of civilian
deaths and the destruction of many homes, while certain
Council members, including permanent members,
continue to protect Israel and render the Council
powerless. What is more heinous is that our United
States colleague has justified the Israeli aggression as
an expression of Iranphobia. It is a shared sentiment on
the part of the Americans and the Israelis.

My country's Government stresses that the terrorist
war against Syria did not start due to national differences
over the Constitution but because of international
terrorism, which targeted Syria for political objectives
related to trying to change the geopolitical map of the
region. That means the war against Syria will end once
the terrorism supported by foreign Powers also comes
to an end. We say all that despite the fact that we are
ready to encourage the delegation supported by the
Syrian State to make efforts so that the Committee
can accomplish its task. The Constitutional Committee
must submit the outcome of its work to the Syrian
people, which is the only authorized party to examine
its conclusions and judge them.

The Syrian people categorically condemn the
occupation and terrorism practised by various terrorist
groups, irrespective of their name and affiliation.
They include Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front, the Muslim
Brotherhood and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, all of which,
as the Council knows, are organizations that have their
elements graduate from major Western universities
that teach international humanitarian law in the United
States of America, France, Belgium or Germany. All
those terrorists studied in major Western universities.
They behead people, eat livers and burn individuals.
That is part of the international humanitarian law that
they studied.

The Syrian people also reject any separatist scheme
or semi-secessionist plan regardless of its form and the
propaganda campaigns that are used to promote it. Our
people call for the immediate lifting of the unilateral

coercive measures imposed on them, which amount to
economic terrorism. It goes without saying that those
national constants must be at the core of the work of
members of the Committee discussing the Constitution.
That is the situation all in the Chamber need to grasp.

