Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and reassure you of our full support.
I would also like to thank the British delegation for
the efficiency with which it conducted its presidency
last month.

I would furthermore like to thank Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her briefing this morning and
for the outstanding work that she carried out last
week. I would also like to thank the observer of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Archbishop of Erbil.

Iraq faces unique challenges today. The country,
emerging from the conflict, has embarked on the
long road towards reconciliation and reconstruction.
The institutions working towards that goal, however,
are fragile. The process takes time. In the meantime,
the authorities must respond, in the short term and
in a difficult context, to the aspirations of their
people - aspirations for a better life and better
opportunities for all.

The freedoms of expression and peaceful assembly
are fundamental rights that must be respected. They
are crucial to the progress of democracy. Belgium
is deeply concerned by the fact that some of the
demonstrations resulted in acts of violence, including
the use of live ammunition by the security forces,
leading to numerous deaths and injuries. Also troubling
is the presence reported of elements who could derail
peaceful demonstrations. Those developments put
Iraq on a dangerous trajectory. How can we overcome
that situation?

First, we call on all actors, especially the security
forces, to follow the President's instructions to act
with the utmost restraint at all times. Secondly, every
abuse must be investigated, and the perpetrators must
be held to account. Thirdly, all parties should engage
in constructive dialogue. Fourthly, we encourage
the authorities to expedite their efforts to meet the
demands of the demonstrators, namely, combating
corruption, starting economic recovery, creating
jobs, providing basic services to the population and
bringing about tangible improvements in people's
lives. Electoral reform has also been a central demand
of many peaceful demonstrators, and we encourage
the Iraqi authorities to implement legislative solutions
that respond to public calls for credible, free and fair
elections. Lastly, we support the important role that the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq has played
in recent weeks. In order to ensure the country's long-
term stability, we encourage the continuation of efforts
in the following areas.

First, as Archbishop Warda mentioned, reconciliation
is ofparamount importance. Looking at the painful past,
acknowledging and understanding it, and especially
transcending it together, is the best way to ensure
that it does not happen again. Such reconciliation
must continue and allow families to return to their
communities. The importance of such reconciliation
cannot be underestimated, especially to avoid creating
new space for Da'esh to take advantage of.

Secondly, the Government has already taken
important and courageous initiatives on security sector
reform. We must keep them going. Moreover, although
the Islamic State is militarily defeated, the causes that
allowed Da'esh to arise remain. Everything possible
must be done to avoid its resurgence.

Lastly, we encourage Iraq to continue its policy
of constructive engagement with its neighbours. The
fundamental principles of respect for sovereignty
and territorial integrity should guide the actions of
all actors. We call for a joint commitment from the
region and the international community to that end.

