Mr. Gambi (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): Allow me to express my great appreciation for
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/409) on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), which was just
introduced by his Special Representative for Chad and
the Central African Republic. In follow-up to that
report, I should like to underscore a few points that I
consider worthy of clarification in order to reach a
better understanding of the situation in the Central
African Republic and of the legitimate expectations of
the people and the Government of the Central African
Republic regarding this peacekeeping force.

The current political situation in the Central
African Republic is marked by preparations for the
legislative and presidential elections that have recently
been scheduled for 23 January 2011. As the Council is
aware, these elections had initially been scheduled for
the end of the first half of 2010. However, despite the
firm commitment of the President of the Republic, His
Excellency General Francois Bozize, to organize the
polling within the time frame set by the Constitution, it
had to be postponed twice because of the scheduling of
pre-election operations. These were disrupted by the
delays in the drawing up of voters lists and in the
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme, by the continuing
climate of insecurity and, especially, by financial
constraints.
10-48016

Following the postponement, which was
requested by our partners, by the political party of the
democratic opposition and by civil society and armed
groups, the National Assembly adopted constitutional
legislation that extended the mandates of the President
of the Republic and of Deputies until the next
elections. This brought stability to the Central African
Republic's institutions in the light of our country's
recent history, the general environment and the
geostrategic stakes of the conflict, including its well-
known regional effects, in particular the crisis in
Darfur and its impact on the Central African Republic.
All of this has been compounded for over a year now
by the presence in the Central African Republic of the
Lord's Resistance Army rebellion, which kills, maims
and rapes in the eastern part of our country along the
border with the Sudan and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

I would recall here that the Central African
Republic shares no border with Uganda. However, a
Ugandan rebellion is currently taking place within the
Central African Republic's territory, dealing the worst
possible blow to our people and to the economy of our
country.

The insecurity and instability in the north-east of
the country led the Security Council to decide, through
resolution 1861 (2009), to deploy the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad, in
order to stabilize the region resulting from the long-
term consequences of the political and military
upheavals of the 1990s.

Now that the mandate of MINURCAT is coming
to an end, there is a need to protect the future of this
still precarious part of the Central African Republic,
which could relapse into violence because of many
destabilizing factors such as transborder insecurity,
banditry, pockets of rebellion, interethnic conflict, the
limited presence of defence and security forces and
other emerging challenges.

MINURCAT's mandate was to secure the Birao
area, bring limited patrols into that vicinity and protect
humanitarian workers and evacuate them if necessary.
There was honest cooperation between the Mission and
the Central African authorities in discharging this
mandate. My Government takes this opportunity to
convey its heartfelt gratitude to all the countries that
voluntarily and sincerely contributed to this
peacekeeping force which truly eased the situation in
5
Birao and its surrounding areas, as well as in Sam
Ouandj a in northern Haute-Kotto.

The Mission has also been conducted in a
transparent manner, thanks to the vigilance of the
Secretary-General, who spared no effort to ensure
implementation of the provisions of the contract.
However, the announcement of the withdrawal of the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic, which will have dangerous consequences if
we are not careful, has led to a strong response by the
Government of the Central African Republic, whose
entrenchment in that part of our country is not
guaranteed due to the fragility and limited capacity of
the security and defence forces.

Hence, a letter dated 15 February 2010 was
addressed to the Secretary-General by the President of
the Republic and head of State, His Excellency General
Francois Bozize, requesting advisers, trainers and
observers from MINURCAT to assist the Central
African Republic armed forces. We welcome with
satisfaction paragraph 82 of the report of the Secretary-
General, which takes account of the wish of the Central
African Republic Government's wish to strengthen its
security and defence forces in the north-east of the
country - which is the soft underbelly of its territory,
marked by permanent insecurity, given its geostrategic
position - through the recommendation submitted for
the consideration of the members of the Security
Council, which my Government hopes to see adopted.
What we wish is to have a strong, toughened,
sustainable army of the Republic, capable of facing any
possible situation.

For that reason, we seek supervisory assistance
for the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic,
training for the police and the gendarmerie, and follow-
up on our equipment needs, including uniforms,
clothing, bulletproof vests, vehicles, communication
and transmission equipment, observation equipment
and barracks.

The current period, which will extend through the
end of 2010 and into the beginning of 2011, is
especially vital for the Central African Republic. The
withdrawal of MINURCAT, the transitional phase, the
electoral deadlines, the post-election period,
compounded by the referendum in Southern Sudan and
by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), are factors which
should draw the international community's attention to
the problems of the Central African Republic.
6
The primary responsibility for international peace
and security lies with the Security Council. The Central
African Republic cannot and does not want to fail, and
it therefore counts on the proven support of the Council
to meet the aforementioned challenges - and new
ones as well.

A wise decision from the Council would be a
great relief for us. For its part, the Government of the
Central African Republic is already striving, through
bilateral consultations, to reactivate agreements related
to the joint transborder patrols. It intends to increase
the number of the armed forces of the Central African
Republic in the north-east to more than the strength of
a battalion. For we face huge challenges if we are to
protect Birao and its surrounding area, control the
gangs of transborder bandits and poachers, ensure the
security of refugee camps and control internally
displaced persons, and especially combat the LRA
rebel groups which have already reached the doorstep
of the Vakaga region, to the north of Haute-Kotto.

In the coming weeks, members of the Economic
Community of Central African States will engage in
dialogue to gauge the possibility of making a
contribution to the recommendation of the Secretary-
General contained in his report. This recommendation
is timely because it falls perfectly within the
framework of the security sector reform that the
Government of the Central African Republic has had
some difficulty in launching owing to a lack of
resources. It is also propitious in other ways, as the
disarmament and demobilization programme has
already started in the north-western region - which
should also be the case in the eastern region, where it
is proving very difficult to put an end to insecurity.

With a view to ensuring stability throughout our
territory in order to enable the people of the Central
African Republic to shoulder its civic responsibility, let
me stress that the second option proposed by the
Secretary-General should be urgently implemented in
the coming days. This is urgent because we are
approaching the 15 October 2010 date for the end of
MINURCAT operations in the north-eastern Central
African Republic.

If the principle of accepting paragraph 82 is
established, it should be followed with immediate
effects. For that reason, the Government is relying on
the goodwill of the States participating in MINURCAT
to provide it with instructors, appropriate supervisory
10-48016
assistance and basic equipment for its security and
defence forces. A price cannot be put on peace in an
operation such as this, where the lives of thousands of
people are in danger.

