Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia): I am honoured to have
the opportunity to address the Council on this agenda item.
At the outset, I would like to express our gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for initiating and organizing the
consideration of this important issue.

We believe that thematic consideration of wider issues
pertaining to strengthening international peace and security
is quite useful, especially when there is wider participation
and input, as at this meeting. In this regard, we believe that
the several meetings devoted to Africa and its problems -
including the meetings on the causes of conflict in Africa,
on the question of children and armed conflict, and others
- have proved to be useful, not only in drawing the
attention of the international community to these pressing
issues, but also in determining adequate responses to them.
Therefore, we believe that today's consideration will prove
useful as well.

Taking a broader approach to security implies
addressing wider dimensions of international security.
Being the organ of the United Nations with the principal
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and security,
the Security Council is expected to address these
questions. Post-cold-war practice has vividly demonstrated
that there is a direct link between the maintenance of
peace and security and post-conflict peace-building. As
far back as 1992 this link was underlined in the
Secretary-General's report "An Agenda for Peace" and its
supplement. Since then life has shown that peace-
building, peacemaking and peacekeeping operations can
be truly lasting if and when the question of post-conflict
peace-building is correctly and successfully tackled. We
fully agree that, though post-conflict peace-building may
not be considered part of peacekeeping and peacemaking,
the essential elements of post-conflict peace-building
should be borne in mind and, to the extent possible,
reflected in peace agreements and settlements. On the
other hand, when post-conflict peace-building is
successful, it, in its own turn, broadens and strengthens
the foundations of peace and security.

Almost seven years have passed since the summit
meeting of the Security Council addressed broader issues
of international peace and security. The post-cold-war
experience - be it in many countries of the Africa
continent, in Cambodia or in Central America -
demonstrates that disarming the previously warring
parties, the destruction of weapons, demining, restoration
of order, repatriation of refugees, organizing and
monitoring elections, strengthening governmental
institutions and, in many cases, promoting the fuller
political participation of former adversaries are all
important factors in post-conflict peace-building. The
example of Mozambique and some other positive
examples have been cited here. Other examples - or
should I say, lessons - caution that ignoring post-conflict
peace-building makes peace very fragile.

With the increasing interdependence of States and
increasing globalization, non-traditional - or should I
say, non-military - sources of threats to peace and
security are also increasing. This demands that the socio-
economic root causes of many conflicts also be properly
addressed. Otherwise, no peace can be stable or durable.
Today's consideration of this item bears testimony to the
realization and acceptance of this reality.

It is also of great importance to address properly the
question of national reconciliation and the psychological
and political factors that define the attitudes of States in

 

conflict towards each other, or of parties in case of internal
conflicts. In our view, mutual suspicion needs to be
overcome and social peace allowed to take root and develop
if the recurrence of conflict is to be avoided.
Furthermore, the root causes - that is, the underlying
political, economic, social and ethnic problems that have
led to the conflict in the first place - ought to be seriously
addressed and dealt with.

Otherwise, previously taken measures, however
important and successful they might have been, would only
be half measures. In this, we believe, the role not only of
the Security Council, but of all the relevant United Nations
bodies, especially the General Assembly, as well as the
Economic and Social Council, development agencies,
financial institutions, regional organizations and the donor
community is essential.

In that regard, the reform of the United Nations
system should also address the questions of the roles of the
appropriate United Nations bodies in more effectively
addressing the questions of development. We believe that
the emerging new concept of human security provides the
opportunity to address this question in a more
comprehensive manner. As today's debate underlines, the
questions of proper coordination of the post-conflict
peace-building efforts of the international community, of
avoiding duplication and of financing these actions need to
be addressed. With respect to the latter, effective
mobilization of internal and international resources is of
crucial importance. Equally, short-term peace-building
measures need to be followed up by long-term programmes
and strategies aimed at strengthening national institutions,
promoting good governance, eradicating poverty and
ensuring sustainable development.

In conclusion, it would not be an exaggeration to say
that the Security Council has been dealing mostly with
immediate problems and has not so often considered
questions of ensuring peace and security in the broader
context. We believe that addressing other, broader issues of
the maintenance of international peace and security, such as
the one that is being considered today, would not only
promote further transparency and wider participation by
States that are not members of the Council, but would also
prove quite useful.

