Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Equatorial Guinea welcomes the timely
convening of this briefing and thanks Ms. Ursula
Mueller for her presentation.

After two years of debate on humanitarian issues
in Syria, the Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea continues to observe with great regret the clear
consolidation of two diametrically opposed fronts on
this matter.

As we have reiterated, the big picture of the
humanitarian and security situation in Syria requires
that the members of the Security Council - guarantors
of international peace and security - transcend their
geostrategic interests. That requires us to focus on
human beings as the crux of all discussions and binding
decisions. That is a very clear and objective position that
some members of the Council have been advocating, but
it remains stymied, perhaps by the inability to exercise
any significant influence on the parties to the conflict.
We recall that the possibility of a major operation
in Idlib and neighbouring regions where Government
forces, the Al-Nusra Front and forces opposing the Syrian
Government are continuing to fight would undoubtedly
have very serious consequences for millions of civilians
and the work of humanitarian agencies.

As has already been mentioned, some 4 million
people, including around 3 million in the north-western
regions, which cannot be reached from the centre of
the country, depend on the cross-border assistance
mechanism and crossing points coordinated by the
United Nations. Our Government is fully aware that the
humanitarian situation has become extremely difficult
for vulnerable persons in Syria, and when it comes to
saving lives, no better partner or ally exists than the very
people suffering the impact of international tensions.

Consequently, until we put an end to that prolonged
conflict, Equatorial Guinea will continue to lend
its support to all mechanisms that aim to prevent an
even graver humanitarian crisis in Syria. We are
all aware that it is imperative to renew cross-border
assistance in Syria, given that the more than 1 million
people who receive assistance every month depend on
that mechanism.

However, we must continue to prioritize dialogue
among all parties, including the Government of
Damascus. Any initiative undertaken or decision
supported by the United Nations must include the
involvement of the Syrian authorities. In that regard,
given the current context, we urge the Syrian authorities
to spare no effort to guarantee safe and unhindered
access to humanitarian assistance in all the areas that
need it and through the most direct routes.

