Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): This is the first time
my delegation has spoken this month, Mr. President, so let
me at the outset congratulate you on having assumed the
presidency of the Security Council and thank Ambassador
Martinez Blanco for the job he and his delegation did last
month.

The Government of Croatia has long intended to
reintegrate parts of its sovereign territory that had been
under the control of secessionist Croat Serb authorities.
This was Croatia's sovereign right, and it can hardly be
faulted for taking steps to this end. What my Government,
however, does find strongly deplorable is the fact that the
Croatian authorities elected to do so by military means,
even at a time when not all diplomatic avenues had been
completely exhausted. It had always been the position of
my Government that a political solution was preferable, and
we are still not convinced that such a solution was
impossible.

One consequence of taking Knin and the former
Sectors South and North is a wave of refugees
unparalleled in the war to date, in a war which has
already seen the most dramatic population shifts in
Europe since the aftermath of the Second World War.

This refugee wave amounts to massive ethnic
cleansing of vast areas of Croatia. Whether the Serb
refugees are leaving on their own account or not is
immaterial, and we view with scepticism Croat
observations that Serb propaganda is solely responsible
for their exodus, and assertions that Serbs are welcome in
a post-Krajina Croatia.

The Croatian authorities will not, of course, hold
people back by force. But they also bear a heavy
responsibility to assure elementary dignity of the refugees
and unconditionally to protect their human rights. Shelling
refugee columns is not the best way to demonstrate
respect for these rights. The Croatian authorities also have
great responsibilities towards those ethnic Serbs who do
elect to stay and to those who may decide to return. In
fact, my Government urges them to create conditions in
the newly reintegrated territories which will not only be
conducive to stanching the refugee outflow but which will
also facilitate and encourage the return of refugees.

The Croatian authorities decided to launch their
military offensive literally over the heads of United
Nations Confidence Restoration Operation in Croatia
(UNCRO) personnel. Some, including two of my
countrymen, lost their lives in the process. Others were
gravely abused. Even today, UNCRO and other United
Nations personnel do not have the freedom of movement
they urgently need to fulfil their obligations. We deplore
the abuse to which certain Croat commanders subjected
UNCRO personnel and demand that appropriate measures
be taken against them. We call for full freedom of
movement of United Nations personnel. But even as we
in the Czech Republic mourn our dead, we are
determined to continue shouldering our international
responsibilities through our contribution to UNCRO.

At this point let me thank from the depths of my
heart, on behalf of my Government, all those who have
expressed condolences, either here or in informal
consultations, and extend our own condolences to the
Government of the Kingdom of Denmark.

The situation of UNCRO has changed dramatically,
and we are anxiously awaiting recommendations from the
Secretary-General on how best to modify its mandate. We

 

anticipate a need to strengthen the United Nations presence
in Eastern Croatia, in the area adjacent to the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. We strongly warn the Croatian
authorities against seeking a military solution in this area,
for, in our analysis, such an attempt could lead to a
full-fledged war involving far greater military forces,
territory and civilian population than ever before, a war that
would eclipse anything the South Slav States have
witnessed so far. In this context, we appreciate the
responsible attitude that States of the region have
demonstrated to date and appeal to all parties to seek a
solution to the issue of Eastern Slavonia through peaceful
means.

In conclusion, we ought to acknowledge that as an
incidental result of the Croatian military action the siege of
Bihac came to an end. This is an important result from
several points of view. How important it was from the
humanitarian point of view will become particularly evident
when we contrast the fate of the men of Bihac with that of
the men of Srebrenica, which we will be considering in our
very next meeting.

