Mr. Diab (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
thank you for convening this meeting. We also thank
your predecessor from Germany and his delegation for
all their efforts last month.

In the past few days, we have seen all the peoples
of the world supporting the United Nations and
defending the international system it represents.
Unilateral use of force is a violation of the United
Nations Charter, impairs its legitimacy and jeopardizes
the present world system. Most of the statements made
by States members of the Security Council at its last
meeting on this topic, like those made today, reflect the
positions of various geographic groups, including those
adopted at the Arab Summit at Sharm el-Sheikh, the
Islamic Summit at Doha, the Non-Aligned Movement
Summit in Kuala Lumpur and the French-African
summit in Paris, along with the position of the Holy
See. All these positions reject the war and express
serious concern about its extremely dangerous potential
impact on the political, social, security and the
humanitarian situation, not only in the Middle East, but
in the world as a whole.

In this context, the ministerial committee created
at the fifteenth Arab Summit in Sharm el-Sheikh came
to New York last week to convey the Arab position on
the Iraqi crisis to the Security Council. It has four main
points. It reaffirms the outcome of the summit held in
Beirut in 2002, which can be summarized as follows.

First, it totally rejects any attack on Iraq and any
threat to the integrity and security of any Arab State
and national Arab security as a whole. Secondly, it
reaffirms the need to respect international legitimacy
and to implement resolution 1441 (2002), which does
not authorize war against Iraq or provide an automatic
trigger for military action. Thirdly, it calls for the
inspection teams to be given sufficient time to fulfil
their mandate and to finish their tasks and affirms that
Iraq must cooperate. Fourthly, it reaffirms international
obligation for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of Iraq. The Security Council is
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security and must play its role in dealing with the
Iraqi crisis in all its aspects.

The reports of Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei note
that continual and clear progress is being made in
several areas, thanks to Iraqi cooperation with the
inspections. The reports submitted to the Council on
Friday state that Iraq has actively and proactively
cooperated. The proactive cooperation of Iraq includes
the gradual destruction of its Al Samoud 2 missiles and
other ballistic vectors and interviews with Iraqi
scientists in accordance with the inspectors' conditions.
It goes without saying that this level of cooperation is a
qualitative leap forward in compliance with Security
Council resolutions 1441 (2002), related to the
verification of Iraq's disarmament of weapons of mass
destruction.

Insistence on the military option has led the
international community to discuss the possibility of
whether or not to adopt another resolution. That has
weakened the Council's unity and affected efforts to
strengthen the role of the inspections of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Those efforts should
have enabled the two agencies to ensure by peaceful
means the elimination of weapons of mass destruction
so that the sanctions that have caused so much
suffering and tragedy to the Iraqi people could be
lifted.

The draft resolution before the Council would
authorize the automatic use of force. It sets an
unrealistic deadline, contrary to the time line proposed
by Mr. Blix himself. As a result, the main tasks that
will be defined by the work programme, which is
expected to be issued soon, would be subject to the
deadline for war, thus preventing the implementation of
the programme.

It is the clear the interest of the international
community to strengthen the mandate of the inspectors
so that they can eliminate weapons of mass destruction,
not only in Iraq but in the Middle East as a whole,
including in Israel, in keeping with paragraph 14 of
Security Council resolution 687 (1991).

