Ms. March Smith (Norway): Our complete
statement will be available on PaperSmart.

Developments in the Middle East since our last
meeting (see S/PV.7164) are cause for deep concern.
For the fourth time in the seven years since Hamas took
control over the Gaza Strip, violence has flared up and
inflicted an intolerable toll on civilians.

That violence, coming after the suspension of the
United States-led initiative to negotiate a final status
agreement between Israel and the Palestinian Liberation
Organization shows that the status quo is unsustainable.
Reaching a final status agreement would have
abrogated the Israeli occupation of Palestine, granted
the Palestinian people a sovereign State and opened the
way to broad recognition of Israel as promised by the
Arab Peace Initiative. An agreement would have laid the
ground for nurturing peace. Instead, massive violence
now incites unlimited hatred and causes devastating
suffering for civilians.

Norway condemns the rocket attacks against Israeli
civilians. Israel has the right to defend its citizens. Yet
Israel has an obligation to respect the requirements
under humanitarian law, an obligation shared by all the
combatant Palestinian groups. Being the stronger party
and operating in very densely populated areas only
adds to Israel's responsibility. We take note of Israel's
acceptance of the ceasefire initiative proposed by Egypt
a week ago. Norway condemns the loss ofmore than 600
civilian lives, among them many women and children.
That unacceptable level of suffering of civilians is out
of proportion. Civilian casualties, including the killing
of four children on the beach in Gaza and the military
operation in Shujaiya, should be swiftly and thoroughly
investigated.

The ongoing military confrontation is a threat to
international peace and stability. Going beyond the
recent press statements, the Security Council could take
more decisive action to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law.
Norway has repeatedly called for an immediate and
unconditional cessation ofhostilities and for a long-term
and durable ceasefire. The bloodshed and suffering
must end. That goal, however, also requires addressing
the complex underlying causes of the conflict.

First, Norway calls for concerted international
action by all friends of Israel and Palestine in support
of the Egyptian initiative and leadership to broker an
unconditional and immediate cessation of hostilities.

Secondly, Norway calls for addressing the
appalling humanitarian situation in Gaza. Recalling
resolution 1860 (2009) and the understanding reached
for the truce that ended the 2012 confrontations, we see
that the challenges are clear. There is an urgent need
for humanitarian and medical assistance and for the
reconstruction of private homes and infrastructure.
There is a need to bring the security arrangements in
Gaza in line with the rest of Palestine.

The people in Gaza cannot continue to live under
a blockade and remain dependent on assistance from
the international community. Border crossings must
be reopened, and access and movement for people and
goods must be facilitated. Key to achieving that is, in
the short term, to reunite Palestine under one integrated
and reformed authority, headed by President Abbas, as
the Palestinian factions have agreed to do.

As the Chair of the Donor Group and the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee (AHLC) and in partnership with
the European Union presidency, Norway will take an
initiative calling for an international donors conference
for Palestine in Oslo as soon as a ceasefire is announced.
The conference will address immediate challenges
and call for pledges of international assistance. On
the margins of the General Assembly, Norway will
chair an ordinary meeting of the AHLC, hosted by the
Secretary-General, to coordinate external assistance
for building the Palestinian institutions and sustainable
economic growth.

Thirdly, Norway calls on the Security Council to
request that the parties return to a political process
aimed at solving the outstanding issues of their conflict
peacefully, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions, previous commitments and agreements
between the parties.

Without hope for the future, the freedom to live
dignified lives, and respect for rights and international
norms, there will be no lasting peace for either of the
civilian populations. Without lasting peace, mutual
respect and broad recognition of the two peoples and
their rights, there will not be security and peace.
We should not forget the other crises in the region.

The situation in Syria remains extremely serious,
despite the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014) in the past
week. Norway remains firm in its condemnation of the
blatant disregard for civilian suffering, human rights
and international humanitarian law demonstrated by
Syrian Government forces as well by as other parties
to the tragic civil war. The atrocities committed by
the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant and its seizure
of control of considerable territories in north-eastern
Syria and in north-western and central parts of Iraq
threaten not only Iraq and Syria, but the whole region.

Global resources and capacity for humanitarian
responses are under severe strain. Norway calls on the
States members of the Security Council to redouble their
efforts to address the root causes of those developments
and to agree on concerted action to restore stability and
calm.

