The Secretary-General: I thank the Government
of Austria for convening this ministerial debate to mark
the tenth anniversary of the Security Council's
engagement on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I commend Foreign Minister Michael
Spindelegger for his leadership.

Over the past decade, this issue has come to
occupy a prominent place on the Council's agenda. We
see this in the biannual open debates; we see it in the
thematic resolutions on the subject; and we see it in the
Council's adoption of an aide-memoire and convening
of an informal expert group. Most importantly, the
protection of civilians increasingly permeates the
country-specific deliberations and decisions of the
Council. This has raised global awareness and
advanced what is, after all, a key part of this
Organization's cardinal mission - saving and
protecting people from the horrors of armed conflict.

Not so long ago, many Member States questioned
whether internal armed conflict posed a threat to
international peace and security. Today, the regional
dimensions and destabilizing effects of internal
conflicts have been firmly recognized. Not so long ago,
Member States questioned whether the United Nations
Charter contemplated the protection of civilians as a
legitimate subject of a peacekeeping mandate. Today,
the Council readily demonstrates its willingness to
address the protection needs of civilians in situations
on its agenda.

This is a welcome evolution. However, even
conflicts that are not perceived by all Council members
to have implications for international peace and
security could have a dramatic impact on civilians and
therefore warrant Council attention. We must find ways
to better address these situations as well.

The past 10 years have seen some major conflicts
come to an end, but others have persisted and new ones
have broken out. In old and new alike, we see
appalling levels of human suffering and a fundamental
failure of the parties involved to respect their
obligations to protect civilians. This failure demands a
reinvigorated commitment by the Security Council,
Member States and the United Nation to the principles
of international humanitarian law, human rights law
and refugee law. It requires the Council to guard
against the perception that only some situations are of
concern. And in practical terms, it requires us to meet
f1ve core challenges.

First, we need to strengthen compliance by all
parties to conflict with international law, particularly in
the conduct of hostilities. This means ensuring access
to conflict zones and reporting on the way conflicts are
conducted. That in turn means making better use of
existing instruments and machinery. But the Council
may also wish to consider ways of improving what we
do and how widely we do it. At the moment, under
mandates from this Council, we are able to examine
and report on the impact of armed conflict on children
and, soon, on sexual violence perpetrated against
women wherever there is conflict and without
additional procedural hurdle. This has been a welcome
step. I now welcome members' thoughts on what we
have learned from these mechanisms that could be
applied to the broader task of protecting civilians.

Secondly, we need more consistent engagement
with non-State armed groups in order to ensure their
compliance and our safe access to populations in need.
Member States must accept the fundamental necessity
of such engagement.

Thirdly, peacekeeping missions must be enabled to
discharge their protection mandates more effectively.
Protection mandates place very distinct and enhanced
responsibilities on peacekeepers and reshape the
requirements of our missions. Most obviously, protection
mandates can involve not only the static protection of a
line separating forces, but the active policing of
territory. This requires improved operational guidance,
training, equipment and appropriate resources,
especially those that allow our forces mobility.
In this connection, I welcome the recently
completed independent study on the implementation of
protection mandates by United Nations peacekeeping
missions commissioned by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. I call on the
Council and Member States, including troop- and
police-contributing countries, in cooperation with the
Secretariat, to consider the recommendations for
implementation.

Fourthly, humanitarian actors must have better
and safer access to civilians in need of assistance. The
Council must be prepared to respond when such access
is not forthcoming.

Last but not least, we must enhance
accountability for individuals who commit war crimes,
crimes against humanity, genocide and other serious
violations of international human rights law. There is a
need for consistency and perseverance in this regard.
Through criminal prosecutions and other resolute
action, we must hold to account those who violate the
law - law, I should stress, that we have worked so
hard to put in place.

As we mark the tenth anniversary of the Security
Council's consideration of the protection of civilians,
let us not dwell too long on what has been achieved,
significant though that is. We must focus on the future
and on how to ensure more effective protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

