Mr. Pleuger (Germany): The resolution on Iraq
that we have just adopted gives us a basis for practical
steps on the ground in order to improve the conditions
for the Iraqi people and to stabilize the political and
economic situation.

This resolution is a compromise reached after
intensive and sometimes difficult negotiations. By
definition, it does not fulfil the every wish of all
parties. But as compared to the initial draft of the
sponsors, we have achieved substantial improvements.
The resolution provides a framework in which the
United Nations has been strengthened and can take a
central role in the political and economic process.

The Secretary-General will now be represented
by a Special Representative who we expect to fully
implement his independent responsibilities in
promoting the political process leading to the early
formation of an internationally recognized,
representative Government of Iraq. The Security
Council is to be fully informed by the Secretary-
General as well as by the United States and the United
Kingdom. The Security Council will review this
resolution within 12 months and, if necessary, consider
further steps.

The disarmament issue is kept on the Council's
agenda, and funding for the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) is ensured. In the economic sector, a
maximum of transparency will be achieved. The
International Advisory and Monitoring Board
overseeing the Development Fund for Iraq assembles a
vast body of expertise on rebuilding economies
ravaged by war and totalitarian systems. We expect the
Board to take full responsibility with respect to its task
of providing transparency and that the Security Council
will be receiving regular reports on its work.

In this resolution, we have left behind the
divisions of the past for the sake of the people of Iraq.
Sanctions will be lifted. A process of political and
economic reconstruction will be started. It is important
now to give the Iraqi people the perspective of building
a democratic and stable Government, at peace with
itself and its regional neighbours - a respected
member of the family of nations. The United Nations
system will help them to realize it. Germany stands
ready to contribute to their efforts.

