Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this debate,
and the Secretary-General for his briefing.

Terrorism is the scourge of our time. We are
reminded almost daily of the brutality and human
cost of terrorist attacks and violent extremism. They
strike indiscriminately, in everyday places, an airport
in Belgium, a school in Pakistan, a university campus
in Kenya, a market square in Syria. And behind each
headline lie shattered lives. So many of these stories
start and end with the actions of Da'esh, with its warped
ideology and false claims of statehood. They are a
challenge to the core United Nations values that bind
us together.

Faced with this and other threats, countering
terrorism and preventing violent extremism has become
a priority for us all - a collective challenge that needs
a collective response. The United Nations is playing
its part. The Council is leading the fight, adopting
ground-breaking new resolutions to tackle Da'esh.
The Secretary-General has provided a crucial basis
for international action through his Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism, and the General Assembly
continues to build consensus on the way forward under
the auspices of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. Those efforts, together with the
actions of the Global Coalition to Counter the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant, are bearing fruit. Da'esh
has lost 40 per cent of the territory it once controlled in
Iraq and has lost significant territory in Syria. We must
now sustain that pressure. To do so, I believe that there

are two top priorities - stopping the flow of money to
Da'esh and silencing its message of hate.

When our Finance Ministers met in the Council last
year (see S/PV.7587), we committed to choking off the
sources of funding that Da'esh needs to survive. Our
efforts are working. Its finances are being squeezed. Its
fighters' salaries are being cut. We all have a role to play
in sustaining that pressure. The United Kingdom has
joined global efforts to degrade Da'esh-controlled oil
resources so that we can deprive it ofthat illicit revenue.
We are helping partners in the region to reinforce their
border-control capacities, cutting off Da'esh access to
resources and recruits. We have the strongest legislation
against kidnap-for-ransom payments in the Coalition so
that we can prevent this most heinous of acts being used
to finance even more hatred.

But to truly shut down Da'esh's finances, all States
must work to a common purpose, implementing the
resolutions adopted by the Council and the provisions
of the Da'esh and Al-Qaida sanctions regime. Our
actions need to be targeted resolutely and consistently
against those terrorist groups. In parallel with targeting
their money, we need to silence their messages of hate.
Da'esh and other groups use the Internet to spread their
views and draw in support at a pace and scale that we
have never seen before.

The United Kingdom takes the threats from online
terrorist and extremist propaganda extremely seriously,
and we have taken significant steps to address them.
We work in partnership with industry and police
to remove terrorist and extremist material online.
We disrupt the circulation of extremist and terrorist
ideology through direct referrals to a dedicated referral
unit and by supporting civil society groups in providing
effective online counter-narratives. Since 2010, United
Kingdom referrals have led to a 150,000 pieces of
terrorist-related content being voluntarily removed by
industry. Removal requests now average 1,000 a week
and approximately 70 per cent of them are Da'esh-
related. This voluntary partnership is one of the many
ways of addressing terrorist use of the Internet without
resorting to excessive restrictions. We will continue
to work with industry to improve that approach, and I
hope other members will play their part, too.

Let me close with this final thought. The Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy is now 10 years old. In the
past decade, terrorism has evolved, with new levels of
barbarity and new tactics for advancing its cause. In
order to sustain our efforts, we need to make sure that
we have the most up-to-date approach possible, shaped
by emerging trends. That is why the United Kingdom
supports an ambitious, forward-looking review of the
United Nations strategy this year. To remain relevant,
we must consider how best to structure and manage
United Nations resources and ensure that new agendas,
notably preventing violent extremism, get the resources,
structures and focus that they require. We look forward
to debating options and ideas with all Member States
during the review of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy this summer.

Through collective action, we can and will address
the threat of terrorism and violent extremism to
international peace and security.

