Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Let me start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for holding this open
meeting at such short notice.

Mauritius has supported the Arab Group's request
that the Security Council consider the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine,
because we believe that the United Nations, especially
the Security Council, has a permanent responsibility
over the question of Palestine until it is resolved in all
its aspects. Resolution 181 (II) of 1947 and Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), among
others, have laid the groundwork for its continued
involvement in the search for a peaceful settlement in
the Middle East.

The Security Council has the Charter
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and it cannot afford to continue to
remain a passive bystander while the situation in the
Middle East continues to deteriorate. In fact, the
current situation has reached the most dangerous and
critical stage since the signing of the Oslo Agreement
in 1993. A continued paralysis of the Council over the
Middle East issue is unacceptable and would be
unforgivable. The Council should act, and it should act
now. If appropriate steps are not taken immediately, we
run the risk of seeing the entire Middle East embroiled
in a full-scale war. No one wishes this to happen.

Since the September 2000 visit by Mr. Sharon to
the holy site of Al-Haram al-Sharif, which triggered
the second intifada, there has been unprecedented
violence, casualties and loss of civilian lives on the
ground. Over the past year, as the result of harsh
economic blockades imposed by Israel, we have
witnessed the occupation of Palestinian offices,
including that of Orient House, by the Israeli forces.
The extrajudicial killings of Palestinian activists and
political leaders, followed by frequent Israeli
incursions into areas under full Palestinian control,
have only added more fuel to the explosive situation in
the Middle East. Likewise, the suicide attacks by
Palestinians, in which Israeli civilians have become
victims, have certainly not helped, and Mauritius
strongly condemns such attacks. Once again, we call on
both sides to exercise restraint.

We have now come to a most frightening and
dangerous stage in the Middle East crisis, with the
announcement by the Israeli Government that it has
severed all ties with the Palestinian leadership; to make
matters worse, it has put the Palestinian leader almost
in a state of siege. We totally reject any attempt to
sideline Chairman Arafat, who remains the only viable
Palestinian interlocutor and partner for peace. We are
relieved that the rest of the world has reacted promptly
to the decision announced by the Israeli Government.
Let us all make no mistake: any move to undermine
Chairman Arafat will bring more chaos to the region
and the resurgence and possible legitimization of
militant extremist groups which have only contributed
to the derailing and undermining of the peace process.

We see great wisdom in the statement made today
by the Belgian Foreign Minister that Chairman Arafat
and the Palestinian Authority are the only addresses
that Israel needs as a partner for peace. We also
welcome the position of the United States that it will
continue to work with the Palestinian leadership, and
we would request all sponsors and facilitators of the
peace process to remain actively engaged with a view
to narrowing the differences between the two sides.

All the same, we should acknowledge the fact
that despite all their efforts, the protagonists on the
ground have not been successful in stopping the cycle
of Violence. The situation in the Middle East is ablaze
and none of the protagonists seems to be capable of
putting out the fire. It is therefore incumbent upon the
United Nations to take the lead and a proactive
approach in stemming the violence.

Mauritius supports the Arab Group-Tunisian draft
resolution, which demands the immediate cessation of
all acts of violence, while calling for the
implementation of the recommendations of the
Mitchell report and the resumption of negotiations
between the two sides. It is also imperative that a
monitoring mechanism be established that would help
the two parties implement the recommendations of the
Mitchell report and address the issue of the safety of
Palestinian civilians. We will all recall that, since
November last year, the non-aligned caucus of the
Security Council has relentlessly undertaken efforts to
move the Council to establish a United Nations
observer force to provide protection to the people in
the Middle East. The stalemate and chaos on the
ground only strengthen our conviction that, had the
Council agreed to deploy such an observer force, the
situation would not be as it is today.

It is imperative that the political leaders return
without further delay and without preconditions to the
negotiating table and devise means for the
unconditional implementation of the recommendations
of the Mitchell report. That report, which has been
accepted by both sides, remains the only viable option
for laying the groundwork for the resumption of the
peace process.

Mauritius unequivocally condemns all acts of
terrorism, violence and targeted assassinations, which
have claimed an untold number of civilian victims. It is
beyond anyone's comprehension that, while the
Security Council considers such issues as the
prevention of armed conflict and the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, it is at the same time
prevented from taking action to protect civilians in the
Middle East, who are already subject to gross injustice
by the occupying Power. There should be no double
standards from this Council.

This afternoon, when Council members were
briefed by Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi on his
engagement in the search for a solution to the problem
of setting up a provisional Government in Kabul, his
achievement was referred to as a case of classic
success of United Nations leadership. We sincerely
hope that the United Nations and the Security Council
this evening will be able to show the same leadership
as we consider the issue of the Middle East and the
question of Palestine.

