The President: I thank Mr. O'Brien for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Ukraine.

I thank the briefers for the updated information they
provided on the attack on the town of Avdiivka, in the
Donetsk region of Ukraine, by the Russian occupying
forces and their proxies, which led to a humanitarian
emergency in the area.

Ukraine continues to be fully committed to
implementing the Minsk agreements in their entirety.
The President okaraine has stressed on many occasions
that there is no military solution in the Donbas. The
Ukrainian Government is sharply focused on peaceful
and diplomatic means in that regard. Ukrainian forces
continue to respect the ceasefire. They have strict
orders to open a fire only in response to the attacks and
assault actions of Russia-backed militants.

On the contrary, Russia, as the party to the conflict
in Donbas, and its proxies have blatantly violated the
Minsk agreements from the very beginning. They have
continued their attacks and occupied several Ukrainian
towns and localities. As ofnow, Russian proxies occupy
about 1,700 square kilometres, going far beyond the
contact line agreed in Minsk on 19 September 2014.

Before the crisis in Avdiivka, there was the battle
for Debaltseve two years ago, which was captured by
Russian forces immediately after the Minsk summit on
12 February 2015, contrary to decisions taken by the
leaders of Ukraine, Russia, Germany and France.

In the early hours of Sunday, 29 January, the
Russian army and its proxies began massive artillery
attacks on Avdiivka and its suburbs from residential
areas in Donetsk and Yasynuvata, which are under the
control of the Russia-led terrorists, and sent assault
units to storm positions of the Ukrainian armed forces.
The Russian forces used Grad multiple-rocket launch
systems, tanks, 152-millimetre and 122-millimetre
artillery, and 120-millimetre and 82-millimetre
mortars. All those weapons are forbidden under the
Minsk agreements. On 29 January alone, the Ukrainian
positions were shelled nearly 400 times.

The shelling intensified on 30 and 31 January,
when civilian infrastructure sites were also targeted.
As a result, the Donetsk water filtration plant and the
Avdiivka coke plant, which provides heat for Avdiivka,
are now without electricity. The city is left without
water, electricity or heat. The current temperature in
Avdiivka is -18°C. Without central heat, civilians will
not survive. Sixteen thousand people ended up without
water, electricity or heat, including 2,000 children.
Just imagine: 2,000 children without heat at -18°C.
Ukrainian emergency services prepared to evacuate
people from Avdiivka.

Numerous attempts by the Ukrainian services
to repair damaged infrastructure were consistently
blocked until 1 February by the Russia-led terrorists,
who continued shelling, and by the Russian part of
the Joint Centre for Control and Coordination (JCCC),
which were unreasonably delayed in providing security
guarantees necessary to reach the destroyed objects.

According to information that we just received
15 minutes before the start ofthis briefing, the separatist
forces resumed the shelling of residential areas of
Avdiivka using high-calibre artillery systems. Several
residential buildings were hit and there are several fires
around the town. One of the shells exploded close to a
temporary heating station that had been set up by the
Ukrainian authorities to provide Avdiivka residents
with warmth in these freezing temperatures.

Destroying critical infrastructure and thus
creating a humanitarian disaster is a terrorist tactic
aimed primarily at civilians. This tactic obliterates the
Russian propaganda myth of so-called peaceful miners
who fight the authorities with their own shotguns.
Locals would never do this to their neighbours, but
those who have come to Ukrainian soil as aggressors to
destroy Ukrainian statehood do not hesitate to damage
factories, houses and powerlines. This tactic is not new
for the Russian forces.

The aforementioned actions by Russia may qualify
as a war crime. Ukraine will add evidence related to the
recent escalation and indiscriminate attacks on civilian
infrastructure to our claim against Russia on terrorism
to the International Court of Justice. This is a first but
very important step in bringing Russia to justice for its
mounting violations of the United Nations Charter and
international law.

The Ukrainian Government announced the
emergency situation in Avdiivka. We have managed
to sustain the functioning of the heating system at a
minimum level and to avoid the rapid degradation
of the situation into a real humanitarian disaster.
Eleven warming centres have been set up, scores of
field kitchens have been deployed, and kindergartens
and hospitals are functioning in emergency mode.
Additional police units have been deployed to protect
civil order and to help provide a timely response to
the emergency.

The events of recent days have become a test for
monitoring and coordination mechanisms in Donbas.
Since the outbreak ofhostilities, Ukraine has repeatedly,
literally hundreds of times, requested Russian
representatives at the JCCC to use their influence to
stop the hostilities. Of the 230 requests made during
the period from 29 January to 1 February to stop the
hostilities in the area around Avdiivka, all but two were
ignored. On 31 January, Ukraine called for an urgent
video-teleconference meeting of the Trilateral Contact
Group (TCG) to defuse tensions. Once again, the
Russian side and their proxies in Donbas did not show
up, claiming that this was not the right time. Seriously?
Not the right time?

Despite calls from all corners for a ceasefire
and the withdrawal of heavy weaponry, the militants
continue shelling day and night. On 1 February, despite
the appeal of the Trilateral Contact Group for an
immediate and comprehensive ceasefire in the region of
Avdiivka, Russian militants did not stop shooting, and
even shot at the repair team that was trying to fix the
damaged power line. They shelled residential buildings
and last night shelled one of the roads designated for
the evacuation of civilians. This is nothing less than a
war crime.

I have a picture here that I would ask the Council
to look at. This is an apartment building in Avdiivka;
at least 1,500 people lived there. It was shelled by
terrorists, and the inhabitants rushed out into the
freezing cold; it was -20°C outside. This is beyond evil.
The perpetrators, those who pulled the trigger and those
who gave the orders, should face justice, and they will.

It has to be mentioned that when the content of
the aforementioned appeal was being discussed in the
Trilateral Contact Group, the Russian side was against
the formulations regarding repair work on the energy
and power-supply infrastructure. This is additional
clear evidence of the Kremlin's intention to create a
humanitarian catastrophe in Avdiivka, as was done, by
the way, by the Russian army in Aleppo not so long ago.

Two Ukrainian soldiers have died and 14 have
been wounded over the past 24 hours. Altogether, 20
Ukrainian soldiers have been killed and 134 wounded
by Russian hybrid forces and Russia-backed militants
since the beginning of the year. We call on the Russian
Federation to abide by the ceasefire and to ensure the
necessary secure conditions for the repair work.
The attacks on and near Avdiivka in recent days as
well as the continuing Russian aggression underscore
two important trends. First, Russia and its proxies in
Donbas continue to block and undermine the peaceful
process by pursuing their political objectives through
the indiscriminate use of force. There can be no illusion
about the Russian role in the implementation of the
Minsk agreements. Every bit of progress made in the
TCG or on the contact line is flagrantly destroyed by
another assault by Russia-led terrorists.

Secondly, the existing mechanisms created to avoid
further destabilization and to move forward with the
implementation ofthe Minsk agreements are not efficient
enough to fulfil their mandate. Despite the urgency of
the situation, the TCG met only three days after the
outbreak of hostilities, and the JCCC appears to be an
ineffective tool in a crisis situation - all of this due
to Russian non-cooperation. Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission
observers still face serious restrictions on their freedom
of movement on the territories temporary controlled by
Russia-backed militants. They lack 24/7 monitoring
capabilities and the relevant technical means.

The events around Avdiivka have created an
obstacle to Russia's aspiration to resolve the conflict
in Donbas by military means. Yes, the Ukrainian army
proved its strength and ability to repeal a Russian
offensive. However, Ukraine is paying a dramatically
high price, losing its best sons and daughters to this war.

We care about our people. The death of every
single soldier or civilian is yet another scar on the soul
of Ukraine. I ask the Council to look at this picture;
it shows a 26-year-old officer, Andriy Kyzylo, who
was killed on 29 February near Avdiivvka. Look at his
eyes, Mr. Ambassador; it is your weapons and your
compatriots who killed him.

(spoke in Russian)

You killed him.
(spoke in English)

Our people get down on their knees to treat their
fallen defenders. Russian invaders are buried in
unmarked graves. We are seeking peace and are doing
our utmost and taking every step to bring peace back
to Ukraine. Therefore, we do not advocate a military
solution and believe that the available political means
should be used. The armed confrontation could be
easily ended. The Russian Federation should stop
arming militants and sending its mercenaries and
military personnel to Ukraine.

Does anyone seriously think that rockets and
artillery shells grow on trees in Donbas? We are talking
about tens, if not hundreds, of thousands of rounds
of artillery ammunition. Since November, we and
international observers have noted an increased supply
of ammunition and armour to militants from the Russian
Federation. Now we are seeing the consequences.

What is clear is that an international security
presence on the ground needs to be enhanced so as to
prevent such provocations in future and thus contribute
to the implementation of the Minsk agreements and,
ultimately, to a peaceful resolution. We once again urge
the Russian Federation to exercise its responsibility to
implement the Minsk commitments, specifically their
security and humanitarian provisions. We urge Russia
to halt its support for terrorists and to stop building
hybrid terrorist armies in eastern Ukraine as well as its
military buildup along Ukraine's eastern borders.

Moreover, we call on the Russian Federation not
to expand the framework of the escalation. Yesterday
Russian military forces shelled and damaged an
Antonov An-26 Ukrainian aircraft while it was
conducting a flight over the Odessa gas-deposit region
in the Black Sea, in Ukraine's exclusive maritime zone.
This time only a lucky coincidence saved the crew from
the Russian shelling. God only knows what will happen
next time.

There is a rather simple remedy that would stop
this Russian aggression against my country and prevent
further civilian suffering. What the international
community needs to do is to step up the pressure on the
aggressor and urge the Russian Federation to get out
of Ukraine.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

