Mr. Paet (Estonia): At the outset, let me congratulate
Lithuania, the first Baltic State to serve on the Security
Council, on having assumed the presidency of the
Council.

The Secretary-General notes in his latest report
(S/2013/689) that the current state of the protection
of civilians leaves little room for optimism. Estonia
strongly condemns all forms of violence against
civilian populations and violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. We hear with great
concern about children being killed and maimed in
Syria and women being raped in the Central African
Republic. The outbreak of armed conflict should be
avoided to the extent possible by using all available
measures.

The greatest responsibility to maintain stability and
to find sustainable solutions guaranteeing the safety of
civilians is in the hands ofthe State concerned. However,
ifthe conflict is escalating despite all preventive efforts
and there is a risk that the lives of civilians might be in
danger, the international community, with the Security
Council at the helm, must act.
In addition to systematically condemning the
violations, the Council can also use targeted measures
against those who commit the violations, mandate a
commission of inquiry or even refer the situations to
the International Criminal Court.

There are numerous examples that prove the
crucial significance of United Nations peacekeeping
missions as the first stabilizing force to reach a conflict
area. United Nations peacekeepers have often played
a central role in restoring peace and preventing tragic
losses of human life.

Estonia continues to support United Nations
peacekeeping efforts. That is evidenced by the fact that
last year we raised our contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping operations considerably, sending our
military observers to the most complicated areas in
the world. Under the auspices of the United Nations,
Estonians are currently serving without any caveats
in the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. But the bulk of our
peace-support troops are still deployed as part of the
International Security Assistance Force mission in
Afghanistan.

Maintaining peace and protecting civilians is the
ultimate goal and requires a quick and determined
reaction. That is why Estonia has decided to take part,
with an infantry platoon, in a European Union-led
peacekeeping mission in the Central African Republic.
We remember the Rwandan genocide in 1994, when
the international community reacted too late. Such
situations should never happen again.

United Nations peacekeeping operations receive
mandates from the Security Council. Therefore it is
also the Security Council that bears responsibility for
setting realistic margins for operations. A clear and
precise assessment of the situation on the ground is a
prerequisite for the sufficient allocation of resources
and operational capabilities. The clarity of a mandate
will have a direct impact on the success ofthe operation.
Therefore, in order to strengthen the means to protect
civilians, the Council should also remain involved in
the implementation process.

Estonia is particularly concerned about the
implications of armed conflicts for the most vulnerable
groups. There is growing understanding that women and
children are impacted uniquely and disproportionately
by the effects of conflict and its aftermath. I should like
to encourage the Council to include in the mandates
of peacekeeping missions provisions on human rights
monitoring, with special focus on the rights of children
and women. We also urge the further and timely
deployment of gender advisers, women's protection
advisers and child protection advisers to peacekeeping
missions. In addition, I should like to stress that the
predeployment training must cover the subjects of
sexual and gender-based violence and the protection of
children. Bearing that in mind, I welcome the Secretary
General's "Rights up front" initiative to make the United
Nations more accountable for its responsibilities. That
is an awaited move forward in acknowledging the
crucial need to respond as early as possible to human
rights violations.

The protection ofcivilians is based on the principles
of humanity, impartiality and neutrality. Estonia has
focused its development cooperation, humanitarian
assistance and human rights activities on supporting
the countries in most need - Afghanistan, the Central
African Republic, Mali, South Sudan and Somalia, to
name a few.

Over the past couple ofyears, Estonia has supported
efforts to alleviate the humanitarian situation of refugees
from Syria with almost €l million. Recently, Estonia
has also provided €100,000 for the effort to relieve
the situation of internally displaced people suffering
violence in the Central African Republic. However,
we are in a situation where humanitarian agencies and
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) experience
increasing difficulties in reaching the most vulnerable
parts of society affected by conflict. With great
disappointment, I have to admit that the humanitarian
space is shrinking. The latest examples are Syria and the
Central African Republic. Humanitarian organizations

and NGOs often have to make compromises in order to
get access to conflict areas. Those limitations function
as alarming hindrances to humanitarian principles.

The Security Council needs to send a clear
message to all parties in armed conflict and to remind
them of their obligations. Violations of international
humanitarian, human rights law and international
criminal law must be condemned. All parties to an
armed conflict must refrain from targeting civilians.
They must also facilitate humanitarian operations
and allow rapid and unimpeded passage of relief
consignments, equipment and personnel to all affected
populations. The protection of organizations and
institutions providing humanitarian assistance, as well
as humanitarian workers, assets and goods, must be
ensured at all times. It is important to set up simplified,
expedited mechanisms such as the registration of
humanitarian organizations and project agreements,
the exemption of humanitarian goods and workers
from fees, duties and taxes, in-country movement of
personnel and goods, and visas.

Parties to conflict must facilitate the provision of
humanitarian assistance in the most effective ways,
including, where appropriate, across lines and borders.
I agree that it is important for national and international
humanitarian actors to ensure a more coordinated
approach to negotiating, securing and maintaining
access. Estonia welcomes the initiative of Switzerland
to produce legal and operational guidance and training
materials on the matter.

Our goal must be to prevent conflicts, grave crimes
and human rights violations. We must strive for a
deterrence-centred approach; but, whenever it is clear
that unacceptable war crimes and violations of human
rights have taken place, we must act in a timely way
and bring the persons responsible for the atrocities to
justice. By ensuring that there are effective mechanisms
for investigating and prosecuting crimes, we strengthen
accountability and decrease the possibility that similar
inhumane injustices will happen again.

National Governments have the primary
responsibility to adopt and adjust their domestic
legislation to ensure the prosecution of persons suspected
of grave crimes. Building up strong and effective
legislation is a prerequisite for protecting witnesses
and victims - whose cooperative engagement in court
proceedings is crucial. States must also ensure that
their investigative and judicial infrastructure has the
knowledge and capacity to prosecute atrocity crimes.
Witness-protection programmes must be in place to
ensure the safety of those brave enough to testify.

In addition to national mechanisms, the international
criminal system must also be constantly strengthened.
Especially significant is the role of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), which has the power to deter
further atrocities or prevent their escalation. But the
ICC's jurisdiction is limited to the territory of States
parties unless the Security Council is willing to refer
the matter to the ICC. In other words, the ICC can
meet its full potential only when national Governments
are determined to cooperate with the Court, but also
only if the Security Council is willing to enforce that
cooperation and to refer all appropriate situations
consistently. Otherwise, civilians would be unequally
protected in armed conflicts throughout the world.

To sum up, allow me to repeat the five crucial
points for Estonia in today's debate. First, the
protection of civilians must remain the central idea
behind peacekeeping operations. Estonia remains
determined to support peacekeeping efforts. Secondly,
the mandates of peacekeeping operations must set
achievable goals and should be adequately resourced.
Thirdly, protecting civilians means protecting human
rights, and vice versa. The Secretary-General's "Rights
up front" initiative is a step in the right direction.
Fourthly, violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law must be condemned and the protection
of humanitarian workers must be ensured at all times.
Humanitarian assistance remains a crucial part of
protecting civilians. Fifthly, former Estonian President
Lennart Meri said once, "Crimes against humanity are
crimes against humanity regardless of who commits
them". Therefore, those who are responsible for
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
other serious violations of international criminal law
must be brought to justice. That is possible only when
national Governments adopt corresponding legislation,
empower their domestic judicial systems, ensure the
protection of witnesses and support and cooperate with
the ICC. It is the responsibility of all States to put an
end to atrocities and to impunity.

