Mr. Ayewah (Nigeria): The delegation of Nigeria
extends its courtesies to you, Sir, as you assume the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. We are convinced that you will bring your
proficiency to bear on the work of the Council. You may
rest assured of the cooperation of my delegation as you
discharge your important duties.

I should also like to convey my delegation's
gratitude to Ambassador Manzi Bakuramutsa, the
Permanent Representative of Rwanda, for the able manner
in which he guided the affairs of the Council in the
month of December.

We welcome into membership of the Council
Botswana, Germany, Honduras, Indonesia and Italy, and
wish them well as they take their places in the Council
and make their contributions to its work in promoting
international peace and security.

We also welcome to the Security Council the
Foreign Minister of Italy, His Excellency Mr. Antonio
Martino and thank him for his powerful contribution to
the debate.

During the consideration on 23 September 1994 of
resolution 943 (1994), on the easing of some of the
sanctions imposed on the FRY (Serbia and Montenegro),
my delegation expressed its reservations primarily because
of the timing. The thrust of the resolution and its main
provisions, which called for the suspension of sanctions
on civilian air travel and sporting and cultural activities,
were generally agreeable to my delegation. We agreed
with the need to find ways and means of encouraging the
FRY authorities to maintain their acceptance of the
Contact Group peace plan and cut off the link between
Belgrade and Pale.

However, the context in which we considered the
draft was one that we wished had been different. We said
then that, had we considered the resolution after the
receipt by the Security Council of a report from the

 

Secretary-General that the Co-Chairrnen of the Steering
Committee of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia (ICFY) had certified that the authorities of the
FRY were effectively implementing their decision to close
the border between it and the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, my delegation would have voted in favour of
the draft resolution. Since that was not the case, my
delegation abstained in the voting. In doing so, we however
expressed the hope that the FRY authorities would live up
to their commitments by effectively implementing their
decision to close the international border between the FRY
and the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Since the adoption of resolution 943 (1994), we have
received the monthly reports of the ICFY Mission, which
has confirmed that the political decision taken by Belgrade
to break off political and economic relations with the Pale
Serbs has been maintained. Furthermore, the ICFY in
paragraph 28 of its latest report confirmed the new
important measures adopted by Belgrade in response to the
observations of the Mission to ensure the effective closure
of the borders to all goods except food, medicines and other
humanitarian supplies.

These developments are positive and encouraging, and
we welcome them and call on the FRY authorities to
continue in that mode. None the less, we are aware of the
existing loopholes along the 450-kilometre border through
which violations could occur, and have indeed occurred in
the past. These incidents have undermined the effectiveness
of the sanctions imposed under resolution 942 (1994) and
also disrupted the balance contained in resolution
943 (1994) between effective border closure and easing of
sanctions. In this regard, my delegation recalls the proposal
of the Caucus of the Non-Aligned Movement during the
month of December 1994 to ensure strict implementation of
paragraph 12 of resolution 820 (1993) and resolution
943 (1994). We had presented this proposal to the Council
in the form of a draft resolution, which was however
vetoed. We found the imposition of this veto difficult to
understand, in the face of the fighting that was going on
then in the Bihac area, which we felt was being sustained
by fuel diverted to the Krajina Serbs across the border into
Croatia. What is more, the draft resolution was intended to
reinforce the existing measures in place.

We have noted the incorporation of some elements of
that proposal in the current draft before us; operative
paragraphs 3 and 5, we believe, contain substantial
improvements over the provisions of resolution 943 (1994).
Furthermore, the inclusion of operative paragraph 2 - a
proposal of the Caucus of the Non-Aligned
Movement - in the draft is another important element.
We are grateful that the co-sponsors of the draft
resolution were able to include this reference to the
mutual recognition of the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and international borders by all the States in the region.
Acknowledgement and acceptance of this principle by all
States are no doubt germane to the solution of the crisis
in the Balkans.

In view of the foregoing and given the recent
improvement in the prospects for the peaceful settlement
of the conflict in the territory of former Yugoslavia, my
delegation believes, in the light of the agreements on a
cease-fire and cessation of hostilities, that an affirmative
vote on this draft resolution would give an added push to
the peace process. As a result, my delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution.

