Mr. Kaddumi (Palestine) (interpretation from Arabic): For the past three days, the Palestinian people in
the occupied Palestinian territories have been brutally
assaulted by the Israeli army and police forces, which are
using armoured vehicles and helicopters against them. This
Israeli attack has resulted in the deaths of over 86 martyrs
and the injury of more than 1,000 people. It would seem
from these developments that these brutal Israeli measures
were planned in advance in the aim of undermining the
achievements of the political process on the Palestinian
track and of sending a warning concerning the other Arab
peace tracks.

Following the declaration of its political programmes,
the current Israeli Government took many provocative
actions, including the resumption of settlement activities
and the building of thousands of housing units. It has
confiscated ever more Palestinian land in order to construct
side roads to protect the security of the established
settlements, which now number 124 in the West Bank.

Using bulldozers, the Israeli authorities abruptly
destroyed the Borj Lukluk community centre for retarded
people in East Jerusalem. It closed down a number of
educational and cultural institutions, including Jerusalem
University. It isolated the city of Jerusalem from other
Palestinian territories and restricted the housing
development in Arab neighbourhoods.

This has occurred despite Israel's pledges not to touch
the Palestinian institutions, as indicated in Mr. Peres' letter
to Mr. Holst, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway,
in which he says,

(spoke in English)

"Dear Mr. Holst,

I wish to confirm that the Palestinian
institutions of East Jerusalem and the interests and
well-being of the Palestinians of East Jerusalem are
of great importance and will be preserved.
Therefore, all the Palestinian institutions in East
Jerusalem, including social, economic, educational
and cultural, and the holy Christian and Muslim
places, are performing an essential task for the
Palestinian population. Needless to say, we will not
hamper their activities. On the contrary, the
fulfilment of this important mission is to be
encouraged. This is a part of the agreements."

The letter is signed by Mr. Peres.
(spoke in Arabic)

Israel has also withdrawn the identity cards of
Palestinian citizens in Jerusalem and prevented the
citizens of Gaza from attending Palestinian universities in
the cities of Jerusalem and Hebron. This Council has
received several letters that underscored these facts and
practices.

The current Israeli Government announced its
political programme to strengthen settlement activity and
to develop and expand settlements in order to receive
more new immigrants. It also endorsed the use of force
and repressive power by the army and security apparatus
to secure, as it claims, the security of Israel. The political
programme of the Israeli Government has emphasized the
preservation of a united Jerusalem as the eternal capital of
Israel under total Israeli sovereignty. This contravenes the
rules of international law and resolutions adopted in
international legality, which reject the annexation of
Jerusalem and any change to its status.

Moreover, the political programme of the Israeli
Government is based on a number of negative positions,
including no return to the 4 June l967 borders; no
withdrawal from the Syrian Golan; no discussion of
Jerusalem; which is a foregone conclusion and not open
to debate; and no establishment of an independent
Palestinian State. That political programme has indicated
that the Israeli Government will define zones for security
and settlement, along with the self-rule zones, in which it
will build more and more settlements for the protection
and safety of Israel. Israel has made such threats more

 

than once. As this political programme was followed by
acts of provocation, ominous clouds started to gather over
the region. As soon as Israel announced the opening of the
tunnel in Jerusalem, the spark of conflagration was touched
off.
Furthermore, the economic siege that was laid against
the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territories
is still in place, intensifying the psychological pressure on
the people and aggravating living conditions.
Unemployment has reached 56 per cent. Israel has restricted
the movement of imports and exports, weakening the
economy of the Palestinian people, that it had destroyed in
the first place.

Thus, the Palestinian people continue to suffer heavy
losses; 4,500 Palestinian prisoners continue to languish in
Israeli jails. To this day, Israel has refused to allow the
return of displaced Palestinians who were forced to leave
their homes as a result of Israeli aggression in 1967.
Security Council resolutions and the accords reached with
Israel provide for a four-member committee composed of
the Palestine Liberation Organization, Egypt, Israel and
Jordan to discuss modalities for the return of displaced
persons to their homeland. Yet that committee has failed to
make any progress owing to the procrastination of the
Israeli authorities.

The Israeli Government's slogan is "Peace for the sake
of peace." That means emptying the negotiations of their
political contents, denying international legality and
ignoring the political provisions contained in President
George Bush's initiative. It deliberately ignores the land-
for-peace formula. Mr. Netanyahu has called for
negotiations without preconditions, as if he thought political
negotiations could be founded on shifting sands, without
any principles or guidelines to govern them. That in itself
is enough to create a vicious circle of events and means
nothing other than an attempt to kill time.

Following Israel's economic siege of the Palestinian
territories some thought that the issue was purely economic
and that it had no political foundations. The fact is that the
root cause was political, not economic, even though, owing
to the vast suffering caused the Palestinian people as a
result of increasing unemployment and the decline in per
capita income, its results have been economic indeed. The
Israeli occupation is the primary cause for these woes since
that occupation is the culmination of terrorism and a source
of tension because of the brutal, oppressive and harassing
measures Israel has enacted and its continuing blockade of
Palestinian territories, not to mention other violations.

Mr. Netanyahu appears to believe that an arrogant
use of power is an effective means of bringing the
Palestinians under control and safeguarding the security
of Israel. The entire world can bear witness to the fact
that the Palestinian police forces have maintained law and
order in the areas under their control in spite of all the
difficulties and odds they face. Today, Israeli tanks are
assaulting towns from which it had withdrawn and
attacking the Palestinian police forces that are maintaining
order in those towns. They are also using helicopters and
heavy machine-guns. Instead of invading towns, Israel
should have withdrawn its forces from Hebron,
implemented the redeployment plan and completed its
withdrawal from other Palestinian territories.

Yesterday in the General Assembly Hall we heard
several statements by heads of delegations that
emphasized time and again the need to preserve peace in
the Middle East. The thrust of those statements was that
the peace process must be kept on track. At the same
time, the rights of that region's peoples to self-
determination, independence and security were also
stressed. We subscribe to the belief that peace cannot be
attained unless the Palestinian people realize their right to
self-determination and to build an independent State.
However, if the Israeli measures continue, the peace
process is in mortal peril and deaths would be inevitable.

An Israeli witness has said that current Israeli
practices do not lead to peace but, rather, serve to create
a vacuum in the Middle East region. We have heard Mr.
Peres himself say this on American television. Yet listen
to the words of Mr. Netanyahu addressing the Israeli
Knesset, words reminiscent of that 1940s European leader
who called for racial supremacy and spoke of security and
settlement:

(spoke in English)

"Zionism is not dead, even though in some
circles it has been relegated to quotation marks, we
have a wonderful youth waiting to mobilize for
national tasks. We will encourage the spirit. We will
encourage pioneering settlements in the Land of
Israel, in the Negev, in Galilee, in Judea and
Samaria and in the Golan. The settlers are the real
pioneers of our day, and they deserve support and
appreciation."

(spoke in Arabic)

 

Is that not reminiscent of a similar speech delivered some
50 years ago? That is the true nature of the political
programme adopted by the Netanyahu Government of
Israel. Those are the measures that have led to this
explosion inside the occupied Palestinian territories.

I have just outlined the most recent developments in
the occupied Palestinian territories since the election of Mr.
Netanyahu, which has led to a greater number of seats in
the Knesset being occupied by increasingly radical and
extremist forces following the assassination of Mr. Yitzhak
Rabin, an assassination that demonstrated the depth of
fundamentalism and terrorism within Israeli society itself.

When United States President Bush put forward his
initiative on 6 March 1991, after the Gulf War, the
Palestinian National Council agreed to enter into the peace
process. We participated in the Madrid Peace Conference
in the hope that it would be a historic opportunity, one that
might not recur. The Palestinian National Council's
approval revealed a genuine desire to achieve its goals. It
also underscored the Palestinian people's genuine desire for
peace, which was also evidenced by the ensuing widespread
demonstrations throughout the entire West Bank in which
the populace placed roses in the bayonets and gun barrels
of the Israeli forces to express their hopes for peace and
coexistence.

After 22 months of political talks in Washington, DC,
with Mr. Shamir's delegation, no progress had been
achieved. Then came the Oslo Agreement, which broke the
log-jam and roused hopes that the peace process would
achieve tangible and concrete progress on the ground.

The Palestinian people, hundreds of thousands of
them, received Chairman Arafat in Gaza when he came to
the occupied land in the hope that that day would be the
beginning of the end of the Palestinian diaspora and the
turning point for the Palestinian people's return to its
usurped homeland. Months passed in which we saw stalling
and procrastination on many occasions, and efforts to back
out of the implementation of obligations under the
agreements reached. But the souls of the Palestinian people
held the fervent hope that change would come in the near
future.

Alas, today we see all doors closed in the path of
peace, and the proof of that is the intransigent stance and
the provocative acts of the Israeli Government. We have
come here to put the whole case before this Council, which
is the supreme organ responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security. We reiterate our hope
and desire for the establishment of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace that would ensure legitimate
Palestinian rights, including the right to self-
determination, the establishment of its independent state
and the return of the Palestinian refugees to the homeland
from which they were evicted.

We also wish to reiterate and emphasize our
commitment to the underpinnings of the peace process,
which calls for Israel's withdrawal from all occupied
Arab territories and Palestinian territories, including
Jerusalem under the resolutions adopted by this Council
and in keeping with the principle that rejects the
acquisition by force of the territories of others.

The final stage on the Palestinian track was a litmus
test of the intentions and credibility of both parties to
implement the agreements concluded. Next, we should
start negotiations on the final status, including the central
issues in the question of Palestine. These central points
include the question of Jerusalem, of the dismantling of
settlements, of the return of refugees and of voters. All
these issues are governed by international treaties, as well
as by resolutions adopted by this august Council.

Allow me to say that the painful events that have
taken place in the occupied Palestinian territories are very
disturbing. They sprang from the accumulation of
simmering tensions, and Israel alone bears the full
responsibility for these events. The Council should
condemn these events and demand that Israel put an end
to its provocative acts and close the tunnel in order to
defuse the escalating tensions. We recommend that the
Council dispatch a fact-finding mission to call for peace
in the occupied territories and to examine in full detail the
situation there. Following that fact-finding mission, the
Council should take measures to ensure peace and
security there.

In closing, the resolutions to be adopted by the
Council must emphasize the principles and tenets
underpinning the peace process and on the basis of which
the Madrid Peace Conference was convened.

