Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I, too, would like to thank Mr. Serry for his briefing
and the representatives of Palestine and Israel for their
statements.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and would like to stress a few
major points with regard to the peace process.

First, we welcome the adoption on Tuesday of
resolution 1850 (2008), in which the Security Council
once again addressed the Israeli-Palestinian issue.

The European Union shares the belief reflected in
that resolution that the Israeli-Palestinian negotiation
process, which has been under way since the Annapolis
conference, is irreversible and must be given the
strongest possible support in order to conclude a
comprehensive peace agreement as soon as possible.
This agreement must provide for the creation of a
Palestinian State that includes the West Bank and Gaza
and is viable, independent, democratic and sovereign,
living in peace and security side by side with Israel
within secure and recognized borders, with Jerusalem
as the capital of both States.

To this effect, the European Union calls for inter-
Palestinian reconciliation. To achieve this, we support
Egyptian mediation efforts and would support any
Government that respects the Palestinian Liberation
Organization's commitments, would strongly support
peace negotiations with Israel and whose policy and
actions reflect the Quartet's principles.

The second issue of major importance is that, like
its European Union partners, France subscribes to a
comprehensive approach to settling the Arab-Israeli
conflict, as reflected in the resolution. We welcome in
this regard the indirect peace talks between Israel and
Syria under the auspices of Turkey and encourage the
two parties to open direct talks.

We also welcome the Arab Peace Initiative,
which we believe provides a solid and relevant basis
for peace in the Middle East. It will also help us to
include the Syrian and Lebanese tracks in our thinking,

which we believe to be essential. In our view, the
initiative calls for a continued, broad and constructive
commitment from all parties involved.

However, this commitment presupposes
strengthening mutual trust, which brings me to my
third point. There is only one path towards mutual
trust - quick and significant change on the ground, in
compliance with the commitments entered into under
the Road Map, the importance of which is quite rightly
reiterated in the resolution.

In this regard, the Palestinian Authority has made
major efforts with respect to security, governance and
rule of law, especially in Jenin, Nablus and Hebron. It
is clear that much remains to be done to stop terrorism
and violence, irrespective of the perpetrating party.
Nevertheless, the progress made by the Palestinian
Authority in terms of security is undeniable.

We believe that this progress calls for reciprocal
gestures from Israel, starting with the settlements issue.
Accordingly, the European Union recalls that it is
necessary and urgent to put an end to the settlements,
which includes natural expansion, as well as expansion
into East Jerusalem. Any other policy would damage
the credibility of the negotiators and prejudge the
outcome of the talks.

Restrictions on travel to and within the occupied
Palestinian territories must be lifted, mainly to
encourage economic development. The humanitarian
situation in Gaza requires radical improvement,
through the continuation of the truce, the reopening of
the crossings and the provision of goods and services
for the population.

The ability of the agencies responsible for
providing assistance, especially the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees in
the Near East, to do their jobs must be assured. Lastly,
it is important that as many Palestinian prisoners as
possible be released, with the initial priority given to
minors.

The European Union condemns all forms of
violence, especially in Gaza, as well as the firing of
rockets against Israel, which must be halted. The fight
against terrorism must continue unabated. Corporal
Gilad Shalit must be unconditionally released.

Fourthly, the parties are naturally not the only
ones with responsibilities. It is equally desirable for the
international community as a whole to mobilize in
support of the Palestinian Authority. The European
Union has done more than its fair share by continually
increasing aid. Total EU aid to the Palestinian people,
including humanitarian and non-humanitarian
assistance, will exceed €540 million this year, meaning
that once again the EU and its member States make up
the Palestinian Authority's largest contributors.

It is important to continue the work which began
in Paris last December at the Donors' Conference for
the Palestinian State. Budgetary aid totalling
€1.7 billion has been paid so far and it is the
responsibility of donors to meet their commitments.

The role of the international community is also
political in nature. The European Union is determined
to work to strengthen the Quartet's monitoring role on
the ground, in collaboration with the United States and
other Quartet members. In order to promote a lasting
settlement, the European Union, without becoming
involved in the negotiations or prejudging their results,
has once more demonstrated that when the time comes,
it is prepared to help implement a final peace
agreement. The European Union recalls the importance
of a continued, broad and constructive commitment by
its Arab partners.

Lastly, as was emphasized by the heads of State
and Government in the European Council declaration
of 11 and 12 December, "We urge the United States,
under its new Administration, to join us in making the
Middle East peace process an immediate and central
priority."

The European Union is convinced that to be
sustainable, peace must be comprehensive. The
European Union reiterates its commitment to resolving
all aspects of the Arab-Israeli conflict, in accordance
with the terms of reference of the Madrid Conference,
especially the principle of land for peace, the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the Road Map.

