Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the French presidency of the Security Council
for having organized this important debate. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General; Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict; Ms. Yoka
Brandt, Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF; Ms. July
Bodin, Child Protection Advisor, Save the Children;
and Mr. Junior Nzita, President of Paix pour l'enfance,
for their informative briefings and their commitment to
protecting children.

Chad also associates itself with the statement to
be delivered by the Permanent Observer of the African
Union.

Today's debate is an important step in focusing our
attention on the situation of child victims of non-State
armed groups as we approach the commemoration
later this year the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005). The scale of the violence itself
and the emergence of new terrorist groups that use
shocking and brutal methods against children compel
the international community to adapt its approach to
and tools for protection to meet these new types of
challenges.

The abduction in 2014 of 270 high school girls from
Chibok by Boko Haram, 153 Kurdish boys from Ain
al-Arab in Syria and hundreds of Yazidi children in Iraq
by the Islamic State underscore the abhorrent use of
children by terrorists as tools to achieve their ends. The
use of children to carry bombs in attacks or as fighters
among the ranks of terrorist groups, such as Boko
Haram, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Lord's
Resistance Army, and terrorist attacks against schools,
such as that of 16 December 2014 against a school in
Peshawar, Pakistan, where 132 children were killed,
highlights the importance of debates such as that of
today and the urgency of finding ways to deal with such
acts. Of the 59 entities listed in the annex of the 2014
annual report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict (S/2014/339), 51 are non-State actors,
including repeat offenders. This shows the immensity
of the efforts that remain necessary to cut down and
eradicate violence committed against children by these
groups.

While the judgments handed down by the
international courts - against Charles Taylor in 2009
as principal leader of the United Revolutionary Front
of Sierra Leone and recently against Thomas Lubanga
by the International Criminal Court - are evidence of
the fight against impunity for violence against children,
they have far from deterred non-State groups, in
particular, terrorist groups. As a result, complementary
efforts aiming to seek ways and means to prevent and
respond to violations against children by armed groups
also requires us to consider the question of access to
such groups and dialogue with them. While such access
is made impossible in many cases due to security and
political reasons, we receive reports ofnew recruitment,
including the abduction and use of children on a daily
basis. In this context, we must consider how to protect
children under all circumstances and the difficulty
of establishing dialogue with armed groups. We
wonder whether turning to certain non-governmental
organizations that have the ability to access some
armed groups due to their neutrality could not be used
to facilitate, in some cases, negotiations of action plans
with such groups.

According to the report of the Secretary-General,
and as Ms. Leila Zerrougui recalled in her statement,
there armed groups that honour their commitments, and
with which the United Nations is in dialogue through
various strategies adapted to their characteristics and
diversity. Moreover, there is an important need to raise
awareness among communities that can at times be
complicit in the recruitment of children or which have
links with armed groups.

Faced with the scale of the violence committed
against children, the international community
thankfully remains mobilized, as evidenced by the
ratification by States of the Geneva Conventions,
human rights conventions and instruments, and the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its optional
protocol. These Paris commitments and the principle of
return relating to children linked to armed forces and
groups also enjoy broad international consensus.

My country Chad, for its part, has ratified the
majority of these international instruments and
adhered to the Paris principle of return. In September
2014, we signed a protocol of agreement with the
United Nations relating to the transfer of children
linked to armed forces and groups, which allowed for
the liberation of children linked to such groups from
a neighboring country, the Central African Republic.
Furthermore, following the for the subregional forum,
held in N'Djamena in June 2010, on the recruitment
and use of children, the Lake Chad Basin States, the
Sudan and the Central African Republic signed a
declaration committing them to facilitating access for
humanitarian protection organizations to children for
so as to carry out their identification and return without
conditions. This reflects the importance of subregional
and regional cooperation and highlights the need to
promote international cooperation in general when it
comes to protecting children. In this context, we call
on the States which have not yet done so to adhere to
or implement the various international conventions and
instruments as well as the Paris principle, and to join in
regional or subregional efforts to level to stop violence
committed against children by armed groups.

In addition, as we await the commemorative
events around the tenth anniversary of resolution 1612
(2005), we agree that abduction should be among the
criteria for listing armed groups in the annexes to the
Secretary-General's annual reports. In order to improve
the international community's efforts to combat
violence against children, we believe it is important to
consider, among other measures and actions, increasing
judicial agreements between States;strengthening
communication between the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict and some of the sanctions
committees and non-governmental organizations, and
broadening its purview; getting national legislatures to
adopt and include guidelines for protecting schools and
universities against attacks; and including the issue of
children and armed conflict in United Nations political
and peacekeeping mandates.

In conclusion, we say that children embody
humankind's future, and therefore that protecting them
should be the absolute highest priority of the entire
international community, which should mobilize every
possible means to ensure that is achieved.

