Mr. Suan (Myanmar): I would like to congratulate
you, Madam President, for presiding over this important
meeting and for the United Kingdom's successful
presidency of the Security Council this month.

At the outset, please allow me to pay tribute to
the late Kofi Annan, former Secretary-General of the
United Nations, who contributed tremendously towards
our efforts to find lasting solutions to the problems
that were jeopardizing peace and progress in Rakhine
state. When he took on the responsibility of leading the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, at the request
of State Counsellor Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, he wanted
Myanmar to succeed and reach its goals of peace,
prosperity, security and progress. The Commission's
recommendations are welcomed by all as important
steps for lasting peace and development in Rakhine
state. The people of Myanmar will always be grateful
for his invaluable support and wise counsel in the
country's democratic transition. We should all learn
from his way of solving conflicts in a peaceful manner
with a constructive and caring approach.

Addressing the deep-rooted and complex issues in
Rakhine state was a fundamental and crucial part of
Myanmar Government's efforts in building peace and
national reconciliation in the country. In May 2016, just
two months after taking on State responsibility, the
Government established the Central Committee for the
Implementation of Peace, Stability and Development in
Rakhine State. Soon after, on 5 September, the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, headed by Mr. Arman,
was established. The Commission was mandated to
examine the complex challenges facing Rakhine state
and to propose responses to those challenges.

Barely a month later, on 9 October 2016, a religious
extremist terrorist group called Aqa Mul Mujahidin,
later known as the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
(ARSA), launched its first attack on three border
police posts in northern Rakhine state. The attack was
premeditated and well organized, causing the deaths of
13 security personnel and other civilians. Their goal
was clear- to incite violence and attract international
attention of the issue at a time when the whole world
was welcoming our peaceful democratic transition.

On 24 August 2017, the Rakhine Advisory
Commission presented its final report to the Government
of Myanmar. The 88 recommendations are aimed at
establishing lasting peace and stability in Rakhine
state. The challenges are daunting, multi-faceted and
require multitasking, but we welcomed the report
and decided to carry on the task of implementing the
recommendations in good faith to the fullest extent,
within the shortest time frame possible, and consonant
with the situation on the ground.

Then, in the early hours of 25 August 2017, just a
few hours after Mr. Annan submitted his final report,
ARSA launched premeditated, well-planned and
coordinated simultaneous armed attacks on 30 border
guard posts and one army battalion headquarters
in northern Rakhine. The attacks caused the deaths
of dozens of security personnel and many innocent
civilians. ARSA has also brutally killed more than 250
non-Muslim ethnic minorities in northern Rakhine since
October 2016. On the same day that ARSA attacked
the security posts they massacred 100 Hindus, which
was well documented. The ARSA attacks triggered
a predictable and logical response from Myanmar
security forces to protect the life and property of every
citizen, resulting in the subsequent mass displacement
of people. Those are plain facts and nothing but the
truth, but they were conveniently discounted or ignored
by mainstream media.

The violent attacks were not coincidence. ARSA
terrorists and their foreign masterminds knew all too
well that the Myanmar security forces would respond
to their attacks with full force. They must also have
anticipated the exodus of people from northern
Rakhine to Bangladesh. Those events were well
planned and executed with the support of foreign
terrorist organizations.

The present grave humanitarian problems and the
untold suffering of the innocent civilian people of all
communities in Rakhine state were carefully calculated,
instigated and created by ARSA. Their objective was to
undermine the Myanmar Government's commitment
and efforts to find lasting solution through the speedy
implementation of the Commission's recommendations
and to elicit maximum international pressure on
Myanmar to achieve their political goals.

Our gathering here today could have been a
different one had there been no terrorist attacks. It
could have been a happier occasion of stock-taking
on the implementation of the Rakhine Advisory
Commission recommendations, or an international
pledging conference to help with poverty alleviation
and socioeconomic development on behalf of all
communities in Rakhine. The provocative terrorist
attacks of October 2016 and August 2017 have affected
the course of our earnest endeavour to build a peaceful,
fair and prosperous future for the people of Rakhine.
But nothing shall stop our determination to continue
our efforts to achieve our objectives.

We share deep sympathy and concern for all
displaced persons, especially women and children. We
believe that we will be able to solve the issue with our
neighbour Bangladesh if we work together amicably in
the spirit of good-neighbourliness. We have reached
out to Bangladesh by sending ministerial delegations.
We invited Bangladesh's Foreign Minister, Mr. Abul
Hassan Mahmood Ali, to Myanmar early this month.
Among other things, during his visit the two sides
agreed to deliver on the commitments made, to speed
up the implementation of bilateral agreements on
repatriation and to set up a hotline between the two
countries at the ministerial level. In the course of the
two months between November 2017 and January 2018,
we signed three documents with Bangladesh to facilitate
the repatriation of verified persons who crossed over
to Bangladesh following the ARSA terrorist attacks
in October 2016 and August 2017. According to the
agreement on physical arrangements for repatriation,
the process of repatriation was scheduled to have
commenced on 23 January 2018.

In line with those bilateral agreements, Myanmar
made arrangements with momentum for the repatriation
of verified displaced persons. We have been ready
to receive the first batch of verified returnees since
23 January. In February, Bangladesh provided us with a
list of 8,032 people - without signatures, finger prints,
proper photographs or, more important, the proper
forms agreed by the two sides. Despite difficulties in
verification owing to a lack of adequate information,
we managed to verify 3,952 returnees as of 23 August
2018. We are also ready to receive those on a list of over
1,200 verified Hindus and Muslims that we shared with
Bangladesh. But we have yet to receive a single returnee
despite our repeated requests for their repatriation. We
call on Bangladesh to fulfil its obligations in accordance
with the bilateral agreements so as to allow without
delay the return of verified persons who consented to
return to Rakhine voluntarily.

Another important issue is the systematic
repatriation of displaced persons staying on the
border line. Since occupying the area 150 feet from
the international border line is unlawful, those people
put themselves unwittingly in a situation that can
affect the stability of the two bordering countries. It is
highly possible that the areas could become an ARSA
terrorist foothold. In that regard, we have requested
the Bangladesh authorities not to provide them any
assistance from their side of the border, instead we are
now arranging to provide humanitarian assistance for
them from the Myanmar side.

Moreover, the Government of Myanmar also signed
a memorandum of understanding with the United
Nations Development Programme and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
to assist with speedy and efficient resettlement and
rehabilitation of the returnees. We have already mapped
out potential resettlement sites. On 7 August, United
Nations officials were granted access to 23 villages
in 13 village tracts selected for the first phase of the
assessment programme. An additional three village
tracts have been marked out for the resettlement of
internally displaced persons residing near the border
line. We urge the United Nations team to start the
assessment programme as soon as possible.

The Government continues to implement the
recommendations ofthe Rakhine Advisory Commission
in earnest. Eighty-one out of the 88 recommendations
have been implemented or are under implementation.
In the process of implementation, the Government
attaches great importance to the advice and opinion
of the advisory board, chaired by Mr. Surakiart
Sathirathai, former Deputy Prime Minister of Thailand.
The advisory board submitted its final report on
16 August. The report contained balanced and viable
final recommendations, which will certainly receive
our serious attention.

We recognize the crucial role of the United
Nations in addressing the issue of Rakhine, and the
present humanitarian crisis in particular. Last April,
we facilitated the visit by members of the Security
Council, representatives of neighbouring countries
and the Chair of the Association of Southeast Asian
Netions. We welcomed the appointment of Ambassador
Christine Schraner Burgener as Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General. We believe that we could maintain
a constructive and fruitful relationship with the Special
Envoy. We have facilitated the opening of her office in
Naypyidaw.

Let me now turn to the question of accountability.
The Government of Myanmar has made its position
very clear that it will not condone any human rights
abuses. Action will be taken against anyone if there is
sufficient evidence. In that regard, the Government has
established an independent commission of inquiry, led
by Ambassador Rosario Manalo, an eminent diplomat
with rich experience in the field of human rights. The
Commission also includes Ambassador Kenzo Oshima,
another prominent diplomat, and two highly respected
members from Myanmar.

The Commission is tasked with investigating
allegations of human rights violations and related
issues following the terrorist attacks on 9 October
2016 and 25 August 2017, with a view to seeking
accountability and reconciliation, as well as formulating
recommendations on steps to be taken to ensure peace
and stability in Rakhine state. The Commission will
submit its report to the President of Myanmar within
a year, including its recommendations prepared on the
basis of the outcomes of its investigation.

In discharging its mandate, the Commission will
apply in particular the 1950 Investigation Committee
Act, which gives the Commission the necessary
authority to investigate. The Commission will also
avail itself of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law where applicable. The
Government of Myanmar will provide protection to
all those who are in contact with the Commission,
particularly victims and witnesses. The Commission
will conduct its mandate while observing the principles
of independence, impartiality and objectivity. The
members met for the first time on 15 August. The
Commission will commence its work this week.

With regard to the allegations of atrocity crimes
committed by Myanmar security forces, as set out in
the recent report (A/HCR/39/64) of the Independent
International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar,
I would like to reiterate that we did not accept the
mandate ofthe Mission because we have concerns about
its impartiality. Besides, I have serious doubts as to the
intention behind the timing of the release of the report.
The report, which was scheduled to be submitted only
to the Human Rights Council on 18 September, was
hastily released on the eve of this particular meeting
of the Security Council. This action raises serious
questions about the objectivity, impartiality and
sincerity of the Fact-Finding Mission.
The challenges we are facing today in Rakhine state
are formidable. However, the Government and people
of Myanmar are united in our determination to achieve
sustainable peace and development for all communities
in Rakhine. We shall not let these challenges derail
our ultimate goal of democratic nation-building. It will
take time and patience to build trust and confidence
among communities. We shall seek reconciliation but
not retribution; compassion but not hatred; integration
but not segregation.

While the primary responsibility to address
the situation in Rakhine rests with the Government
and people of Myanmar, the objective, positive
and constructive contribution and support of the
international community will be crucial to the success
of Myanmar's national efforts. This is not the time
to exploit the plight of innocent people, particularly
women and children, from Rakhine for reasons of self-
interest and political grandstanding. This is the time to
act and to show our genuine concern by taking practical
steps. Let the first batch of verified people who have
expressed their interests in voluntary return go back
to their land. Let the first phase of the assessment
programme commence where access has been granted.
Let us not waste our time.

In conclusion, I wish to express our sincere
appreciation to all our friends who are helping us in
various ways to resolve the challenges in Rakhine at
this critical juncture of democratic transition. We
should make important policy decisions based on facts
and full understanding of the issues at hand. We should
view this complex issue from a broader perspective.

We shall continue to work in good faith with the
United Nations and with all our friends near and far to
end the suffering of the people of Rakhine and rebuild
their land so that all shall enjoy the fruits of peace and
prosperity in a land blessed with so much resources
and potential.

