Mr. Jele (South Africa): My delegation wishes to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of July. May I also extend a
word of congratulations and appreciation to Ambassador
Elaraby of Egypt for the efficient manner in which he
presided over the deliberations of the Council last month.

My delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his current report on the situation in
Angola. We are pleased to note from the report that there
are positive developments in the implementation of some
aspects of the Lusaka Protocol. We welcome in particular
the promulgation of the Amnesty Law on 8 May 1996, the
completion of the quartering of the rapid reaction police,
and the beginning of the process of incorporating UNITA
troops into the Angola Armed Forces.

However, the information in the report that over
18,000 troops have arrived in the camps without weapons,
and that UNITA has not yet surrendered all of its arsenal
and military equipment, is of grave concern to my
Government.

My Government will not relent in its efforts to ensure
that the peace process in Angola is well on track. In this
connection, a meeting was held recently in South Africa
between my Deputy President and Mr. Savimbi, at which
Mr. Savimbi reiterated UN ITA's commitment to the peace
process. At that meeting, the Deputy President emphasized
to Mr. Savimbi the urgent need for UNITA to translate that
commitment into meaningful, tangible actions.

We consider it essential that both President dos Santos
and Mr. Savimbi should meet again, as a matter of urgency,
in order to address all problem areas. The main focus of
that meeting should be to expedite the issue of the
establishment of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation, which we believe is crucial to fostering the
spirit of reconciliation as well as to enabling both parties
to adopt a common approach on key issues.

My delegation would also like to echo the Secretary-
General's plea to the donor community to respond
generously to the needs created by demobilization and
reintegration. In this regard, my Government has already
contributed 28 million Rand to UNAVEM. III for the
quartering of troops prior to demobilization.

The men, women and children of Angola are crying
out for peace in their country, and they deserve it. Both
parties are called upon to fulfil this dream. The
international community can accept no further delays in
the full implementation of the peace process. It is
essential that this process not be held hostage by any of
the parties concerned.

Finally, my delegation wishes to register its full
support for the Secretary-General's recommendation that
the mandate of UNAVEM. III be extended for three
months, to 11 October 1996.

