Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the delegation of the
United States for resolution 2396 (2017), which was
adopted today.

The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters is one
of the most dangerous aspects of the unprecedented
terrorist threat that we are facing today. This
phenonomenon has become increasingly prevalent
over the past few years. Terrorists have been able to
move from Syria and Iraq to other countries and
regions throughout the world. This phenomenon is
therefore now linked to many other issues and factors,
which the Egyptian delegation has tried to address in
today's resolution.

Egypt voted in favour of resolution 2396 (2017),
as it is at the forefront of counter-terrorism efforts. We
did not want to abstain in the voting or vote against a
counter-terrorism resolution, especially when it comes
to countering the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters, despite certain details of the resolution.
Although Egypt decided to vote in favour of the
resolution, it believes that the text could have been
much better than its current version if the opinions of
the countries on the front lines of the counter-terrorism
efforts had been sufficiently taken into consideration.
For example, paragraph 3, on one of the most important
aspects concerning the foreign terrorist fighters issue,
could have been stronger and had more impact on the
ground if it had included prescriptive language calling
on Member States to notify, in a timely manner, upon
travel, arrival or deportation of captured or detained
individuals whom they have reasonable grounds to
believe are terrorists, including suspected foreign
terrorist fightersm, and including, as appropriate,
the source country, destination country, any transit
countries, all countries where the travelers hold
citizenship, and including any additional relevant
information about the individuals, and further calls upon
Member States to cooperate and respond expeditiously
and appropriately, and consistent with applicable
international law, and to share such information with
INTERPOL, as appropriate.

The problem is that the current version of the
paragraph is not sufficiently compulsory. Egypt has
noted that fact and therefore suggested, during the
consultations, that more compulsory language be used.
However, that Egyptian proposal was rejected. The
reasons for that remain unclear, given that the reports
of expert panels have reaffirmed the importance of the
issue that we tried to introduce into the resolution.

Furthermore, operative paragraph 12, whereby
the Security Council decides that Member States shall
implement the passenger name record (PNR) system,
and operative paragraph 15, whereby the Security
Council decides that Member States shell develop
and implement systems for collecting biometric data,
impose new and costly obligations on all States. Given
the compulsory nature of both paragraphs and the
expected cost of the implementation of these obligations
by States, especially poor and developing countries, the
delegation of Egypt sought to link such implementation
to the availability of financial resources. However, we
saw that the resolution included only non-compulsory
provisions on providing technical assistance and
resources for capacity-building.

All this aside, we are convinced that the fact that the
Security Council has adopted a resolution on countering
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters represents
a complement to Security Council resolution 2178
(2014), which is very important. However, what is even
more important is to have political will on the part of
countries to implement these resolutions, and therefore
we need follow-up by the Security Council and to hold
accountable countries that are not implementing these
resolutions, especially those supporting terrorism and
providing shelter to terrorists. Furthermore, we must
provide financial resources and the necessary technical
assistance to countries so that they can shoulder their
obligations under these resolutions. It is not enough for
the Security Council to impose additional obligations
on countries by virtue of these resolutions without
providing such countries with the tools to implement
these obligations.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that Egypt will
continue to shoulder its obligations to be at the forefront
of international efforts to counter and defeat terrorism
while respecting international law, the rule of law and
human rights.

