Mr. Hovakimian (Armenia): First of all, I would
like to thank the French presidency of the Security
Council and Mr. Fabius personally for this timely
initiative to discuss the deterioration of the situation of
the ethnic and religious groups in certain parts of the
Middle East.

We are facing a new and evolving threat in the
Middle East in the form of mass and grave human
rights violations targeting ethnic and religious groups
and their members. It is disappointing that on the eve
of the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations,
after such tremendous efforts to strengthen peace and
security, tolerance, prosperity, fundamental rights and
freedoms, we must deal with this newly emerging wave
of violence, vandalism and hatred in a part of the world
that is the cradle of world civilization.

It was 100 years ago that three countries, which
are currently permanent members of the Security
Council, coined the term "crime against humanity
and civilization" in relation to the mass extermination
of a religious and ethnic group in the Middle East.
Unfortunately, the use of that term is relevant to current
realities as well. The concerted attempts of terrorist
groups, including foreign terrorist fighters, to deprive
religious and ethnic groups of their life, property,
religion, culture and memory can indeed be qualified
as a crime against humanity and civilization.

On 21 March 2014, Al-Qaida-affiliated terrorist
groups attacked the predominately Armenian and
millennia-old town of Kassab, situated on the border
between Syria and Turkey, resulting in the forced
expulsion of the local population from their homes.
The extremist groups have desecrated and vandalized
Kassab's Armenian religious and cultural heritage. A
number ofother Violent acts took place against Christians
and other minorities, including the beheading of
21 Egyptian Copts and brutal attacks against Assyrians
in Syria and the killing and oppression of the Yazidi
minority by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) terrorist group in the Mont Sinjar region in Iraq.
We all saw the chilling Video footage of ISIL militants
smashing 2,700-year-old statues in the Mosul museum,
followed by their barbaric destruction of the Nineveh
museum and other artefacts of ancient art and culture
in Iraq and Syria.

The full implementation of resolutions 2170 (2014),
2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015) is essential in the prevention
of massive and grave human rights violations against
religious and ethnic groups. Armenia, as a nation that
survived the first genocide of the twentieth century,
has a moral responsibility towards the protection of
collective and individual rights of religious and ethnic
groups and their members, particularly in situations
where their survival is at stake.

Genocide prevention is a high priority for Armenia.
Over recent years, we have tried to mainstream issues
of genocide prevention in efforts for international
cooperation on security and human rights. We are
glad that, two hours ago, the Human Rights Council
adopted by consensus an important resolution on
genocide prevention, which was sponsored by Armenia
and 64 other States. The issues of education on
and remembrance of genocide are important in the
prevention of mass atrocities against religious and
ethnic groups. It is not a coincidence that those who
are engaged in mass atrocities against religious and
ethnic groups associate themselves with the denial and
justification of previous genocides.

On 24 April and throughout the year, the centennial
of the Armenian genocide in the Ottoman Empire will
be commemorated around the world. A Syrian town,
Dayr Al-Zour, and its surrounding desert was the final
destination of the death march of hundreds of thousands
of the victims of the Armenian genocide. Every year,
the Saint Martyrs Armenian church in Dayr Al-Zour,
which was a sanctuary for the remains of many Victims,
used to be one of the main places of commemoration.
However, in this centennial year, it will not be possible
to pay tribute to the Victims in Dayr Al-Zour, since in
September 2014 terrorist groups destroyed the church
and vandalized the holy site. The destruction of the
Saint Martyrs church is a symbolic link between old
and new crimes. Faced with the continuity of such evil
deeds across time and space, we must demonstrate our
unreserved human solidarity with the victims of those
crimes. In the name of humanity and civilization, we
should fight and defeat fear, dehumanization and denial.

We are here today first to strongly condemn the
violations we have witnessed in recent times in the
Middle East and to commit ourselves fully in the fight
against ISIL, the Nusra Front and other derivatives and
associates of Al-Qaida. The international community
should work hard to address the gaps in the protection
of religious and ethnic groups and empower their
members to enjoy human rights and fundamental
freedoms and continue their valuable contribution to
humanity and civilization.

