Ms. Rice (United States of America): We are
grateful to Ambassador Ilkin for convening this timely
debate and for including troop- and police-contributing
countries in the discussion. The United States deeply
appreciates the chance to hear their views, and we
salute the sacrifices made by their brave and women
serving under the United Nations flag. Allow me also
to thank Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy and
Malcorra for their thorough briefings.

Much of what we have just heard echoes what
key stakeholders say. United Nations peacekeeping
operations save lives. They stop wars from escalating
and spreading, and they can provide hope after decades
of despair, as we have been told by the democratically
elected leaders of such countries as Haiti, Liberia,
Timor-Leste, Sierra Leone and Burundi.

However, for all the good that United Nations
peacekeeping does, it faces, of course, serious challenges.
Host Governments warn that violence may return if
Blue Helmets leave too soon. Civilians plead for better
protection from marauding gangs, rebel groups and
renegade soldiers. Troop and police contributors point
to a widening gap between the risks they face on the
ground and the degree of input they have when mandates
are discussed here in the Council. Financial contributors,
in the throes of a global economic crisis, struggle to
enforce budget discipline, cut waste and prevent abuse.

The Secretariat appeals for political support to
advance peacemaking efforts and to assemble better
equipped and rapidly deployable forces. Peacekeeping
missions often need stronger leadership and endure
persistent delays in acquiring critical personnel and
materiel. And Security Council members question
whether the way we produce mandates for those
missions does justice to all those concerns and to the
responsibilities that all of us on this Council must
shoulder.

Those responsibilities do not end when we adopt
a peacekeeping mandate. In many ways, it is where
they begin. Tackling those challenges is one of my
highest priorities, and the United States stands ready to
do its part. Allow me to spell out five of the principles
that will guide our approach.
First, we will seek mandates for United Nations
peacekeeping operations that are credible and achievable.
We will urge the Council to continue to weigh the full
range of responses to a given challenge. Poorly armed
and disorganized gangs, rebel groups and others outside
a peace process should not be allowed to thwart a
peacekeeping mandate or block a United Nations
deployment. Peacekeepers are often authorized to use
appropriate force to defend themselves and to fulfil
their mandate, including protecting civilians under the
imminent threat of violence. They must be willing and
able to do so.

At the same time, we recognize that United
Nations peacekeepers cannot do everything and go
everywhere. There are limits to what they can
accomplish, especially in the midst of a full-blown war
or in the face of opposition from the host Government.

Peacekeeping missions are not always the right
answer; some situations require other types of United
Nations-authorized military deployments, such as
regional efforts or multinational forces operating under
the framework of a lead nation. Effective mediation
must precede, as well as accompany, peacekeeping
efforts if they are to succeed.

Those lessons have guided our approach in a
number of instances, most recently in Somalia, where
conditions are not yet appropriate for successful United
Nations peacekeeping. But that is a country that still
urgently needs sustained, if not increased, international
support.

Secondly, the United States will intensify
diplomatic efforts to give new momentum to some of
the stalled or faltering peace processes in areas where
United Nations peacekeeping operations are deployed,
starting with Darfur and the Sudan's North-South
peace process. As the Council is aware, President
Obama appointed General Scott Gration as his special
envoy for the Sudan for precisely that purpose.
Successful diplomatic and political efforts are crucial
to enabling the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the United Nations
Mission in Somalia and the United Nations Mission in
Chad and Central African Republic (MINURCAT) to
better implement their mandates.

Thirdly, the United States will strengthen its
efforts with the United Nations and other partners to
expand the pool of troop and police contributors for
both current and future United Nations peacekeeping
operations. That will require work on several fronts.
The United States, for its part, is willing to consider
directly contributing more military observers, military
staff officers, civilian police and other civilian
personnel, including more women, to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We will also explore ways to
provide enabling assistance to peacekeeping missions,
either by ourselves or together with partners.

Let me single out one immediate priority. We will
assist with generating the missing forces in enabling
units required for UNAMID, MINURCAT and the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to better protect civilians under
imminent threat of physical harm, including sexual
violence.

We will be open-minded about practical suggestions
to deepen consultations among troop and police
contributors, the Security Council and the Secretariat,
including redoubling efforts to implement undertakings
in resolutions 1327 (2000) and 1353 (2001). In those
consultations, we should also be clear about what we
are asking of troop contributors and what we are
Willing to do to assist them.

We will provide improved training and equipment
assistance through the United States Global Peace
Operations Initiative and its Africa-oriented programme,
the African Contingency Operations Training and
Assistance programme. Through the Global Peace
Operations Initiative, the United States has already
trained 75,000 peacekeepers and facilitated the
deployment of some 49,000 peacekeepers to
20 operations around the world, mostly in Africa. Over
the next five years, the Global Peace Operations
Initiative will continue direct training, but will make it
its top priority to help partner countries to become self-
sufficient in peacekeeping training.

The United States will engage in longer-term
discussions about how best to increase the interoperability
and supply of rapidly deployable brigade-size forces -
the very forces that could join, reinforce and buy time
for United Nations peacekeeping operations in an hour
of crisis. And the United States will consider different
ways to support the increasing need for effective
formed police units.

Fourthly, the United States will dedicate greater
attention to Security Council discussions on the
renewal of existing peacekeeping mandates. We will
seek more comprehensive assessments of the progress
that has been made and the obstacles that remain. That
includes carefully considering the early-recovery and
peacebuilding activities that enable peacekeeping
operations to depart successfully, such as demobilizing
and reintegrating former combatants, reforming the
security sector and strengthening the rule of law.

We will use these discussions as opportunities to
take stock of the ways that United States assistance can
accelerate the transfer of responsibilities from
peacekeepers to the host country in success. We plan to
start this new approach in September, when the
Security Council is scheduled to discuss Liberia and
Haiti. But let me be clear: We will not support arbitrary
or abrupt efforts to downsize or terminate missions
before their downsizing or termination is warranted.

Finally, the United States will carefully review
and keep an open mind about reform proposals from
the Secretariat and others, especially those to be
contained in the New Horizon non-paper and related
field-support proposals, in order to address the many
challenges we have discussed today.

We are ready to work together with members of
the Council, the Secretariat, the countries that provide
troops and police, and the many other partners on
whose efforts success in peacekeeping depends, notably
the countries in which United Nations peacekeeping
operations now exist or may be deployed in the future.
We thank our colleagues, in particular the United
Kingdom, France, Japan, Turkey, Canada and Nigeria,
for urging us to confront the challenges facing United
Nations peacekeeping. We thank the peacekeepers and
those who support them for all their efforts and
courage. We look forward to the lifesaving work we
can continue to do together.

