Mr. Allagany (Saudi Arabia) (interpretation from Arabic): At the outset, allow me to express to you, Sir,
our sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We are
confident that with your abilities and experience you will
lead the Council to the desired success. I would also like
to express our thanks to your predecessor, Ambassador
Karel Kovanda, for his outstanding conduct of the
business of the Council last month.

Once again the Security Council is considering the
question of Holy Jersualem, Al-Quds Al-Sharif, the first

 

kiblah and the third holiest shrine, within its consideration
of a whole set of questions affecting the Arab States and
the territories occupied since 1967. In recent times - since
the beginning of the Middle East peace process in Madrid
in 1991 - we have entertained some hope for international
unanimity on the basic principles for a comprehensive
settlement in the Middle East. These principles include a
full withdrawal from the occupied Arab territories,
including Holy Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan Heights, on
the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973), and Israel's implementation of Security Council
resolution 425 (1978), relating to its withdrawal from
southern Lebanon. These resolutions also provide for the
right of all States in the region to live in peace and security
and the right of the Palestinian people to determine their
future and their destiny.
Over the last four years we had hoped and dreamed
that this region could once again enjoy prosperity and
peace. We hoped that all parties would sincerely implement
the commitments they undertook, especially after the
signing of the Declaration of Principles between the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and the Israeli
Government in Washington on 13 September 1993. We
thought that would be the first step towards the
establishment of a just peace between the Palestinians and
Israel.

With optimism and high hopes, we expected that
agreement to herald peace and prosperity, and the various
stages of the agreement to proceed smoothly. But the Israeli
Government has taken a number of decisions that have
dashed those hopes and marred the atmosphere of the peace
process; these have thwarted the creative thought and
thorough analysis needed to consolidate the principles of
good-neighbourliness.

We deeply regret that the Israeli authorities continue
to take illegal measures to confiscate additional Palestinian
land, and that it is still attempting to annex East Jerusalem
and alter its legal, demographic and geographical status.
These measures all clearly violate the Fourth Geneva
Convention, in particular its articles 47 and 49.

Since Israel took its first steps towards the annexation
of Jerusalem, the Security Council and the General
Assembly have adopted many resolutions denouncing these
Israeli actions and declaring them all null and void.
Foremost among the Security Council resolutions are
resolutions 252 (1968), 271 (1969), 476 (1980), 478 (1980)
and 672 (1990). In that connection we highlight resolution
478 (1980), in which the Council categorically decided not
to recognize Israel's annexation of Jerusalem and called
upon all States not to establish diplomatic missions to
Israel at Holy Jerusalem.

Respect for Security Council resolutions on
Jerusalem is not only required by international law and
international legitimacy; it is a prerequisite for the
continuation and the success of the Middle East peace
process, which began in Madrid. There is no room for
doubt that violation of such resolutions, particularly those
relating to Holy Jerusalem, will cause the untimely end of
that peace process.

Along with its sister Arab States, Saudi Arabia has
supported the peace process in order to bring about its
success and to enable the Palestinian self-rule authorities
to consolidate their footing and move the peace process
forward. The representatives of the international
community, the Security Council and the co-sponsors of
the peace process, the United States of America and the
Russian Federation, must shoulder their responsibility to
convince Israel to rescind its illegal actions with respect
to the confiscation of Arab land in Holy Jerusalem and to
commit itself, completely and sincerely, to the success of
the peace process. Silence by the Security Council and
the international community at large on these actions
would once again raise questions about the Council's
credibility and about the international criteria on which
values of justice, right and peace are based.

One of the provisions of the Declaration of
Principles signed by the PLO and Israel states that talks
on Holy Jerusalem should begin no later than the third
year of the interim period. The two parties agreed that
four questions would be negotiated next year when the
final status negotiations had begun: Jerusalem;
settlements; refugees; and boundaries. It is our
understanding that the Declaration of Principles commits
both parties to taking no step that could impede those
negotiations. We wonder whether Israel's understanding
differs from ours.

The Arab and Islamic worlds expect the Security
Council once again to reaffirm Arab and Islamic rights to
Jerusalem. They call upon the Council to declare illegal
these Israeli decisions and actions. They expect it to make
Israel cease its plans and programmes for settlements in
the occupied Arab territories. The Security Council has
the power today to salvage the Middle East peace
process. It has the power to stop Israel from persisting in
these policies and practices.
 

We hope that the Council will shoulder its
responsibility to restore legitimate Arab and Islamic rights,
and that the Middle East, along with other regions, will
enjoy prosperity, stability and peace.

