The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
» Georgia, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation -of the President, Mr. Chkheidze
(Georgia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, document S/ 1997/47.

Members of the Council also have before them
document 3/1997/93, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the Members of
the Council to the following other documents: 8/1997/57,

letter dated 21 January 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Georgia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the text of the provisions of the final
document of the December 1996 Lisbon Summit of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
which pertain to the situation in Georgia; and 8/1997/75,
letter dated 24 January 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Georgia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretaly-General, transmitting a copy of
the letter dated 20 January 1997 from the Chairman of the
Supreme Council of Abkhazia addressed to the Secretary-
General.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution (5/1997/93)
before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, Guinea-
Bissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1096 (1997).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 3:45 pm.

