I join others in thanking the Permanent Mission of South Africa for organizing today's debate and the briefers for their insightful statements. The importance of partnerships among the United Nations, the African Union and subregional organizations in maintaining international peace and security cannot be overemphasized. The Sudan is an excellent example of how playing on the strengths of respective organizations can support people's aspirations as they transition from decades of dictatorship to democracy and bring peace to their country. Previous speakers have already highlighted many other examples that show how close cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union builds and sustains peace on the continent. Estonia recognizes the close link between security, prosperity and good governance and therefore remains committed to the holistic approach of supporting peace and security in Africa. The coronavirus disease pandemic has further underscored the need for strengthened cooperation, as we are best positioned to address the pandemic and its effects together. It is obvious that closer cooperation between these two organizations should be our common goal. In that regard, I would like to highlight three thematic areas where Estonia would like to see cooperation further strengthened. First, we see great potential for cooperation in the area of conflict prevention. We support the Secretary-General's call for strengthening early-warning mechanisms to ensure preventive, timely and effective action. I would also like to express Estonia's full support for the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative. The concrete steps outlined in the action plan are crucial to contributing to peace, stability and security in Africa, while addressing the root causes of conflict. Strengthening respect for human rights, good governance, the rule of law and democracy is at the heart of prevention efforts and also contributes to the prevention of violent extremism and terrorism. Additionally, we see value in maximizing the trilateral cooperation among the United Nations, the African Union and the European Union in the areas of conflict prevention and mediation. These complementary resources, strengths and linkages pave the way for a more effective response. Secondly, Estonia would also like to see further cooperation in the field of climate change, whose devastating effects we are already witnessing, from the Sahel to the Horn of Africa. We need to be proactive about this driver of conflict before the situation further degrades and disrupts the lives of millions of people. Thirdly, Estonia supports further cooperation related to the women and peace and security agenda. We must continue our efforts to ensure that African women and girls participate in all aspects of social activity, including conflict prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding efforts. We also stress the importance of joint action between the United Nations and the African Union to end conflict-related sexual violence, as well as violations and abuses against children affected by armed conflict. I would like to conclude by citing a well-known African proverb, which is very fitting for today's debate. It says, "If you want to go quickly, go alone. If you want to go far, go together." I am convinced that by further strengthening cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union, we can go far quickly in helping to bring about peace, prosperity and a brighter future for the African people.
