The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bahrain, Cuba, Egypt, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Japan, Jordan,
Kuwait, Malaysia, Morocco, Pakistan, South Africa,
Spain, the Sudan, Tunisia and Turkey, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lancry
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Buallay (Bahrain), Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla
(Cuba), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Hidayat
(Indonesia), Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Aldouri (Iraq), Mr. Haneda
(Japan), Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein
(Jordan), Mr. Al-Otaibi (Kuwait), Mr. Hasmy
(Malaysia), Mr. Bennouna (Morocco), Mr. Akram
(Pakistan), Ms. Ndhlovu (South Africa), Mr. Arias
(Spain), Mr. Erwa (Sudan), Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia)
and Mr. Cengizer (Turkey) took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
12 June 2002 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document 5/2002/658 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
tomorrow, Thursday, 13 June 2002, regarding the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
Council's provisional rules of procedure and with
previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): I should also
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter
dated 12 June 2002 from the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, I have the
honour to request that I be invited to participate
in the debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council."

On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In conformity with past practice
in this matter, I propose that the Council extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, Mr. Papa Louis Fall, to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Council is meeting in response to the request
contained in the letter dated 11 June 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of Bahrain
to the United Nations, document S/2002/655.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to the following documents:
S/2002/617, S/2002/641, S/2002/650 and S/2002/654,
letters dated 4, 6, 10 and 11 June 2002 respectively,
from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations; and 5/2002/620 and S/2002/642, letters dated
5 and 6 June 2002 respectively, from the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
Permanent Observer of Palestine, on whom I now call.


