The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Lebanon.

I would like to begin by joining my colleagues in
thanking Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his briefing and his efforts in that
country. I should also like once again to welcome
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, as well as to thank him for his statement
and his presence here. I should now like to make a few
comments.

With the beginning of the gradual handover of
responsibility for security to Afghan authorities, the
difficult security situation continues to be a source of
major concern for Afghans as well as for the
international community. Undoubtedly, the resolution
adopted to increase the number and preparedness of
national military forces will contribute to improving
the security situation in the country.

In the light of the increasing number of civilian
losses and injuries, we reiterate our call on all parties
to abide scrupulously with the provisions of
international humanitarian law and to do everything
possible to protect innocent persons from violence, as
well as mosques and hospitals, which have not been
spared from attack in recent months.

Lebanon condemns the assassination of
Mr. Burhanuddin Rabbani, former President and Chair
of the High Peace Council (HPC), which was intended
to undermine the efforts made by the Council to
achieve dialogue and reconciliation among all
components of Afghan society. We extend our sincere
condolences to the Government and people of
Afghanistan, including the family of the deceased.

In that context, we call for moving ahead with the
policy of dialogue, reconciliation and confidence-
building as the only alternative to violence, with a view
to achieving the desired peace.

The sanctions Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) will have an important role to
play in ensuring the success of the HPC in a matter that
is of no less importance than the political and security
situation. We call for decisive efforts to improve the
human rights situation in Afghanistan, particularly by
enforcing the law prohibiting violence against women
and protecting women from injustice, coercion and
discrimination, as our Organization demands. Although
the efforts of UNAMA have yet to stem the tide of
violence and injustice against women, they have helped
to mitigate it. In that regard, we welcome UNAMA's
focus on situations of arbitrary detention and detainee
abuse and on guaranteeing fair trials, which are
prerequisites for good governance and the rule of law.

Perhaps the most horrendous situation described
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2011/590) is the
ongoing recruitment of children by the various parties
to the conflict for military and even sexual purposes.
We call for zero tolerance for that phenomenon and due
punishment for those responsible, with the aim of
preventing such abuse.

I also recall the importance of moving ahead with
the implementation of the provisions of the Kabul
process, and look forward to agreement on the
International Monetary Fund country programme, the
absence of which would adversely affect the
reconstruction and socio-economic development of
Afghanistan.

At the regional and international levels, we
welcome the efforts of Afghanistan's neighbouring
States to consolidate security and economic
cooperation, particularly with respect to border control
and the fight against drug trafficking and terrorism.
The stability and prosperity of Afghanistan will have
an impact on the region, and we look forward to the
convening of the Istanbul and Bonn Conferences in the
coming months. They represent the international
community's reaffirmation of its commitment to
supporting Afghanistan.

In conclusion, we reiterate our appreciation for
the efforts of the international community in general,
and the United Nations in particular, in all fields. The
Organization is working with courage and resolve in
difficult security conditions for a better future for
Afghanistan, a country rich in civilization, potential
and yearning for peace and progress.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Canada.

