Mr. Niang (spoke in French): Speaking for the first
time in my capacity as Chair of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, I should like, Mr. President, to commend
the effective manner in which your delegation is
conducting the work of the Security Council this month
and to welcome the holding of this open debate, which
represents a fresh opportunity to consider the situation
in the Middle East, including the question of Palestine.

Just yesterday the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Zeid
Al Hussein, speaking to our Committee on the human
rights situation in the occupied Palestinian territories,
touched upon the many obstacles impeding a just,
lasting and peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
dispute. It is up to the Security Council to ensure that
its resolutions are implemented.

As the occupying Power, Israel must take
responsibility for ensuring the protection of Palestinian
civilians, in accordance with international law and the
relevant resolutions of the Council, including resolution
2417 (2018), on the protection of civilians in conflict.
However, since March, when the current wave of
violence began, at least 146 Palestinians have lost their
lives in Gaza and approximately 15,000, including many
children, have been wounded. The Committee reaffirms
its support for the numerous appeals made by the
international community, including by the Secretary-
General, for an independent, transparent inquiry into
these incidents. It also supports the commission of
inquiry established by the Human Rights Council.

The Committee therefore looks forward to the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to General
Assembly resolution ES-10/20, on specific proposals
relating to the international protection of the Palestinian
civilian population.

The civilian population of Gaza is continuing to
undergo indescribable suffering and deprivation. The
additional restrictions imposed recently by the Israeli
Government are exacerbating an already disastrous
situation. Meanwhile, the parties have an obligation
under international humanitarian law to guarantee
humanitarian access and medical care for populations
in need.

While expressing our deep concern about the threat
of a further military confrontation in Gaza, we urge
the Israeli authorities to lift the blockade of Gaza and
to refrain from the disproportionate use of force. The
Committee also calls for genuine reconciliation among
Palestinian political actors in order to help address
more effectively the significant security, humanitarian
and socioeconomic challenges facing the civilian
population, especially in Gaza.

For decades the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) has been a life-saver for millions of
Palestinian refugees in the Middle East, providing them
with education, health care and humanitarian assistance
and promoting sustainable development. However, the
Agency is currently facing one of the most serious
crises of its existence owing to a considerable financial
deficit of $217 million. I take this opportunity to appeal
once again to Member States to continue and strengthen
their support for UNRWA,

Also of concern are the continued construction
of illegal settlements, forced displacements, the
confiscation of land and the demolition of Palestinian-
owned homes and structures, in violation of the recent
resolution 2334 (2016), all of whichjeopardize the two-
State solution.

The Committee therefore encourages the Secretary-
General to continue to issue written reports on resolution
2334 (2016), including by providing information on the
implementation of paragraph 5, which calls on Member
States, in their dealings with Israel, to distinguish
between the territory of the State of Israel and the
territories occupied since 1967.

In June, the Committee organized a conference
on Jerusalem during which all member States and all
participants, including Israelis, reiterated the illegal
nature of the recent decisions to establish embassies
in Jerusalem while also calling on the international
community to provide full support to the Palestinian
population living in East Jerusalem.

Lastly, the Committee remains convinced that in
order to be lasting, the solution to this dispute must be
based on international law and the relevant resolutions
of the United Nations.

