Mr. Sharma (India): Earlier today, after it became
known that the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) was contemplating military action against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the Ministry of External
Affairs issued the following statement in New Delhi:

"The Government of India has closely been
following developments in Kosovo. It recalls its
statement of 9 October 1998 and reiterates that the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
international border of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is inviolable. That must be fully
respected by all States.

"We are of the firm conviction that the
resolution of this crisis can only be through peaceful
means, through consultation and dialogue, and not
through either confrontation or any military action,
unilateral or otherwise. In this regard we wish to
reaffirm commitments to the United Nations Charter,
which clearly stipulates that no enforcement actions
shall be undertaken under regional arrangements
without the authorization of the Security Council."

The attacks against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia that started a few hours ago are in clear
violation of Article 53 of the Charter. No country, group
of countries or regional arrangement, no matter how
powerful, can arrogate to itself the right to take arbitrary
and unilateral military action against others. That would
be a return to anarchy, where might is right. Among the
barrage of justifications that we have heard, we have been
told that the attacks are meant to prevent violations of

 

human rights. Even if that were to be so, it does not justify
unprovoked military aggression. Two wrongs do not make
a right.

Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter stipulates that
nothing contained in it would

"authorize the United Nations to intervene in matters
which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction
of any State or shall require the Members to submit
such matters to settlement under the present Charter".

Kosovo is recognized as part of the sovereign territory
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Under the
application of Article 2, paragraph 7, the United Nations
has no role in the settlement of the domestic political
problems of the Federal Republic. The only exception laid
down by Article 2, paragraph 7, would be the "application
of enforcement measures under Chapter VII". The attacks
now taking place against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia have not been authorized by the Council, acting
under Chapter VII, and are therefore completely illegal.

What is particularly disturbing is that both
international law and the authority of the Security Council
are being flouted by countries that claim to be champions
of the rule of law and which contain within their number
permanent members of the Council, whose principal interest
should surely be to enhance rather than undermine the
paramountcy of the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

We have heard that the attack on the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia will be called off if its Government accepts
what are described as NATO peacekeeping forces on its
territory. In other forums, we, along with the entire
membership of the Non-Aligned Movement, have
repeatedly said that the United Nations cannot be forced to
abdicate its role in peacekeeping and that a peacekeeping
operation can be deployed only with the consent of the
Government concerned. Quite apart from being a violation
of Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter, a peacekeeping
operation forced upon a reluctant Government or population
stands little chance of success. Somalia established that. In
Somalia, there was at least the excuse that State authority
had crumbled, but that excuse does not even remotely
obtain in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. What NATO
has tried to do is to intimidate a Government through the
threat of attack, and now through direct and unprovoked
aggression, to accept foreign military forces on its territory.
There are several traditional descriptions for this kind of
coercion; peacekeeping is not one of them.

We have also heard that these attacks are meant to
ensure that events in the Federal Republic do not threaten
regional peace and security. In fact, there is a very real
danger that these attacks will imperil regional peace and
security and spread discord in the Balkans and beyond.

In the interests of peace and security in the region,
and if the countries now attacking the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia truly have the interests of all Yugoslavs at
heart, this arbitrary, unauthorized and illegal military
action should be stopped immediately. Domestic political
problems have to be settled peacefully by the parties
concerned through consultation and dialogue. Foreign
military intervention can only worsen matters. It will
solve nothing.

We urge NATO to immediately stop the military
action against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and we
trust that the Security Council will be able to exert its
authority to bring about an early restoration of the peace
that was broken earlier today.

