Allow me first to welcome the convening of this pertinent open debate on United Nations peace operations and human rights, presided over by Her Excellency Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, Federal Minister of Defence of Germany. The meeting that brings us together today is a continuation of the tireless efforts of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres to make peacekeeping operations an effective tool for conflict prevention and the protection of populations, in keeping with the spirit of the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative. My delegation followed with great interest the excellent briefings by Ms. Michelle Bachelet, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for South Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, and the civil society representative, who provided a comprehensive update of the matter under consideration. Respect for human rights in the deployment areas of United Nations peace missions is a key factor in evaluating a peace operation. The credibility of missions depends on it, particularly for the local population, whose cooperation is essential to the success of a mission. The strong resentment of the United Nations following the failed peace operations in Rwanda, parts of the former Yugoslavia and Somalia in the 1990s is sufficient proof that the success of a mission depends to a large extent on its capacity to protect and promote human rights. Strongly convinced of that paradigm, my delegation can only welcome the inclusion of human rights teams as an integral part of peacekeeping operations. We therefore look forward with great interest to the results of the study, which seeks to optimize the contribution of the human rights component to peace missions. In its 2015 conclusions, the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations appointed by the Secretary-General strongly recommended that human rights be placed at the heart of the work of peacekeeping operations (see S/2015/446). It is gratifying to note that since then, the Secretariat has taken ownership of that recommendation, which the A4P initiative fully embodies. Like my colleagues, whose relevant contributions I commend by the way, I would therefore like to share these few lines of thought. First, the issue of human rights should be better addressed by the Security Council in the drafting of mandates. Divisions within that decision-making organ often give rise to disagreements on the subject, thereby depriving the mission concerned of the political support necessary to protect human rights. Yet in its preamble, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights sets out that human rights are "the highest aspiration of the common people", a fundamental right recalled by the Secretary-General in his The Highest Aspiration: A Call to Action for Human Rights, issued on 24 February. In view of that inviolability, as France has already proposed, it is necessary to abolish the right of veto on all matters relating to human rights and humanitarian issues. In that way, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the main entity entrusted by the General Assembly with the important task of protecting and promoting human rights, could fully play its role in developing mandates and in the strategic and operational planning of peace missions. Secondly, human rights is a cross-cutting issue that spans several areas, in particular the protection of civilians, the management of conflicts in relation to sexual violence and violence against children, support for transitional justice and accountability mechanisms, and peacebuilding activities. In that regard, human rights teams are called on to work closely with other civilian or uniformed components of peace operations in these overlapping areas. That requires integrated planning and better coordinated activities in the field. Therefore, with a view to strengthening the performance of peacekeepers in collecting information and identifying human rights violations, the human rights component, in conjunction with the Secretariat and contributing countries, could do more to train uniformed personnel. The effective protection of civilians, and consequently human rights, can be achieved only by troops who are not only experienced but also familiar with the fundamentals of humanitarian law. Moreover, the human rights issue is of particular importance in peace agreements signed between parties to the conflict. In that context, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and human rights teams must, at all stages of the process, support missions in implementing agreements. Their active participation in the negotiation phase of peace agreements must therefore be strengthened. That also applies to the implementation phase of mandates, where they must receive the necessary political and financial support and the genuine cooperation of the different parties to the conflict in investigating possible human rights violations and regularly submitting their reports on the human rights situation. In addition, the effects of the coronavirus pandemic may have an impact on the humanitarian and human rights situation, particularly in conflict areas. The economic recessions that will inevitably follow could trigger social and political crises in some countries, including developing countries. Such scenarios would lead to a widespread increase in cases of human rights violations. We therefore call on the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, if this is not already being done, to develop an appropriate human rights response plan in coordination with its various partners.
