Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I wish to thank you,
Madame President, for convening this important
meeting. I wish to express our deep appreciation for
your principled, sincere efforts in this process in your
national capacity and in your capacity as the President
of the Security Council this month.

I also wish to thank Bosnia and Herzegovina for
its skilled stewardship of the Security Council in
January, particularly during the Council's open debate
on 19 January (see S/PV.6470 and Resumption 1) and
throughout the series of consultations undertaken on
the draft resolution on Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, on which the Council has just taken action.

At this time, I also wish to express Palestine's
deep appreciation and gratitude to Lebanon, the Arab
representative on the Security Council, for its
principled efforts and unwavering support throughout
this important exercise.

We also wish to thank the Arab Group for their
serious consideration of this matter, their constant
coordination and their strong support. We express
appreciation for the able leadership of the Chairs of the
Arab Group since we began this exercise in December
2010. In that context, we also extend our appreciation
to the important and sincere efforts of the Arab League
Follow-up Committee and its Chair, Qatar, at all levels
in the region, in Cairo and here in New York.

We must also express our appreciation and
gratitude to the members of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM) and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and to the Chairs, Egypt and Tajikistan, for

their sincere efforts and their valuable support and
solidarity with Palestine. In that regard, we also convey
our thanks to the members of the NAM. caucus of the
Security Council for their consideration and support on
this most important issue.

Of course, Palestine also wishes to extend its
deep gratitude to all of the countries that co-sponsored
the draft resolution, from all corners of the world -
from Africa, Asia, Europe and Latin America. Their
strong and principled support was invaluable and
illustrated to us once again the importance, weight and
necessity of a collective effort and position in our work
in the international arena as we strive to uphold
international law and make peace and justice a reality.

When we decided to come to the Security
Council to address the critical and dangerous issue of
Israel's ongoing illegal settlement campaign
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, we did so with a sensible draft
resolution reflecting agreed language and principles.
That represented a responsible and serious attempt on
our part, along with the entire international community,
to address the issue of illegal Israeli settlement
activities in order to remove that obstacle from the path
of the peace process.

Our overarching goals remain to bring an end to
the Israeli colonization and occupation of our land and
its destruction of the two-State solution, and to create
the appropriate environment and dynamics for the
conduct and ultimate success of genuine peace
negotiations for the achievement of the two-State
solution for peace in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles,
including the principle of land for peace, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Quartet Road Map.

Unfortunately, however, the Security Council has
failed to uphold its responsibilities to respond to the
crisis in the long search for peace and security in the
Middle East and to legislate the existing global
consensus in demanding that Israel, the occupying
Power, immediately and completely cease all
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem.

We reiterate that it is high time to send a clear
and firm message to Israel that it must comply with its
international legal obligations, including in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions, and

cease all of its violations and its obstruction of the
peace process.

Israel, the occupying Power, should not question
the determination of the international community to
bring an end to those violations, including its illegal
settlement campaign, including in occupied East
Jerusalem. The proper message that should have been
sent by the Security Council to Israel, the occupying
Power, is that its contempt of international law and the
international community will no longer be tolerated.

We fear, however, that the message sent today
may be one that only encourages further Israeli
intransigence and impunity. That must be remedied.
Otherwise, we will face a situation in which Israel's
illegal, reckless and expansionist campaign will put in
final jeopardy the prospects for achieving our
collective goal, the goal that will bring peace and
security to our region: the two-State solution for the
peace of an independent and viable State of Palestine
living side by side with Israel on the basis of the 1967
borders.

Despite the negative outcome today - and of
course, we appreciate the positive votes of the 14
countries that voted in favour - we are calling and
will continue to call on the Security Council to uphold
its duties and responsibilities vis-a-vis the question of
Palestine, because we believe in international law and
in the central role of the Council in maintaining
international peace and security. The Council must
undertake this role seriously and consciously in the
Middle East in its ongoing attempts to resolve the
Arab-Israeli conflict, the core of which remains the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

The situation on the ground in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, is
intolerable and the status quo is untenable. We must
continue to uphold our duties towards our people and
our just cause, and will thus continue to consider all of
our options at the United Nations in order to address all
of the critical issues we face and to promote the
achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
settlement. We do this with full conviction and
commitment, and with deepest gratitude and
appreciation to all the member States of the
international community whose support and solidarity
in this long search for peace have been so vital and
unwavering.

The Palestinian people and their leadership will
not forgo their legitimate national aspirations and will
not cease their honourable efforts to achieve a peaceful
resolution of this conflict in all its aspects. This
includes, foremost, bringing a complete end to the
Israeli occupation of the Palestinian land that began in
1967 and the achievement of the inalienable right of
the Palestinian people to self-determination in their
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, where they can live as a dignified and proud
people, enjoying peace, freedom, democracy, security
and prosperity in their homeland.

