Mr. Min: I thank you, Sir, for the kind invitation
to address Security Council members and other
representatives on the important topic of furthering
the mandates of resolution 1540 (2004), focused on
non-State actors. I want to especially thank the Mission
of the Kingdom of Spain to the United Nations for
its kind facilitation of my participation today. It is an
honour for me to be here to share some of my thoughts
on the role of the private sector in this endeavour to
further the work of resolution 1540 (2004) and the
challenges and opportunities that lie ahead. My views
today are my own and do not necessarily reflect those
of my employer.

As many of those present know, Deutsche Post-
DHL Group is a global leader in mail and logistics, and
its various business divisions provide services ranging
from express delivery services, warehousing, mail, air
and freight forwarding, customs brokerage, aviation,
and so on. DHL operates in practically all countries
and territories throughout the world, servicing every
imaginable sector of the world economy.

Such international presence and reach pose
challenges in an environment where there is conflict,
political tensions and non-State actors who seek to
harm global peace and security. While businesses are
in some sense agnostic when it comes to international
political objectives, global businesses benefit from
international stability, trade and economic integration.
While a business's goal is to maximize profit for its
shareholders, the reality in the twenty-first century is
that a multinational company cannot be profitable or
increase its brand value in the long run if it ignores
international norms, legal requirements and potential
risks to global security.

To achieve the aspirations laid out in resolution
1540 (2004), cooperation just between national
Governments is not enough. With the advancement
of technology driven by the private sector and the
quickly evolving supply chain and its modalities, such
as the growth of non-asset-based service providers, the
private sector is a key component of the fight for global
peace and security. The private sector and the public
sector must work together in combating illicit activities
by non-State actors.

In that regard, the Government of Germany's
efforts with the Wiesbaden process, which we have
participated in, is a model for facilitating dialogue
between the public and private sectors. Given the limited
time, I would mention only that various documents
that contain detailed information have already been
transmitted by the German Government regarding
best practices for public-private dialogue, as well as
measures, such as internal compliance programmes,
that businesses should adopt. What the Wiesbaden
process has taught us is that it is only dialogue and
the sharing of information and best practices that
can reduce misunderstanding between the public and
private sectors and highlight the crucial role that the
private sector plays in that arena. There needs to be
more dialogue similar to the Wiesbaden process, with
more private sector participation and in more regions
of the world.
Businesses such as DHL have a unique vantage
point and opportunity to cooperate with the public
sector to ensure that logistics services are not used for
illicit activities by non-State actors or if they are, to
mitigate the risks to the global order. While it should
never be the role of private businesses to be a proxy of
law enforcement, businesses are on the front lines of
economic activity and thus can and should have strong
internal compliance programmes to prevent their
products and services from being used by malicious
non-State actors. For example, DHL has instituted a
global transactional screening system whereby lists
of restricted individuals and entities designated by
the United Nations or national Governments are used
to reduce the chance of providing DHL services to
those who seek to harm global security. Such a process
is expensive, requiring vast information technology
systems, software and specialized personnel. But in the
end, it is important for companies like DHL to reduce
such risks because ultimately such measures can avert
business disruption and detrimental impact to the
world economy.

One of the challenges that faces private industry
in the context of resolution 1540 (2004) is that despite
the high level of participation among Member States,
there are differing requirements and standards, such as
in export-control laws. For a global business, divergent
and varying requirements among Member States
add cost, confusion and, often, complex conflicts of
laws. To maximize the effectiveness of the objectives
of resolution 1540 (2004), uniform or harmonized
regulatory requirements among key markets, to the
extent possible, make it easier for multinational
businesses to comply and to cooperate with the public
sector. Such efforts as the Waasenaar Arrangement,
while not universal, do set the global standards for
the classification of dual-use goods for licensing and
export-control purposes. That type of uniformity is
highly welcomed by multinational businesses that must
contend with multijurisdictional issues.

In conclusion, although it is a cliche', the
technological and economic advancements are getting
faster and faster. But with that is also a global supply
chain that is ever more complex, yet more integrated
and specialized. It is harder than ever before for national
Governments to combat the illicit activities ofnon-State
actors on their own. It requires more cooperation across
borders and, more importantly, between the public and
private sectors.

