Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Thank you very much,
Madam President, and congratulations for taking the
initiative of organizing today's debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding, an issue of great interest for the United
Nations and of paramount importance to many nations
in the world. You have been very successful in
generating the necessary interest and support. The
participation of your Foreign Minister, of Deputy
Secretary-General Louise Frechette and of many other
high officials from various countries and international
organizations is tangible proof of that. We thank each
of them for their participation and insights.

Greece fully aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Luxembourg on behalf of
the European Union.

The end of the cold war created many hopes for
peace and security. Unfortunately, violent conflicts
emerged, threatening the lives of thousands of innocent
people, as well as security, in many parts of the world,
in particular in Europe and Africa. It soon became
clear that the post-conflict rebuilding of war-torn
societies is essential to prevent those countries from
relapsing into conflict. The international community,
especially the United Nations, took early note of that
fact and strove to find ways to end that vicious circle.

The concept of peacebuilding arose to bridge the
gap between security and sustainable development.
Those issues have now become linked. The concept
offers an integrated approach for dealing with a whole
range of issues that relate to peace, security and
development.

Many peacekeeping operations of the 1990s
combined both peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities. The Brahimi report (S/2000/809) offered
various recommendations for specific peacebuilding
operations, such as the creation of a fund for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
There is a growing international consensus on the
importance of post-conflict peacebuilding and the need
for its consolidation. As we all know, it is a
multidimensional process. It aims at the consolidation
of peace after the end of hostilities and the
reconstruction and development of conflict-torn
societies. It is the only way to prevent them from
sliding back into violent conflict.

Contemporary conflicts around the world require
more effective peacebuilding that would address the
root causes of such conflicts, particularly structural,
political, sociocultural and economic factors. More
specifically, it should integrate the key elements of
human security, political stability based on the rule of
law and good governance, social reconciliation, and
economic reconstruction.

We are convinced that a successful sustainable
post-conflict peacebuilding outcome requires the active
engagement of local ownership in the reconstruction
process. Local actors, such as Governments, non-
governmental organizations and civil society, must be
involved in the political process and in setting the
peacebuilding agenda. That is crucial for long-term and
effective results. The capacities of local actors should
be strengthened so that they can cope with future
violent conflicts, enhance the commitment of local
Governments to the process, and increase the presence
ofa well-organized civil society.

Furthermore, one should not forget local
conditions that need to be taken into account in post-
conflict peacebuilding agendas. It is essential,
however, that effective post-conflict peacebuilding
policies integrate institution-building, the rule of law,
good governance and transitional justice, as well as
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts.

That highly political process needs to be strongly
supported by international actors. The United Nations,
regional organizations, donors and other international
actors can play a crucial role. They contribute to the
implementation of peacebuilding policies.

There is a pressing need for better coordination
among those international actors. They have to develop
more effective strategies in assessing local needs,
allocating recourses and defining priorities. Those
strategies have to be well designed and correspond to
local realities. Most importantly, they have to be long-
term, since reconstruction itself is a long-term process.
Rapid response is important in humanitarian assistance
and human security situations, but long-term
commitment is vital to securing development.
Another key factor for successful post-conflict
reconstruction is the provision of financial support at
an early stage. International actors have established
post-conflict peacebuilding funding mechanisms in
order to provide financial aid to countries emerging
from conflict. However, it should be noted that neither
available financial resources nor existing funding
mechanisms are adequate to cover reconstruction needs
at their starting point. Despite many efforts, there is a
lack of sustainable and adequate funding, as well as a
need for improved coordination. That requires better
targeted, timely and coordinated financial support and
the predictability of assistance.

It is our view that closer interaction and
coordination between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council would be beneficial for
sustainable long-term peace reconstruction. Likewise,
the various departments within the United Nations -
the Department of Political Affairs, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs - should find
ways to better coordinate their peacebuilding activities.
In addition, effective United Nations involvement
requires a well-designed role for the resident United
Nations coordinator.

In conclusion, Greece believes that post-conflict
peacebuilding is a major priority for the United
Nations system due to its contribution to international
peace and security and its preventive effects on violent
conflicts. In that context, Greece, individually and as a
member of the European Union, supports the proposal
of the Secretary-General for the establishment of a
Peacebuilding Commission. The creation of such a
body will enrich the peacebuilding agenda of the
United Nations and promote world peace, security and
development.

