Mr. Burian (Slovakia): We too would like to
welcome President Tadic of the Republic of Serbia and
to thank him for his statement. We would also like to
take this opportunity to express our sincere
condolences to Mr. Kosumi, Prime Minister of Kosovo,
and to the people of Kosovo, on the passing away of
President Rugova.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Soren
Jessen-Petersen, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing. We
commend the very profound and balanced analysis and
evaluation of the situation in Kosovo contained in the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We believe that, as a result of the Security Council's
decision to launch negotiations to define the future
status of Kosovo, the role of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is
even more vital and instrumental for the peace,
stability and prosperity of the region, as well as for the
lasting settlement of the issue of Kosovo.

Slovakia fully associates itself with the statement
to be made by the representative of Austria on behalf
of the European Union. I shall therefore limit my
statement to several points that we consider to be
critical for Kosovo's future.

First of all, we understand and support the need
to find a lasting and balanced settlement regarding
Kosovo's future status. At the same time, it is our
understanding - and as is highlighted in the Contact
Group's guiding principles for the settlement of
Kosovo's status - that the settlement of the issue of
Kosovo must be fully compatible with international
standards of human rights, democracy and international
law, and must contribute to regional security.

That is why we believe it is important to seek a
negotiated settlement and compromise from both
Belgrade and Pristina on the issues of future status and
peaceful co-existence through direct talks and
dialogue. Only a solution that reflects the objective and
legitimate concerns of all parties involved, and which
is not considered as being imposed from outside, will,
in our view, contribute to lasting security and stability
in the region. In that context, we believe that all
options for the outcome of the status talks should
remain open for discussion. In our view, it is also
important that all participants in the talks refrain from
any kind of activities or statements that can give
Belgrade or Pristina the undesirable impression that the
outcome of final status talks has already been
prejudged or precooked.

In our view, the participation of the Kosovo Serbs
in the future status process and their engagement in
Kosovo's political life is of critical importance. We
therefore call upon Kosovo Serbs to participate in the
process and in the political life of Kosovo in order to
influence the processes that will be decisive for their
future. We also call on Belgrade and Pristina to allow
Kosovo Serbs to exercise their rights in a way that will
contribute to a positive atmosphere for the negotiating
process and to the stabilization of the region.

Secondly, we believe that standards of democracy
and tolerance are the key to peaceful multi-ethnic co-
existence. We fully support the Secretary-General's
appeal to all parties to take visible and tangible steps
towards progress in the implementation of the
standards, which, in our opinion, has been insufficient
and slow. Lack of progress in that area affects the day-
to-day lives of all people, especially those belonging to
national or ethnic minorities. The Government of
Kosovo must try harder to ensure that everyone in
Kosovo is able to get equal treatment and the same
level of respect regardless of ethnic origin or religious
beliefs. In that connection, we also note the assurances
given by Mr. Sejdiu, newly elected President of
Kosovo, that Kosovo's institutions remain fully
committed to the further implementation of standards.

Success in the implementation of the post-
conflict project for a multi-ethnic Kosovo will in
practice be measured by the situation on the ground for
Kosovo Serbs and other ethnic groups. In our opinion,
the low number of refugees and internally displaced
persons returning to Kosovo is an alarming indicator
that the current efforts of the Kosovar Government to
create adequate conditions for returns are insufficient.
There are many outstanding issues - including the
guarantee of property rights - that, in our view, the
Kosovar authorities must address more vigorously.

The decentralization and protection of Serbian
Orthodox sites and institutions remain crucial issues
with regard to confidence-building measures. In that
context, we hope that the upcoming Vienna meeting on
decentralization will bring about positive results.

On the other hand, we cautiously share the
positive assessment regarding the increase in minority
employment in the central Government and in the
Kosovo Protection Corps.
The establishment of trustworthy local judiciary
and security institutions based on the principle of
multi-ethnicity is an integral part, and the key to the
future success, of security sector and judicial reform,
as well as overall transformation in Kosovo.

Thirdly, we believe that the economic
development of a country, especially during a period of
transition, goes hand in hand with the process of
democratization and the rule of law.

We strongly encourage all stakeholders in the
region to use the new impetus provided by the future
status negotiations to be held under the auspices of the
international community, represented by Mr. Ahtisaari,
to make take significant steps with regard to
confidence-building measures between all communities
and entities in Kosovo.

Last but not least, in our opinion it is of the
greatest importance that the future status of Kosovo be
visibly disconnected from any other global political
developments. The future model for a solution in
Kosovo must not be automatically applied as a
precedent in addressing other conflict situations.

