Mr. Fulci (Italy): First of all, allow me to express to
you, Sir, my warmest personal congratulations on your
assumption of the duties of the President of the Security
Council for the month of June. Having known you since the
first day I came here, I have not the slightest doubt that
your performance will be remembered.

I would also like to take this opportunity to express
heartfelt thanks to the Permanent Representative of China,
Ambassador Qin Huasun, for the way in which he exercised
his duties most impartially during the month of May.

I have the honour to speak in my capacity as
Presidency of the European Union.

The Security Council has closely monitored the
situation in Tajikistan over the past few months and
expressed its great concern at the worsening of conditions
on the ground. Military activities by the opposition and,
more recently, by the Government have shown that the
cease-fire is at best frail and subject to large-scale
Violations.

In our opinion, the presidential statement of 21 May
sent a clear message to the parties after the premeditated
offensive by the armed Tajik opposition in the Tavildara
region. The Council noted with concern that the spiral of
Violence had taken the lives of civilians and of members of
the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) Collective
Peace-keeping Forces.

At the same time, the political stalemate in the inter-
Tajik dialogue following the Ashgabat talks was blamed on
the loss of trust between the parties. Some of the elements
in this troublesome picture were the opposition's attitude in
the negotiations and in the field; the lack of adequate
written safety guarantees given by the Government to
opposition members on the Joint Commission; and the
delay in investigating the fate of Mr. Zafar Rakhmonov,
abducted last February.

We share the assessment of the Secretary-General in
his report (S/1996/412) of 7 June and endorse his proposals.
We would like to focus on the following three aspects.

A solution to this conflict can be achieved only
through the inter-Tajik dialogue. But the necessary
political solution remains elusive. Therefore, the inter-
Tajik talks should be resumed without delay.
Unfortunately, opposition members chose not to
participate in the special session of the Parliament,
organized on the initiative of President Rakhmonov as a
first step towards the participation of all political forces
in Tajikistan in the reconciliation process. As the
Secretary-General's report indicates, the opposition
leaders have reiterated their ideas on the establishment of
a Council of National Reconciliation. Whatever formula
is ultimately pursued, national reconciliation must clearly
be a central element of the inter-Tajik dialogue.

We welcome the appointment of the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Tajikistan,
Mr. Gerd Merrem, who has initiated contacts with the
parties and the leaders of the region. A first result has
been obtained: the Government and the opposition have
agreed to extend for another three months, until 26
August 1996, the validity of the Tehran Agreement on a
Temporary Cease-fire and the Cessation of Other Hostile
Acts on the Tajik-Afghan Border and within the Country.
However, the cease-fire has been seriously violated and,
according to the latest reports, fighting continues.

The parties must respect obligations they have
undertaken. The international community cannot continue
to provide support and commitment without a much
greater level of cooperation from the parties themselves.
They must build upon the initially positive signals given
in May when they decided to extend the cease-fire. We
rely upon the mediating efforts of the Special
Representative. Concrete confidence-building measures,
such as the unconditional release of the prisoners captured
by the opposition in the Tavildara area, should be
implemented.

In this framework, we support the Secretary-
General's recommendation to extend the UNMOT
mandate for another six months. However, we remain
concerned that delays in implementing an effective cease-
fire may create a situation in which direct United Nations
involvement after this six-month period will not be
advisable. We cannot tolerate threats to the security of
UNMOT personnel, nor can we allow restrictions to be
placed on the freedom of movement of the military
observers for reasons unrelated to their security. Now,
more than ever, a clear message must be sent to the
parties that the United Nations considerable efforts, in
terms of both financial and human resources, as well as

 

participation in the negotiations, cannot be taken for
granted.

Further delays in reaching a significant outcome in the
inter-Tajik dialogue may prejudice not only the momentum
in the negotiations that the United Nations is trying to
maintain, but also the financial support badly needed by a
population and a country so much afflicted by this crisis.

The following countries associated with the European
Union align themselves with this statement: Bulgaria,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia.
Iceland and Norway also align themselves with this
statement.

