Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): As this
is the first time that I am taking the floor under your
presidency, Sir, I should like at the outset to congratulate
you personally as well as your country, Bolivia, on
your well-deserved accession to the presidency of the
Security Council. You may, of course, count on the
full support and cooperation of Burundi throughout
your presidency.

I should like to take this opportunity to share with
the Council the latest developments in my country at
the political, security and human rights levels and the
efforts undertaken by the Government to normalize
relations with its partners and the United Nations.

As regards the political situation, I should like to
recall that, following 26 April 2015, the Government of
Burundi began a process of inter-Burundian dialogue,
with the facilitation of both the Commission nationale
de dialogue inter-Burundais (CNDI) and that of the
East African Community (EAC).

On the domestic level, the Inter-Burundi dialogue
has made significant progress. On 12 May, the
Commission nationale de dialogue inter-Burundais
submitted its final report to the appropriate parties.
Since its inception, it has spent about 600 hours in
listening and exchange sessions with approximately
26,000 Burundian citizens in the 18 provinces and 119
communes of the country. The CNDI also met with
organized groups - such as women's groups, youth
groups, trade unions, accredited political parties,
religious groups,journalists, students, economic actors,
police officers, civil society as a whole and so on. In
addition, the Commission met with representatives of
the East African Community Legislative Assembly,
the diplomatic and consular corps, the international
organizations present in Burundi and, of course, the
African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
and the Burundian diaspora living in such Scandinavian
countries as Norway, Denmark and Sweden.

At the regional level, the East African Community
is working hard to assist Burundians in finding lasting
solutions to the political consequences of the 2015
crisis. Those consultations are on the right track despite
some pending challenges. The Government of Burundi
remains very committed to the process of political
dialogue. Recently, consultations at the highest level
between Burundi and mediators have been stepped up
and will continue to move forward.

Also at the regional level, upon the initiative of the
Chair ofthe Burundi configuration ofthe Peacebuilding
Commission, the Permanent Representatives of the
countries of the region, together with the Permanent
Representative of South Africa, whose country has
played an important role in the inter-Burundi peace
process, met here in New York for a working lunch
on 31 May. At the end of the meeting, consensus was
reached on the following items.

First, the people concerned and the region must
retain their leadership role in the management of the
situation in Burundi. The international community's
contribution should be limited to providing assistance.
Secondly, the social and economic aspects must
continue to receive the attention of Burundi's
development partners. Just as the recent EAC Summit
did, the Permanent Representatives called for the
lifting of the economic sanctions on Burundi that
affect vulnerable people. My delegation hopes that
this passionate appeal from the region will be heeded.
Thirdly, there was also consensus on the fact that the
two dialogue processes - the internal and external
processes - complement one another; they do not
compete. They need to benefit on an equal footing from
the attention of our partners, because they constitute
the very benchmarks for the road map for peaceful
elections in 2020.

The culture of dialogue in Burundi goes beyond
those two processes. In recent months, the Burundian
Ombudsman has increased the number of meetings
among all the parties involved in the peace process,
in the form of retreats and what we call political
coffeehouses. The next retreat is scheduled for
tomorrow - 21 to 23 June. This internal dynamic is
supported at the highest level by the Head of State and
should be supported by our partners as well.

With respect to security, the shared view is that
security in Burundi is good throughout the territory,
except in a few isolated cases. The fact that a grenade is
thrown once every six months is not a cause for concern
about security in Burundi just because we see such
occurrences elsewhere. The country as a whole is calm,
with citizens and foreigners residing in Burundi calmly
going about their business.

There is no longer a political crisis in Burundi
in the true sense of the term. Let me explain this to
you, Mr. President. A political crisis is the absence
of institutions or institutional paralysis or general
insecurity in a country. Burundi has none of that
today. The democratically elected institutions function
normally from top to bottom. Security in the country is
real. We are today managing the political and economic
consequences of the 2015 crisis through dialogue
about those consequences and by mobilizing domestic
resources and winning back the trust of partners so
that we can address the economic consequences of the
crisis. That is what is at stake.

This return to normal security in the country has
been confirmed by several regional and subregional
organizations, such as the East African Community,
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, the African Bar Association and the African
Union. Following the return to peace, several regional
meetings, including that of the East African Standby
Force, in February 2017, the ECA Health Ministers
meeting, in March 2017, and the eighth ECA Petroleum
Conference and Exhibition, from 7 to 9 June 2017, have
been held successfully and peacefully in Bujumbura.
This reflects the region's confidence in the Burundi
authorities. We are also preparing to host the fifth annual
ECA Secretary General's Forum for Private Sector,
Civil Society and Other Interest Groups, from 22 to
23 June 2017, and the Summit of the Common Market
for Eastern and Southern Africa, in October 2017.

In the area of human rights, which I think is the most
sensitive topic for everyone, Burundi, like other nations
in the world, is continuing to make efforts to promote and
ensure the protection of human rights. It is an ongoing
battle for everyone, including for the Government
of Burundi, which is committed to fighting for the
protection of human rights so as to meet the remaining
challenges in this area. In order to achieve that end, it
would be best not to point fingers, but rather to adopt a
cooperative approach. We must definitively foreswear
politicization, selectivity, bias and subjectivity in the
process of human rights protection. Only international
cooperation and a mutually beneficial partnership
that respects the foundational pillars of all States,
namely, sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence, can contribute to the genuine protection
of human rights in Burundi and elsewhere. In that
regard, I would like to cite an authority from a State
that is a member of the Security Council who said only
a few days ago that "if our human rights laws get in the
way" of their leaders' ability to ensure their citizens'
security, they "will change the law so we can do it" in
order to adapt to the current situation. That may be an
approach that works for other countries dealing with
terrorism and serious crime as well.

It is no longer even an open secret that everything
that has happened in Burundi since 2015 is the result
of a meticulously conceived plan to destabilize
Burundian institutions by known outside elements. One
example of this, among many others, is the European

Union contract documents assisting the financing and
evacuation of the key players - who recently fled - in
the 2015 insurgency that led to the failed coup d'e'tat of
13 May 2015. The numerous Council members that do
not have a hidden agenda where Burundi is concerned
have the right to understand that reality. On top of that, a
humanitarian war is being planned behind Burundians'
backs, as if the recent successive failures of this type
of interference disguised as humanitarian assistance in
Africa and elsewhere have not been lessons enough in
ending such aggressive behaviour for good.

Basically, every possible strategy has been
employed since 2014 to effect regime change in Burundi.
The plan to destabilize the country was carried out in
several stages, each supported by a plan B in case of
failure. It all began with the creation of some confusion
in interpreting the Constitution, and thereby flouting
the authority of Burundi's constitutional court and the
East African Court of Justice, which had validated the
legitimacy of the candidacy of Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza,
President of the Republic of Burundi. The second
phasewas to be a continuation ofthe experiments in mob-
led regime change in black Africa that, as the Council
is aware, had just succeeded in Burkina Faso and in
some countries of the Maghreb. Thanks to Burundians'
unity and patriotism, the mob insurgency failed.

The destabilizing machinery then switched to
plan B through its planning and financing of the coup
of 13 May. Like the first plan, the coup d'e'tat failed
miserably, thanks to the overwhelmingly patriotic
majority of the forces of law and order. The third
plan was to use both internal and external actors to
create death squads, whose mission was to conduct
targeted killings in both camps with the goal of
dividing Burundians and getting them to retreat back
into themselves. After several months of such sinister
efforts, the regime-change machinery once again came
up against Burundians' unity and decided to move
to a fourth stage, still going on today, of a campaign
demonizing and slandering Burundi and its elected
leaders, this time through the wholesale politicization
of the human rights situation in Burundi.

Biased, politically motivated resolutions and
reports on the human rights situation in Burundi have
been regularly adopted in Geneva at the urging of the
same external actors. Commissions of inquiry have
been created in their wake and are putting out reports
from afar, without ever setting foot in Burundi. As far
as we are concerned, a fact-finding report on the human
rights situation produced without evidence gathered on
the ground and based solely on the testimony ofrefugees
and information collected from social networks is pure
theatre, aimed at achieving the regime change that the
same well-known axis desires so much. Besides that,
having been a refugee myself, I do not know a single
refugee anywhere in the world who speaks well of the
politics of his country of origin. That applies all the
more when the refugees being interviewed are the same
people who have taken part in incursions into Burundi
after undergoing military training in a neighbouring
country that United Nations experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have exposed, as the Security
Council well knows. So claiming to produce a report
on a country's human rights situation based solely
on refugee testimony is simply all the more likely to
diminish that mandating body's credibility.

I should also point out that the avalanche of biased
and politically motivated reports that have emerged
since 2015 with the intention of damaging my country
only add fuel to the fire and help to destabilize Burundi
rather than pacify it. The crisis that some external actors
continue to speak ofis now more artificial than real, and
it is therefore high time that the political and diplomatic
harassment that Burundi has endured since 2015 came
to an end and gave way to cooperation. To the outside
forces that continue to harass the Burundian people
directly or by proxy, I say that Burundi's sovereignty,
unity and dignity are priceless. Burundi will never give
in to unjust pressure from those who want to wrest from
it the three values that are the very foundation of our
nation. Burundi may be a small country, but it is also a
great nation that treasures its sovereignty and dignity.

With regard to cooperation, this time with the
United Nations, the Government is working to restore
peaceful relations with its development partners in a
spirit of mutually beneficial and respectful partnership.
It was in that spirit that Burundi gave quick assent to
the appointment of Mr. Michel Kafando as the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General and has also just
confirmed his first visit to Burundi so that he can meet
directly with the national authorities. The Government
of Burundi stands ready to cooperate fully with him
in full respect for the principles and values enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. In its eagerness
to restore the trust that had been lost among some of
its partners, Burundi also recently swiftly approved the
appointment of the new United Nations Development
Programme country representative and Resident
Coordinator of United Nations agencies with a view to
contributing to its sustainable development efforts.

The process of negotiating a consensus on a new
host country agreement that will enable cooperation to
be resumed between the Government of Burundi and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights is following the normal course and
should be finalized in the near future with the consent
of both parties. Keeping the Office's presence in
Burundi is therefore a foregone conclusion and should
no longer be a major concern. The only thing left to do
is to finalize the host country agreement.

Still with its contribution to United Nations
activities in mind, Burundi continues to participate
actively in peacekeeping operations in other countries,
with approximately 6,500 troops on the ground, mainly
in Somalia and the Central African Republic. Our
participation in peacekeeping around the world is one
way we can give back to the international community
and the United Nations, which have always supported
us at difficult times in our history. And it follows that
Burundi also expects its partners to make reciprocal
efforts to ensure peace.

In conclusion, I would like to briefly share with
the Council the three challenges that Burundi is
currently facing.

First, it is clear that the economy is Burundi's
greatest challenge. Poverty continues to fuel political
instability because politicians manipulate young people
who are frustrated by the lack of guarantees for a
better future. Burundi, like other countries, is trying
to implement the United Nations 2030 Agenda and the
African Union's Agenda 2063. Political discussions
should not take the place of discussions on economic
and social aspects. Everything must be done in parallel
with the three pillars of the United Nations, which
constitute our foundation. I welcome the new approach
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which since November 2016 has tended
to emphasize socioeconomic recovery.

The second challenge is the return of refugees. The
Government of Burundi has undertaken a wide-ranging
awareness-raising campaign for refugees to encourage
their voluntary return. Local administrations also have
a duty to supervise the land and property of those who
have left, so as to avoid conflict when they return. As a
result of those efforts and renewed peace, I emphasize
that 156,000 refugees, which no non-governmental
organization or foreign actor has spoken about and which
include some political party leaders, recently returned
to their homes. The Head of State has just asked the
Ombudsman of Burundi to continue awareness-raising
efforts for refugees and non-violent political actors for
them to return to their country in preparation for the
2020 elections.

As you know, Mr. President, the repatriation of
refugees is an indication of subregional stability. It is
recognized that, some of those who fled their country,
whether for economic reasons or because of rumours of
an impending war, were recruited, trained, supervised
and then entered the stillborn ranks of rebel movements
against Burundi, in flagrant violation of the 1951
Convention relating to the status of refugees and other
international laws, as well as the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, of 24 February 2013.

Our third and last challenge is national
reconciliation. The need for a successful conclusion to
the process of national reconciliation through the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission is extremely important
for us Burundians. The Burundian people must learn
about their history before definitively turning the
page of their painful past. In that respect, we advocate
once again for maintaining support for the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, which has a major role
to play in seeking truth, fixing broken hearts and
genuinely rewriting our history, which has always been
deliberately falsified.

