Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today's open debate on youth, peace and
security, which is an important topic for us all. We are
well aware of the important resolutions adopted by the
Security Council recently, focusing on investing young
people's potential in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Young people constitute the majority of the world's
population today, and youth constitutes the majority of
the population in conflict affected-countries, including
Yemen. We are well aware of the need to promote
the positive contribution of young men and women
by including them in efforts aimed at maintaining
international peace and security. The international
community must redouble its efforts to reach a better
understanding of the important role that young people
can play and to promote youth initiatives within the
United Nations so as to ensure that their voices, ideas
and initiatives are heard and that the United Nations
becomes younger and belongs to the future.

For these reasons, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2250 (2015), the first resolution ofits kind on
youth, peace and security. The resolution stresses the
responsible role that youth can play in maintaining and
promoting international peace and security. We thank
the Secretary-General for commissioning the progress
study on the implementation of the resolution, and we
welcome the relevant report (see S/2018/86), including
its recommendations.

I would like to contrast the youth of Yemen in 2011
and the youth of Yemen today. In 2011, young people
were the essence of the revolution that started at Sana'a
University, calling for change. However, today, in the
midst of the war launched by the Houthi militias, young
people are in a disastrous and tragic situation. Since
2014, the Yemeni Government has consistently sought to
seize all relevant options for achieving peace sponsored
by the United Nations. I will not go into the details,
except to say that we have made every effort to achieve
the dream of the young Yemenis who took to the streets
on the 11 February 2011 to call for a safe, prosperous
and stable Yemen that incorporates all segments of
society without discrimination or exclusion.

Since His Excellency President Hadi Mansour came
to power in 2012, the Yemeni Government has focused
its attention on young people because we believe in the
role of youth in building peace and prosperity and in
decision-making at all levels. A case in point was the
National Dialogue Conference, held on 18 March 2013
under the theme "In dialogue we make the future",
and supported by the United Nations, the region and
the international community. It lasted 10 months, until
25 January 2014, during which time productive debates
took place in which all segments of society participated.

One of the main achievements of the Conference was
the broad participation of young people in its activities.
The Conference called for 30 per cent representation of
women and 20 per cent representation of youth in all
Legislative, executive and judicial State bodies. The final
document of the Conference called for the scientific,
professional, political and economic empowerment of
youth, providing them with the conditions necessary to
build their potential and contribute to their society and
their country. The final outcome document also called
for amending Yemeni law to provide tax exemptions
for all projects aimed at economically empowering
youth and women and, specifically, to facilitate
access to loans for women entrepreneurs and youth
entrepreneurs. The final document of the Conference
also called for the establishment of a Supreme Council
for Youth that would play an oversight and steering
role in adopting the necessary policies to protect youth
from social dangers and violence, while launching new
projects to develop the capacity and potential of young
people, ensuring their participation in decision-making
processes. The document also called for the adoption
of measures to provide jobs for young men and women
with a view to eliminating youth unemployment. The
youth of Yemen participated in these decision-making
processes and negotiations, which laid the foundation
for peace and stability in the new, united Yemen.

Today, we are entering the fourth year of the
Houthi insurgency against the legitimate Government
of Yemen, after the Houthis usurped the Yemeni
State in September 2014 by occupying the country's
capital. The young people of Yemen today have had
their dreams dashed after they took to the streets at the
time of the revolution. The Houthi militias continue to
commit the most heinous forms of violations against
innocent youth and others by detaining and arresting
activists, journalists, politicians and legislators. These
unprecedented violations have crossed all religious,
social and cultural red lines that had never been crossed
before, even during the country's darkest times.

Over the past two and a half years, the Houthi
militias have kidnapped and arrested 16,800 people,
80 per cent of whom are young people. They have
not built educational institutions, cultural centres and
health clubs. They have not undertaken rehabilitation
projects with a view to providing political, financial,
technical and intellectual support to young people.
Instead, they have done something else. More than 484
Government buildings, health facilities, universities,
schools and sports clubs, as well as households, have
been transformed into detention centres.

Houthi militias have committed numerous
violations against young people, including extrajudicial
killings, arbitrary detention, torture and media
oppression, while transforming schools and hospitals
into military centres. They have also planted mines on
agricultural land, and recruited children and sent them
to fight their wars. The young people of Yemen have
lost every hope for a better future. Today they fight in
order to make a living. They are forced to fight as part
of the Houthi terrorist militias, Al-Qaida and Da'esh.

The young people and children of Yemen are fuel
to the war launched by the Houthi militias against the
Yemeni people. They are the majority of the victims
among the combatants. The militias have been so
cruel that they have even forced students to attend
compulsory military training before sending them to
fight. Children have become the focus of the Houthis
now that young people have come to understand the
gravity of the disaster and erroneous practices of the
Houthi militias.

Can members of the Council imagine the future
of Yemen's young people under the control of armed
militias that act contrary to the will ofthe international
community and international law? We call on the
international community to assume its legal and moral
responsibility in the light of the violations committed
against the young people of Yemen. We call on the
international community to protect our young people
in line with international treaties, the outcome of the
National Dialogue Conference, the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015). During
all rounds of negotiations, the Yemeni Government
has called for the release of all detainees, in particular
young detainees, and immediate measures to improve
the humanitarian situation in Yemen.

We take this opportunity to call on the Security
Council not to reward those who have destroyed the
dream of Yemen's young people, rejected all peace
initiatives and sought to carry out a coup against the
Yemeni Government. A democratic, federal Yemen - a
Yemen that would exploit the full potential of its young
people - is the dream of every Yemeni youth.

