Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ambassador Fatima Mohammed
and Ms. Hanna Tetteh for their briefings.

The Dominican Republic acknowledges the
commitment and strong strategic partnership in the
area of peace and security between the United Nations,
the African Union and other subregional organizations
in the pursuit of more systematic and coherent solutions
to the peace and security challenges in Africa.

In that regard, we welcome the recent joint annual
consultative meeting of the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council held in
Ethiopia. We also commend the progress made in the
implementation of the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security and the African Union-United Nations
Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as
well as thejoint efforts to implement the African Union
initiative to silence the guns in Africa by 2020.
Despite progress made in conflict resolution in
several countries of the region, the challenges posed
by Violent extremism, terrorism, organized crime,
corruption, impunity and the adverse effects of climate
change, among others, continue to threaten political
and socioeconomic stability in a large part of Africa.

We are aware that the challenges to African peace
and security are complex and need broad cooperation to
address them properly. We recognize that the situation
requires more robust support and more proactive and
better coordinated prevention initiatives. We should
not wait for conflicts to break out. The United Nations,
particularly the Security Council, together with
regional structures should strengthen the systematic
implementation of standardized assessment procedures
for potentially violent situations.

There is a need to invest in education, job
creation in countries and initiatives that particularly
benefit women and young people, recognizing their
contribution in their communities, especially as
mediators and peacebuilders.

It is increasingly necessary for the United
Nations and regional bodies to develop more closely
coordinated efforts that complement each other and
generate synergies to deliver consistent and unified
messages. In that regard, we hope that the modalities
forjoint Visits to Africa can be agreed to strengthen the
collective perspective.

In the same vein, we View positively the upcoming
assessment report on cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, as well as the structure
and capacity of the United Nations-African Union
partnership, and we look forward to its conclusions.

It is clear that to ensure sustainable peace and
rapid response mechanisms, the United Nations needs
regional peace support structures with the capacity for
early deployment, as well as the equipment and capacity
to overcome the challenges facing the continent. In that
regard, we welcome the adoption of the Declaration of
Shared Commitments, and we hope that procedures will
be adopted to increase the predictability, sustainability
and flexibility of financing for peacekeeping operations
and African Union-led joint forces authorized by the
Security Council.

Finally, we applaud the excellent work being done
by the United Nations and the African Union in their
ongoing mediation and cooperation to find solutions
to the peace and security challenges in Africa. A
more coordinated partnership and closer cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
particularly between the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council, are essential tools to find
predictable and lasting solutions.

