Mr. Misie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Since I am
addressing the Council for the first time this month, allow
me, Sir, sincerely to congratulate you on your inspired,
conscientious and, above all, successful leadership of the
Security Council during the first half of this turbulent
month of September, which has been full not only of
challenges and traps, but also of hopes that the tragic
events in my homeland could be stopped and that finally
solid foundations could be laid for a durable and stable
peace that could, in the course of years, also become a
just peace.

If our hopes are fulfilled, we will remember with
gratitude that you, Mr. President, your colleagues in the
delegation that you lead and your Government selflessly
contributed.

I also cannot forget the significant contributions of
Ambassador Wisnumurti of Indonesia and his associates,
who during the month of August clearly demonstrated
why their country, and their President Suharto, enjoy the
complete confidence and sincere respect of the
non-aligned countries, of which he has been the
successful chairman during the last three years.

The draft resolution on the agenda of the Security
Council represents a new, and so far the most generous,
investment in the present bankrupt policy towards the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina of the FRY, which
since August 1994 has been making promises and taking
on obligations, but never fully and sincerely delivered; it
never stopped supporting the Pale Serbs, both militarily
and politically.

The findings of my Government, which I have
presented to this Council, differ drastically from those
that the Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia have
been submitting over this year to the Security Council.
From January to the end of July deliveries of all kinds of
military assistance from the FRY to the Pale Serbs
doubled. This contributed to the destruction of the safe
areas of Srebrenica and Zepa and to the immeasurable
sufferings of civilians in Sarajevo, Bihac, Tuzla and
Gorazde. It made it possible also for Mladie and Karadzie

 

to continue to ignore the international community, to
humiliate and disable the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR), and to pose a threat to the lives of the
courageous and decent men and women serving under the
UNPROFOR colours.

I can present a list of hundreds of names of Mladie's
and Martie's soldiers, captured in the action to liberate
Bihac last August, all of whom are citizens of the FRY and
all of whom were mobilized by the authorities of the
Milosevic regime and sent to the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Republic of Croatia in June and July
this year. To those who doubt their identities, my
Government is ready to offer the opportunity to verify the
facts on the spot in Bihac.

Indeed, we are surprised that the resolution which will
be adopted today supports the suspension of sanctions
against the FRY for the whole period of 180 days. But we
also tend to believe that the time when the international
community was willing to be deceived by the regime in
Belgrade and their Pale proxies is irretrievably gone.
During the last two weeks, Belgrade and Pale have tested
the new determination of the United Nations and the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and I believe that
they have come to the right conclusions - conclusions
which will help them choose the right way forward from
the crossroads at which they now find themselves. I hope
they will not misunderstand the generosity and the
confidence of the Security Council. I hope Belgrade will
realize that it cannot build its prosperity on the conquest of
its neighbours' territories and on its support for the
formation of terrorist and secessionist movements. Without
the clear and full compliance of the FRY with the border
closure resolutions and all the well-known conditions,
which include mutual recognition by the FRY, the Republic
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic of Croatia, as
well as full respect for independence sovereignty and
territorial integrity among the three neighbouring States,
there will be no basis for any further easing of existing
sanctions. We do hope that the latest peace initiative will
bring us to the goal that would make this the last in the
series of sanctions resolutions.

Because of this hope and these expectations, I have to
remind the Security Council that it was precisely on 5 July
last, as the Council was adopting resolution 1003 (1995),
that, in Belgrade, under the auspices of Slobodan Milosevic,
the President of Serbia, his military commander, General
Momcilo Perisic, and the commander of rebel Pale Serbs,
General Mladic, were planning the onslaught against the
United Nations-declared "safe areas" of Srebrenica and
Zepa, which concluded not only with their destruction,
but also in new crimes against humanity in which
thousands of inhabitants of these two martyred towns
were slaughtered and 8,000 more are still unaccounted
for.

At the same time, we would like to believe that the
manipulated followers of Mladic and Karadzic in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina have finally realized
that they have a new chance to disabuse themselves of the
idea of a Greater Serbia and to spare their only homeland,
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, from further
destruction, which ultimately affects the Serbian
population too, so that they can build their future and
happiness only through peaceful co-existence, tolerance
and understanding with their Bosniak Muslim and
Bosnian Croat neighbours.

