Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
meeting and for providing this opportunity to discuss the
third report of the Secretary-General on initiatives taken
to implement the 12 recommendations on how the

Security Council could help resolve the matter of the
illicit trade in small arms. The Officer-in-Charge of the
Department for Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Hannelore
Hoppe, gave us a very good briefing, which indicates that
significant progress has been made in the implementation
of certain recommendations.

However, given the threat that the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons continues to pose for the
most vulnerable populations around the world, we must
acknowledge that much remains to be done. Indeed, the
number of illicit small arms and light weapons in
circulation and the number of victims of those weapons
are still far too high. In Africa, undoubtedly one of the
regions most affected by such proliferation, they are
commonly called weapons of mass destruction because
of their devastating effects in many conflict areas and
because of the high number of victims they claim on a
daily basis, and the suffering and other consequences
they impose on civilian populations. These arms are
also a permanent threat to peacekeepers, as in the case
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for several
peacekeepers have lost their lives in recent months.

Illicit small arms and light weapons thus continue
to pose a major challenge to peace. Controlling this
scourge requires a collective effort on the part of the
international community, for, because of the close links
between these weapons, terrorism and transnational
organized crime, no country is immune to its threat.

In the 12 recommendations under consideration,
it is clear that the most important progress achieved
since the adoption of the 2001 Programme of Action is
undoubtedly the adoption of the international
instrument related to tracing and identifying small arms
and light weapons. That instrument calls for new
commitments that must be respected, especially when
it comes to provisions related to identification, tracing
and international cooperation. As the Secretary-General
said in his report, the effectiveness and relevance of
this instrument will depend on the commitment of
Member States to fully implement it.

My country, like certain other Member States,
while recognizing the progress resulting from the
adoption of this instrument, regrets the fact it is not of
a binding character and does not have provisions
concerning ammunition. Indeed, it is ammunition that
allows the continued use of illicit small arms and light
weapons. Without a supply of ammunition, those small
arms and light weapons could not continue to wreak
such deplorable havoc. The Security Council should
therefore focus greater attention to this matter of
ammunition.

Interpol has an important role to play in
implementing the International Instrument to Enable
States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable
Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons. We
welcome the progress already made, with the
participation of that organization, in the development
of an international system to track arms and explosives.
We hope for greater cooperation between the United
Nations and Interpol in the area of appropriate legal
and technical aspects. Only rigorous control of imports
and exports will make it possible to effectively combat
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.

Violations of arms embargoes continue to
promote the continuation of conflict situations. Such
violations must therefore be resolutely condemned. My
delegation therefore supports the recommendations of
the Secretary-General with regard to the
implementation of Security Council sanctions
resolutions, especially those that impose arms
embargoes on countries or regions emerging from
armed conflict, experiencing actual armed conflict or
where there is a threat of such conflict. My delegation
likewise supports the establishment of monitoring
mechanisms to detect instances of intentional
violations.

In addition, peacekeeping missions and sanctions
committees established by the Security Council should
be empowered to make requests with regard to
identifying arms and ammunition discovered in the
course of their operations or collected in the context of
a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) programme. Export control policies, including
provisions pertaining to requiring end-user certificates,
merit our further consideration. In that regard, we must
promote regional support for the strengthening of
controls over international transfers of small arms.

The Congo favours strengthening inter-State
cooperation on various levels. We therefore participate
actively in the implementation of the relevant
mechanism at the subregional level in the framework
of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa. In the same vein,
we reaffirm the relevance of the Bamako Declaration
on an African Common Position on the Illicit
Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking of Small

Arms and Light Weapons, which was adopted on 1
December 2000 by the African Ministerial Conference
on the Illicit Proliferation, Movement and Traffic in
Small Arms and Light Weapons, as well as the June
2004 Nairobi Protocol for the Prevention, Control and
Reduction of Small Arms and Light Weapons in the
Great Lakes Region and Horn of Africa.

Respect for the commitments undertaken in the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects therefore requires a
collective effort. Those involved in illicit trafficking
often take advantage of shortcomings in legislation,
differences between States and the weaknesses of some
States to manage their own territory. In that regard,
priority should be given to strengthening national
operational capacities in various areas, including in
developing legislation, training law enforcement
officers, border control, stockpile management,
maintaining registries and public awareness. That
requires extending assistance to the weaker States.

The Congo welcomes the fact that the report of
the Secretary-General on small arms emphasizes,
among other things, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes in countries emerging from
conflict. It should be clearly underscored that
disarmament can be effective and lasting only if former
combatants are reintegrated into society and able to
regain their social status and find employment. We
therefore support the idea of including in the mandate
of peacekeeping operations specific provisions
pertaining to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.

Our national experience has shown that
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes require significant resources, which
cannot always be mobilized at the national level. With
the assistance of various bilateral and multilateral
partners, the Government of the Congo is currently
developing disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes for former combatants. The
objective of those programmes is to curb the illicit
circulation of the almost 42,000 firearms on our
territory and to reintegrate more than 25,000
combatants into civilian life, so as to strengthen peace.
On the basis of that experience, we would like to see
greater involvement on the part of international
financial institutions in the implementation of DDR
programmes.
With regard to recommendation 6 in of the report
of the Secretary-General in particular, my delegation
believes we should pay particular attention to the links
between trafficking in illicit small arms and the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. Reports by the Expert
Panel on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources
and Other Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and by the Panel of Experts on Liberia, to
name but two, have pointed to the role played by the
illicit exploitation of natural resources in the
continuation of conflicts, the financing of military
expenditures of rebel forces, the recruitment of
mercenaries and so on. We would like the Council to
adopt stronger measures in that regard, including with
regard to the implementation and monitoring of
targeted sanctions, in order to sever the link between
the illicit trade in small arms and the illegal
exploitation of natural resources.

In conclusion, for the international community,
the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects is the very basis
for combating the proliferation of such weapons. We
hope that, by its actions, the Council will contribute to
the preparations for the review conference scheduled
for July, which will be an opportunity to gauge the
progress made in this field.

