Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We express our appreciation
to Special Representative Mr. Yamamoto for his
comprehensive briefing on the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/508) on the overall situation

in Afghanistan and the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report, which highlights the key political and security
challenges facing Afghanistan. The briefing by Special
Representative Yamamoto was not only comprehensive,
it was also very frank and insightful.

Let me also take this opportunity to thank our
colleague the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan
for his briefing. It was a very useful briefing.

We also welcome the recent visit by the Secretary-
General to the country to express solidarity with the
people and the Government of Afghanistan following
the recent terrorist attacks. We condemn those
senseless attacks in the strongest possible terms and
express our sympathy and solidarity with the people
and the Government of Afghanistan. The threats posed
by terrorist groups of all kinds are indeed a matter of
serious security concern, not only for the country but
also for the wider region. We cannot agree more with the
Secretary-General's comments in his report in favour of
concerted international efforts in countering terrorism.

The long-term security and stability ofAfghanistan
can be assured only through a comprehensive and
inclusive Afghan-led and owned political process.
In that connection, we note that some progress has
been made. However, we understand that peace talks
between the Government and the Taliban have shown no
progress and the trajectory does not appear promising
on that front. We agree with the Secretary-General
that a regional environment conducive to an Afghan-
led peace process is indeed essential. It is that context
that we welcome the Afghan Government's initiative
to convene the Kabul process conference on peace and
security cooperation, which was held this month in spite
ofa difficult security situation. The efforts of UNAMA
and the promotion of peace, reconciliation and dialogue
in support for development in Afghanistan, with full
respect for the country's sovereignty and leadership
and ownership of the Afghan Government, remains
very important. The role of countries of the region is
also very critical in creating the necessary conditions
for the fight against terrorism and the advancement
of peace efforts. In that regard, the recent meeting
between the President of Afghanistan and the Prime
Minister of Pakistan to improve bilateral relations
between their countries is noteworthy but needs to be
pursued with greater vigour, all the more so in the light
of the fact that mutual trust is always critical and its
absence detrimental.

We welcome the efforts made by the National Unity
Government in pushing its reform agenda, fighting
corruption and enhancing accountability. We also
understand from the report of the Secretary-General
that progress has been made towards the holding of
credible and transparent elections. We nonetheless
stress how critical it is to ensure that there is some level
of coherence and unity of purpose in the country's top
leadership - and that is true with any Government.

Afghanistan faces enormous security, social and
economic challenges. Without continued inclusive
economic growth and development, sustained peace
and security cannot be achieved. That is why there is
a need to support the Government's continued efforts
to detail its development priorities in 10 national
priority programmes for 10 sectors, as envisioned in
the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework. We hope that the commitments made at
the Brussels Conference last October will be honoured.
But, once again, for that all to succeed, peace and
security in the country will need to be secured and
confidence generated.

Let me conclude by expressing support and
solidarity with the Afghan Government in its difficult
task of addressing the country's multiple challenges
with a view to promoting peace, reconciliation and
development. I also wish to express appreciation to
UNAMA for its continued role in support of those
endeavours and for its efforts in carrying out its
mandate under very difficult circumstances.

