Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We join other speakers in thanking the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia, Mr. Yusuf
Hassan Ibrahim, for his important statement containing
a very thorough and detailed analysis of the situation in
his country. In our opinion, that statement was
extremely useful. We also thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this meeting.

The Russian delegation agrees with the
assessments and observations contained in the
Secretary-General's report. We wish to comment on
three key issues reflected in the report.

We share the Secretary-General's "cautious
optimism" with regard to the outcome of the ninth
Summit of the lntergovernmental Authority on
Development (lGAD). The general understanding
achieved on how to resolve the urgent problems of
Somalia on the basis of consensus among the countries
of the subregion is an important prerequisite for
harmonizing the various peace initiatives under way.
Coordinated efforts in the framework of lGAD among
the Somali factions will deprive the destructive forces
of any opportunity to exploit the conflicts between the
countries of the subregion and other interested players.

The task of the Security Council and the entire
international community is to strengthen the positive
approach of IGAD and to encourage Somalis in their
turn to interact constructively with that organization.
Russia is prepared to continue to assist the efforts of
the countries of the subregion on a bilateral basis and
within the context of the Joint IGAD Partners Forum.

We note the Secretary-General's intention to
establish committees of friends of Somalia in Nairobi
and in New York. We believe that such structures
should primarily provide moral, political and, where
possible, material support for the collective efforts of
the lGAD countries and the positive forces in Somalia
to emerge from crisis. Naturally, membership in the
committees of friends should be open to all interested
participants, including members of the Security
Council, that can provide genuine assistance in that
work.
We agree with the Secretary-General's conclusion
that the security situation in Somalia, including in
Mogadishu, is not yet conducive to the establishment
of a United Nations political office there. The Council,
together with other members of the United Nations
family, must map out a clear path for providing
effective assistance to the Somali people once the
conditions have been met.

We have also focused our attention on that
section of the report addressing the fight against
international terrorism. We note that the leaders of the
Transitional National Government have asserted that
they will not tolerate any manifestation of such a threat
in the territory of Somalia. At the same time, we
understand that the capacities of the Transitional
National Government and other Somali groupings
prepared to combat extremism are limited. It is the task
of the international community and the Security
Council, at the heart of the struggle against
international terrorism, to provide the Somalis with the
essential help they need to neutralize any possible
manifestation of terrorism. It is important for the
Somalis themselves energetically to cooperate in that
task with the Counter-Terrorism Committee established
pursuant to a Security Council resolution. Such
cooperation, including possible measures against
persons linked to international terrorism, should have a
solid foundation in international law. The ultimate
neutralization of the various threats emanating from the
territory of Somalia will be impossible without the
restoration of peace and order throughout the country.

