Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): Let me begin
by expressing our appreciation to you, Madam, for
convening this important debate. We should like
to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui, Executive Director
Anthony Lake and Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for their
participation and statements.

In recent years, the theme of children and armed
conflict has been firmly placed on the international
agenda. The Security Council has demonstrated its
strong commitment to ensuring the protection of
children in armed conflict, most notably by adopting
resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005). Progress
has been made in relation to dialogue with parties to
conflicts and the signing of action plans on the ground.

However, children remain the most vulnerable
group in many ongoing armed conflicts around the
world. As noted in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2013/245), children in Syria are facing a dire
situation in which they have been killed, injured,
displaced and tortured. There are many accounts of
violations against children in conflict areas, such as in
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Mali. Much more needs to be done
with a view to enhancing the protection of children
affected by armed conflicts. Against that backdrop, I
should like to make a few observations about where
greater efforts could be made.

First, we welcome the fact that all Government
armed forces listed in the Secretary-General's report
have entered into an action plan process. Meanwhile,
we also note that non-State armed groups constitute
the vast majority of listed parties. Children in armed
conflict cannot be protected completely unless all
parties to conflicts abide by their obligations under
international law. As such, it is imperative that all
parties listed in the report develop and implement
action plans.

Secondly, the protection of children should be
ensured throughout the fulfilment of United Nations
peacekeeping mandates. In particular, child protection
advisers currently deployed in six United Nations
peacekeeping missions and four political missions
play crucial roles in mainstreaming child protection.
Specific provisions for the protection of children
should continue to be included in all relevant mandates
of United Nations missions.

Thirdly, perpetrators of grave violations against
children must be held accountable. Ending impunity is
vital in the prevention of violations against children.
In that regard, we recognize the International Criminal
Court's contribution to ensuring accountability for the
most serious crimes against children, as demonstrated
in the Thomas Lubanga Dyilo case. At the same time,
national legislation and judicial systems should be
strengthened in order to investigate and prosecute such
perpetrators.

Last but not least, it is noteworthy that several
Security Council Sanctions Committees include
violations against children in their sanctions designation
criteria. Such a linkage between the perspective of
child protection and the work of the relevant sanctions
regimes can serve as a practical tool to put pressure on
perpetrators.

Children represent our collective future. Saving
the children affected by armed conflict is saving the
very future of humankind. The Republic of Korea fully
supports resolution 2143 (2014), which was adopted
earlier here in the Chamber.

