Mr. Machado (Brazil): The past few weeks have
once again witnessed important events in the Middle
East and in North Africa. Brazil warmly welcomes
the announcement by United States Secretary of State
John Kerry on July 19 that an agreement has been
reached regarding the basis for resuming direct final
status negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis.
That is an encouraging development, one that has the
potential for reversing the deadlock and paralysis that
have characterized the peace process in recent years.
We hope this renewed effort will lead to the full and
overdue realization of the two-State solution. It is an
opportunity that must not be missed.

The Security Council must provide active and
sustained support to the resumption ofthe peace process
and work towards its satisfactory completion. The
current situation, with the Council sidelined and sterile
efforts to promote peace remaining in the hands of
small groups such as the Quartet, should be called into
question. Brazil herewith renews its firm and continued
commitment to peace between Israel and Palestine and
remains ready to support a genuine agenda for peace.

As the parties prepare to re-engage in direct
negotiations, we must continue to help meet the
humanitarian needs of the Palestinians, which continue
to be quite substantial. The Brazilian Government
has just concluded an agreement with the World Food
Programme and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East for the
donation of 11,500 tons of rice.

As we continue to grapple with the challenges of
achieving peace between the Israelis and Palestinians,
let us not forget the role played by civil society in
the region, and allow those voices that have been
clamouring for peace to be heard.

Brazil remains deeply concerned with the situation
in Syria, where a human tragedy is unfolding with
spillover effects in the entire region. We reiterate our
unequivocal condemnation of all forms of violence,
by whomsoever committed. We renew our call for
an immediate ceasefire, an end to all violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law, and
safe, immediate and unimpeded humanitarian access to
those in need.

We remain strong supporters of the initiative to
convene another Geneva conference as soon as possible
in order to promote an inclusive, Syrian-led political
process leading to a transition that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people. We renew our support
for the work of the Joint Special Representative in that
endeavour and encourage him to brief the General
Assembly on his initiatives.

Comprehensive negotiations are the only viable
option at hand. Brazil reiterates its repudiation of
actions that further militarize the conflict in Syria. We
call on all members of the international community,
including members of the Security Council, to heed
the recommendation of the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry and cease arms transfers to
all actors involved in the conflict. The argument that
providing weapons to the parties will help reach a
military balance and somehow contribute to the success
of the planned Geneva conference is seriously flawed.
It will only promote an arms race, which in turn will
further reduce the chances of a political understanding.

A diplomatic surge, not an arms surge, is the path
to a political settlement which this Council should
promote. Furthermore, it is clear that more weapons
can sadly lead to more human rights violations. In the
light of the conclusions of the Commission of Inquiry
that all parties have gravely violated human rights, the
protection of civilians requires fewer, not more, arms in
the hands of the parties.

In view of the grave deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Syria, we commend neighbouring countries
for the humanitarian assistance provided to Syrian
refugees. We recognize that the burden placed on
the shoulders of those exercising active and laudable
solidarity with the Syrians has been extremely heavy.
Brazil has been contributing financially through the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to mitigate the plight of the refugees and
internally displaced people.

Brazil has been following with great concern the
grave situation in Egypt. We urge all actors to seek
solutions to the challenges facing the country with full
respect for the institutions. We further call for dialogue
and reconciliation, so that the legitimate aspirations
of the Egyptian people to freedom, democracy and
prosperity can be achieved without violence and fully
within the democratic order.

Let me conclude with a brief comment on Lebanon.
It is particularly worrisome that the violence is
becoming more and more sectarian, creating further
challenges in a country as diverse as Lebanon.

More than ever, the international community must
strongly and effectively support President Michel
Sleiman and the Lebanese Government's commitment
to the dissociation policy. Peace and stability in
Lebanon should be firmly upheld by the international
community, with the resolute involvement of the
Council, as exemplified by its presidential statement
of 10 July (S/PRST/2013/9), which we support. We call
on all parties in Syria to fully respect the sovereignty,
political independence and territorial unity of Lebanon.
It is in their own interest not to further destabilize the
country. We also call on all Lebanese actors to avoid
further escalation and to embark on the path of political
understanding.

