Mr. Lamamra (spoke in French): Now that the
effects of the earthquake that hit Haiti so hard are
beginning to be seen in all their tragic scope and it is
confirmed that there has been considerable loss of
human life, I would like once again to express on
behalf of the African Union our heartfelt condolences
to the people and the Government of Haiti and to the
families and loved ones of the deceased, to whom we
extend all our sympathies. We are thinking of our
colleagues - leaders, members, partners and even
visitors who are there with the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, including Mr. Hedi
Annabi, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, whose whereabouts are still unknown. We
assure their families of our full solidarity.

On behalf of the African Union (AU), I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Council for so opportunely scheduling
this meeting on Somalia so early in the year. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/684), as well as his Special Representative,
Mr. Ahmadou Ould Abdallah, for his extremely clear
and useful introductory comments and for his
praiseworthy perseverance in carrying out his mission.
I would also like to express my appreciation to the
representative of Somalia and the Permanent Observer
of the League of Arab States and to assure them of our
continued cooperation, while thanking them in advance
10-20953
for the useful information on developments in Somalia
that they will be giving the Council.

The year 2009 was a particularly difficult one for
Somalia. However, it was also different from many of
the preceding years inasmuch as the cruel tribulations
and complex problems have begun to be addressed as
major challenges that are also harbingers of
opportunity. The enemies of peace and reconciliation,
inside and outside the country, have redoubled their
aggression and cruelty, blindly determined to wreck the
results of the Djibouti process and beyond that to make
Somalia a regional focal point and base of operations
for maritime piracy and international terrorism.

The affiliation of Somali armed groups,
particularly the Al-Shabaab movement, with
international jihadist terrorists has been confirmed and
reconfirmed through public declarations of allegiance
to Al-Qaida, an influx of foreign fighters into Somalia,
and the introduction of typical modi operandi
previously unknown there. There has been a detectable
quantitative growth in the capacity of insurgent groups
to do harm, which in turn has led to increases in deadly
terrorist acts and a territorial expansion that has yet to
be sufficiently contained. One of the effects of the
insurgent groups' spectacular acts that magnifies their
propaganda and their impact is the perception that the
situation in Somalia is structurally volatile, precarious
and uncertain.

In fact, the past year in Somalia has set in motion
a tenuous but nonetheless genuine momentum toward a
rebirth of the Somali State, led by the pluralistic and
inclusive Transitional Institutions, the expansion of the
bases of President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed's
Government, and the functioning of Government
structures that are working to bring about good
governance, while vital public services such as national
police and security forces are gradually and effectively
being put in place. The legitimacy and credibility of
the present Transitional Federal Institutions, with clear
aims, objectives and expectations, have made sure that
a broad consensus of the international community is
united behind them.

The African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), which in 2009 witnessed twice as much
loss of life as in the rest of its existence, has increased
in terms of numbers, capacity and experience; it is
motivated by a heightened sense of its responsibilities
and the desire to accomplish an undertaking for peace
which Africa is pursuing on behalf of the entire
international community - and with its support. Here
I would like to once again pay tribute to Burundi and
Uganda for their decisive contribution to this mission.

On 8 January, the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union renewed AMISOM's mandate for
another 12 months and is counting on the Security
Council's support for its decision. It expressed its
appreciation for the considerable logistical support that
the United Nations has provided to AMISOM, as well
as for the encouraging results of the pledging
conference held in Brussels. The AU Peace and
Security Council also welcomed the United Nations
Security Council's adoption of resolution 1907 (2009)
and called for its genuine implementation, while urging
the Security Council to respond positively to its request
to impose a no-fly zone and port controls in order to
deprive Somali insurgents and their allies of the use of
the country's air and maritime spaces. The Peace and
Security Council also expressed its concern over the
ongoing piracy and the phenomenon of the payment of
ransoms that fuel crime, terrorism and extremism.

Based on all of these considerations, the Peace
and Security Council

"reiterated its appeal to the United Nations
Security Council to take the necessary steps for
the United Nations to play a role commensurate
with the gravity and complexity of the situation
on the ground, including through the
transformation of AMISOM. into a United Nations
peacekeeping operation and by putting in place
all other legal, budgetary, logistical and
operational arrangements that could decisively
enhance the effectiveness of the action of the
international community in Somalia".

Clearly, Somalia and the international community
have made considerable gains on which it would be
desirable and possible to base a bold strategic vision
for ending the crisis in Somalia by the end of the
transitional period in October 2011, which is not a long
time from now. With the necessary political will,
decisive progress can be made in an ongoing effort of
effective Somalization of the country's national
security and by the Somali State's assumption of its
other sovereign functions.

At the same time, humanitarian assistance, quick
impact projects and the launch of development
activities that create jobs should all be part of a
comprehensive, consistent and multidimensional effort
to mobilize collective energies to ensure that Somalia
is no longer a threat to its own people, to its region, to
Africa and to the world. Somalia must no longer be
seen through the lens of the trauma of its past
experiences. Rather, Somalia must be vigorously
supported in creating the leverage for a recovery that
will be healthy both for Somalia itself and for the
entire international community.

