Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, like other delegations, I would like to
welcome Mr. Nebojsa Covie to today's meeting, and to
express my gratitude for his statement. I am also very
grateful to Mr. Steiner for his comprehensive briefing.

We welcome the efforts made by Mr. Steiner
since he took office to stabilize the situation in
Kosovo, promote the political process, strengthen the
capacities of the police and judicial systems and restore
and develop the economy of Kosovo. Under
Mr. Steiner's leadership, the achievements made by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) to contribute to effective
administration by the provisional Government are
apparent to everyone. The Chinese delegation supports
UNMIK in continuing its comprehensive and effective
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), and hopes that, on the basis of its existing
work, it will take further measures to combat organized
crime along the Kosovo border, protect the freedom
and security of minorities, including Serbs, facilitate
refugee returns and resolve the problem of missing
persons, so that a multi-ethnic society can be
established soon in Kosovo. Furthermore, we would
like to see further cooperation between the provisional
Government in Kosovo and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.

Now we would like to ask two questions to Mr.
Steiner.

The first concerns the proper name of Kosovo. In
paragraph 7 of the Secretary-General's report, it is
stated that the Assembly failed to include the
amendments made by the Kosovo Serb members on the
conditions for return. Furthermore, it would not allow
Kosovo Serb members to use, Kosovo and Metohija, as
the full name of Kosovo. We would like to know the
views of Mr. Steiner on this question, and how it was
finally resolved.

Secondly, with regard to the security situation
along the border of Kosovo, the Secretary-General
said, in paragraph 21 of his report, that the overall
security trend remains encouraging. The main crime
indicators show that most crimes had an economic
basis. We note that only six major crimes were listed
here, with the leading ones involving drugs and
weapons. There were eight indicators fewer than those
listed in his previous quarterly report.

We understand that smuggling is still a serious
problem along the Kosovo border. According to
reports, this is to a certain extent related to a reduction
of KFOR. We would like to hear the comments and
Views of Mr. Steiner in this regard.

