Mr. Ivanov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The theme of today's discussion is a relevant
one in the context of the activities of the Security
Council in particular, and in that of the Organization in
general. Ensuring the rule of law and justice is a crucial
tool to promote the prevention and settlement of
regional conflicts. In the context of peacekeeping and
post-conflict resolution, issues ofjustice and the rule of
law cannot be considered in isolation from the more
general problem of ensuring the rule of law in
international relations. We are certain that without
asserting the primacy of law in international relations,
we will be doomed to an endless and fruitless
consideration of the issues of the prevention and
settlement of conflicts. Russia believes that the
principle of the rule of law is an imperative for the
entire system of international relations.

Moreover, despite all the complexities of the
current international situation at the dawn of the
twenty-first century, favourable conditions have been
established to bring all States together on the basis of
that fundamental principle to address new threats and
challenges. In order for that to become a reality,
however, all members of the international
community - irrespective of their political, military or
economic might - must recognize that realizing their
individual interests will ultimately not be possible
without upholding the collective interests of the entire
international community. Clearly, the key role in this
respect must be played by the United Nations and its
Security Council, which bear primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security and
for the prevention and settlement of conflicts.

In addressing the issue of the rule of law and the
role of the United Nations in the context of
peacekeeping, I should like to draw the attention of the
Security Council to the following points.

For Russia, the basic principles and criteria of
United Nations peacekeeping activities remain
fundamental. We believe that joint efforts must be
made to ensure that the legal bases for peacekeeping
are strengthened, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and the decisions of the Security
Council. This would represent a genuine alternative to
unilateral approaches to resolving crisis situations
around the world.

Russia looks forward to constructive cooperation
in the task of perfecting peacekeeping and post-conflict
settlement mechanisms under which the peacekeeping
component would be effectively combined with the
work of the social, economic and humanitarian
structures of the United Nations system.

The broad range of relevant tasks, comprising the
mandates of multifunctional operations, also includes
assisting States in restoring or strengthening organs of
justice and law enforcement. Work aimed at perfecting
the justice system is not restricted to the purview of the
Security Council but has a bearing also on the activities
of many of the institutions of the United Nations as
well as other international and regional structures in
this area. There must be smooth coordination and close
interaction among them, and the Council should
provide them with considerable political support.

The role of law and legality at the stage of post-
conflict peace-building cannot be overestimated, given
that compliance in this respect ultimately determines
the legitimacy of the new Government and the
effectiveness of the work of all State bodies, and also
ensures citizens' rights and freedoms.

Strategies involving United Nations assistance in
the reconstruction of the judicial and law-enforcement
structures of countries emerging from crisis must be
aimed at the smooth transfer of functions in these areas
to the legitimate national bodies of State Government
as they are formed and as the security situation
normalizes. It is precisely such tasks that, over a
number of years, the international community has been
addressing, with the active role of the United Nations
in Bosnia and Kosovo, and today these tasks are on the
agenda in Afghanistan and Iraq.

It is essential here carefully to reconcile
international assistance measures with the specifics of
the situation in each individual case and to take into
account national particularities and the status of local
judicial systems. The main point here is that this kind
of work by United Nations structures should be
conducted in strict accordance with the decisions of the
Security Council and that it must preclude any arbitrary
or broader interpretation of those decisions, which
could have negative consequences for the success of
peacekeeping efforts and for the credibility of the
United Nations in general.

In the context of asserting international standards
of legality in post-conflict States, favourable conditions
must be established in order to ensure human rights and
to bring to justice persons who are guilty of war
crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide. Here, the
experience of the United Nations in cooperating with
States in the establishment of special courts may prove
useful. Due use, of course, should also be made of the
potential of the International Criminal Court.

In the Millennium Declaration, adopted by the
General Assembly, States expressed their intention to
strengthen respect for the principle of the rule of law,
both in international and in domestic affairs. Today's
Council meeting must become an important step
towards implementation of this aim. In this regard, we
wish to reaffirm Russia's principled support for United
Nations actions aimed at ensuring that the primacy of
the rule of law is the basis for the comprehensive
settlement of conflict situations and for the perfecting
of Security Council mandates to conduct peacekeeping
operations, as well as for United Nations peacekeeping
activities in general.

