Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Under-Secretary- General Vladimir Voronkov and Ms. Michele Coninsx for their briefings, as well as Ms. Mona Frei for courageously sharing her experience. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for the tenth report (S/2020/95) on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/Da'esh to international peace and security and the range of United Nations efforts in support of Member States in countering the threat. We are following with great concern the reports of the ongoing transformation of ISIL into a covert global network, continuing to launch attacks and seek resurgence. ISIL's regional affiliates have continued their strategy to exploit conflict situations and local grievances and expand their network in other parts of the world. A number of the remaining foreign terrorist fighters have relocated to other regions or have returned to their home countries, thus posing challenges for rehabilitation and reintegration and the risk of radicalization. The report also notes the alarming trend of the growing nexus between terrorism and organized crime, as well as the risk of women being recruited to plan and carry out attacks. That reality requires all Member States to remain vigilant and united. We join the call for greater cooperation among States and other stakeholders in order to strengthen our collective efforts and be innovative in our actions. In that regard, my delegation would like to make three points. First, we underscore the paramount need to strengthen international cooperation to address the threat posed by terrorism. Cooperation among the relevant authorities is crucial for the collection, analysis and sharing of intelligence about terrorists' imminent attacks, networks, recruitment, training and financing, as well as evidence for their prosecution. Enhancing national capacities and building national and regional institutional mechanisms to counter the threat of terrorism are equally important. We welcome the capacity-building efforts of the Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT) and the Counter- Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), including CTED's recent updates to the technical guide for the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions, which are very useful to Member States. We support the central role of the United Nations system in coordinating the global fight against terrorism. We commend the increased efforts to strengthen the coherence, coordination and effectiveness of United Nations counter-terrorism work, in particular the cooperation between UNOCT and CTED. It should be noted that in undertaking all measures to address the threats of terrorism, Member States and all relevant stakeholders should uphold the Charter of the United Nations and ensure full compliance with their obligations under international law and relevant Security Council resolutions. Secondly, we have consistently maintained that one of the most effective ways of countering the threat of terrorism and violent extremism conducive to terrorism is to address the root causes of terrorism, including unresolved conflict, poverty, inequality and injustice. The Security Council should scale up its efforts and pay greater attention to addressing unresolved conflicts. Regional organizations should play an instrumental role in settling disputes and strengthening a region's resilience in the face of terrorism. Thirdly, we note with concern the presence of ISIL terrorist groups in Asia, including the travel of foreign terrorist fighters in South-East Asia. At the regional level, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has spared no effort to counter the threat of terrorism, including by effectively implementing the its Convention on Counter-Terrorism and its Plan of Action to Prevent and Counter the Rise of Radicalization and Violent Extremism. Viet Nam maintains its firm position to reject and condemn terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We are committed to cooperating with Member States and relevant stakeholders in countering the scourge of terrorism and contributing to the maintenance of international peace and security.
