The President: Under rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Australia, Bangladesh, Brazil,
Canada, Cuba, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, Egypt, Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Lebanon, Malaysia,
Nicaragua, Norway, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab
Emirates and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to
participate in this meeting.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 19 April 2012 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/2012/247 and
which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in accordance
with its previous practice, the Security Council
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations to participate in the meeting of
the Security Council which will be held on
Monday, 23 April 2012, on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in this meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

It is so decided.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate in
this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Abdou Salam
Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
2
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I now give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.

