Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling today's briefing and for
your concept note (S/2015/848, annex), and I thank the
Secretary-General for attending today and for giving
us his briefing.

Today's topic and the Secretary-General's briefing
address the role and effectiveness of some of the
Council's mostpowerful tools for maintaining peace and
security. We welcome the reports and recommendations
of the Secretary-General (S/2015/682) and the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446). Both provide an important basis and
opportunity for change. The reports set out useful
recommendations to address long-standing challenges,
including the growing mandate resource gap and the
need for enhanced political strategies and engagement
and more timely deployments, together with innovative
and flexible support and financing arrangements, a
number of which the Secretary-General touched upon
this morning.

Today I wish to focus on several issues New
Zealand considers to be of particular importance. First,
we support the calls for a much stronger investment
by the Security Council and the wider United Nations
system in conflict prevention, and for a way to better
harness the Organization's collective political leverage
in pursuit of political settlements. New Zealand sees
merit in making greater use of timely missions by the
Council, including mini-missions to the field. They
are both a concrete demonstration of the Council's
interest in a situation and a means for the Council
to both influence and obtain a better understanding
of conditions on the ground. Such missions should
work with the relevant regional organizations. In our
view, there should be standing arrangements for such
missions so that funding is not at the expense of the
on-the-ground operation.

Secondly, the Council needs to put into practice its
commitment to clear, focused and realistic mandates.
We agree with the High-level Panel that we should use
two-stage mandates for missions being established or
reconfigured and allow for operations to be built up
and drawn down according to clear priorities and the
situation on the ground.

Thirdly, the Council needs to consider changes to
the way it develops, considers and approves mandates.
In particular, there needs be more consistent and
meaningful engagement among the Council, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the affected States,
as well as with the Secretariat. As the concept note
indicates, New Zealand has been active in promoting
informal discussions along these lines with positive
results. Such interaction should be part of everyday
Council and Secretariat culture and practice. Moreover,
to be useful, the conversations need to focus on the
practical and avoid formality. Formalistic and formulaic
consultation is not useful for any us.

Fourthly, we need to enhance the ability of the
United Nations to ensure the safety and security of
United Nations peace operations personnel. Countries
will not make soldiers and police available if they feel
their people may be exposed to unacceptable risk.
As a recent International Peace Institute-organized
workshop that New Zealand co-hosted with Chad and
Uruguay, there was discussion about that method. It was
concluded that there is no single answer to the issue.
Rather, safety and security need to be key concerns in
the development and review of mandates, along with the
training and equipping of peace operations personnel,
access to information, and the Secretariat's planning
and management practices.

Fifthly, in order to be effective, mandates need to
fit the real-world context. Understanding that context is
critical to effectiveness. That means we need to enhance
the Council's access to the information necessary for
making sound decisions. New Zealand has proposed
options for addressing that issue. We have requested
more regular informal briefings for Council members
on specific missions, beginning with the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. That has already proved
valuable in providing operational-level information and
insights. The Secretariat briefings provided in informal
triangular consultations on specific mandate renewals
have also been similarly useful, but we believe there is
scope for a more systematic approach.

We would see merit in the Council receiving regular
situational awareness briefings, led by the United
Nations Operations and Crisis Centre and supported by
other United Nations stakeholders. That is consistent
with what is called for in the High-level Panel's report,
several of the Secretary-General's reports and resolution
2171 (2014). We understand that such a practice used to
exist. It would provide Council members a more regular
and relevant flow of information on key points across
all United Nations peace operations to assist mandate
implementation, safety and security, and the protection
of civilians.

Finally, we need to get much better at addressing
ongoing allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse
by United Nations peacekeepers. We must get past
ritualistic expressions of condemnation and zero
tolerance. We think that a key missing piece of the
puzzle is implementation of the recommendations of
the 2005 report (see A/59/710) by His Excellency Prince
Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein for a more independent and
confidential process to receive and register complaints
in place in missions.

The Secretary-General's report and the report
of the High-level Panel provide clear analysis of key
problems facing United Nations peace operations and
a wealth of useful proposals to address them. But the
debate has never suffered from a dearth of problem
definition or proposed solutions. What we need is a
sustained commitment to fixing things in a real-world
sense and to set aside narrow interests and fixations
with doctrinal purity to make the changes that can
make a practical difference.

Pragmatism and practicality underlay the original
conception of peacekeeping. It is important that they
continue to inform our responses to modern realities.

