Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak in Austria's capacity as current Chair of the
Human Security Network, an interregional group of
countries that also comprises Canada, Chile, Greece,
Ireland, Jordan, Mali, the Netherlands, Norway,
Slovenia, Switzerland and Thailand, and South Africa
as an observer.

Ever since the creation of the Human Security
Network, in 1999, the issue of children affected by
armed conflict has been of critical importance to our
agenda. The Network and its individual members have
witnessed the origin of several important initiatives,
such as the Agenda for War-Affected Children, adopted
at the Winnipeg Conference in September 2000; the
holding of workshops on the issue of ending the use of
child soldiers in Jordan; and the programmes of the
Centre for Children Traumatized by Armed Conflicts in
South-Eastern Europe, in Ljubljana, Slovenia, to name
but a few.

Austria made children and armed conflict one of
the top priorities during its period in the chairmanship
of the Network. At its next ministerial meeting in May
this year in Graz, the Human Security Network is
expected to adopt a common support strategy for
children affected by armed conflict, identifying a set of
operative principles as well as a training curriculum for
child-rights monitors and rehabilitation experts. One of
the results envisaged is that the Network will
contribute to establishing a pool of child experts for
eventual use in conflict areas.

In November 2002, the Human Security Network
supported the holding here in New York of an
international symposium on children affected by armed
conflict. The event was organized by the Harvard
Program on Humanitarian Policy and Conflict
Research, in cooperation with the Coalition to Stop the
Use of Child Soldiers, the Watchlist on Children and
Armed Conflict, the United Nations Children's Fund
and the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. The symposium focused on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1379
(2001) and came up with a set of concrete
recommendations, which have been communicated to
the members of the Council.

Let me now touch upon the politically significant
report of the Secretary-General before us. We strongly
support the general thrust of this report and I would
like to highlight a few of its aspects.

It is indeed astonishing how the normative
framework for the protection of children in armed
conflict has been strengthened during the recent past.
In less than a month, we will celebrate the first
anniversary of the entry into force of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on children in armed conflict.

While progress with regard to the normative
framework for the protection of children in armed
conflict is certainly remarkable, I would like to
reinforce the call made by the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative to focus now on application.
There is an essential role for the United Nations system
in ensuring better implementation of the relevant
standards, in the first place through an enhanced
operationalization of activities in the field. Austria and
the Office of the Special Representative are currently
working together on a compendium containing all
relevant international standards, which will be
published shortly and is supposed to improve the
understanding and knowledge of those dealing with
children in armed conflict.

Let me now come to the much anticipated list
requested by Security Council resolution 1379 (2001).
The Human Security Network welcomes the list
annexed to the report, as well as the description in the
report of further situations of concern, which could not
be added to the list due to formal reasons. This list is
without doubt a major and politically significant
contribution to raising awareness about the plight of
children affected by armed conflict around the world
and to eventually ending the recruitment of child
soldiers. It also clearly demonstrates that the
international community is no longer willing to close
its eyes before one of the biggest tragedies we are
facing today.

While the annexed list candidly names 23 parties
to armed conflict that recruit or use child soldiers and
meet the other criteria set out in resolution 1379
(2001), it is, however, obvious that it excludes large
numbers of children equally affected by armed conflict.
We therefore believe that the list needs to be extended.
It should encompass all other situations where children
are recruited or used as soldiers or where their
protection needs are severely threatened in other ways.
As an example, I would like to direct members'
attention to one situation which is particularly
alarming: the ongoing abduction of numerous boys and
girls in northern Uganda. Based on reports from a
variety of sources, we have reason to believe that large
numbers of children are still being abducted and held
by the Lord's Resistance Army for use in combat or as
sex slaves. The Human Security Network is currently
evaluating possible action to shed more light on this
situation and to put a halt to this abominable practice.
At the same time, we feel that it is necessary also for
the Security Council to be able to better assess such
situations.

The Human Security Network has concrete
recommendations to present to the Council which, in
our View, would significantly increase the ability of
this forum to address the issue of children and armed
conflict and will have an impact on the lives of war-
affected children. The 10 recommendations can be
summarized as follows.

We should continue the consideration of the issue
of children and armed conflict on a regular basis and
adopt new resolutions adding value to the debate.

We should create an effective evaluation
mechanism for the list of parties to conflict recruiting
or using child soldiers and the relevant steps taken by
those on it. This could include field visits. The
involvement of international agencies and non-
governmental organizations in this process is crucial.

The Secretary-General should be requested to
regularly update this list and consider extending it by
also including conflict situations not on the Council's
agenda, as well as other severe violations of relevant
child-protection obligations, such as abductions or the
use of landmines.

We should enter into a dialogue with the
Governments of countries on the list, ask them to
report on the respective situations and urge them to put
an immediate end to the recruitment or use of child
soldiers, to reintegrate them into society and to stop all
other severe violations of child-protection obligations.
We must also raise awareness among all parties
concerned, including non-State actors, of their
obligations and responsibilities under international
humanitarian, human rights, refugee and criminal law.

We should ensure that the issue of children
affected by armed conflict is also taken up under other
agenda items of the Council, in particular when
considering resolutions on specific conflict situations
or when planning Security Council missions.
According to a study by the Watchlist, only 9 out of 75
country-specific Security Council resolutions adopted
between August 2000 and October 2002 included
references to children and armed conflict.
Attention must also be paid to the need for all
peace processes; all disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes; and all justice and
reconciliation mechanisms to be child-conscious and
for boys and girls to be fully involved in order to make
sure that their voices are heard.

The child-focused expertise in these processes
should be increased and the training of peacekeeping,
civilian police and humanitarian personnel on child
protection standards promoted. Each peacekeeping
operation should include at least one child protection
expert. The establishment of rosters of qualified
experts available should be encouraged.

We should give higher priority to the issues of
violence against, trafficking in and exploitation of
children, in particular girls, and to the prevention of
infectious and sexually transmitted diseases and
HIV/AIDS, and request the provision of adequate
assistance to the children affected.

The Human Security Network also suggests that
efforts be made to ensure safe and unhindered access to
humanitarian assistance for children in emergencies,
with emphasis on particularly vulnerable groups such
as displaced and separated children.

Finally, the Network suggests improving the
exchange of information with non-members,
international agencies and NGOs on the issue of
children affected by armed conflict and the
establishment a focal point for that purpose.

In conclusion, let me assure the Council that the
members of the Human Security Network remain fully
committed to enhancing the protection of children in
armed conflict. This is indeed an urgent matter
pertaining to our common values and our conscience as
human beings.

