Mr. Corr (Ireland): May I first extend the good
wishes and full support of my delegation to you, Sir, as
China assumes the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I would also like to thank very warmly
the Permanent Representative of Cameroon and his
colleagues for a presidency last month of skill and real
achievement, which we appreciated very much. I would
also like, on behalf of my delegation, to warmly
welcome the Foreign Minister of Uganda to our
meeting today. I thank him for his very comprehensive
statement this morning. We look forward to the report
of Judge Porter later this month.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this public meeting of the Council to
consider the final report of the Panel of Experts on the
Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2002/ZJ46). I wish to express the warm
appreciation of Ireland to Ambassador Kassem and his
colleagues for their report. This has been a difficult
task very well done, and we are in their debt. The
representative of Denmark has already made a
statement on behalf of the European Union, and
Ireland, of course, fully associates itself with that
statement.

The Panel, in all its successive reports, has
consistently and rightly taken the view that without a
resolution of the broader conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region
generally, it will be extremely difficult to achieve an
end to illegal exploitation of the natural resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The situation is more complex than simple cause
and effect. Violence and conflict fuelled the illegal
exploitation of resources of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo by foreign Governments and armies;
exploitation, in turn, became in itself a prime factor in
further exacerbating conflict and violence. Today, this
exploitation and greed remains a powerful force against
the achievement of peace and stability in a tortured
land whose people want peace and deserve justice as
part of peace.

The Pretoria and Luanda Agreements, building on
the Lusaka process, offer the best - indeed, the only-
way forward to peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. And yet, the progress achieved
to date, while real, remains distinctly tenuous as recent
violent clashes in the eastern and north-eastern parts of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo graphically
illustrate. The situation in Ituri remains especially
grave. All parties to the Agreements have an absolute
duty to use their full influence to end military activity
by all armed groups and militias under, or susceptible
to, their influence. All sides must work, especially in
the context of the current Pretoria talks, for an
inclusive political agreement in the framework of the
inter-Congolese dialogue. All must cooperate fully and
in every respect with the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). The process of disarmament,
demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration
(DDRR) must proceed with no impediments. And we
in the Security Council, as we prepare to review the
mandate of MONUC in support of the Pretoria
Agreement, must play our part.

The detailed findings in the Panel's report are
shocking. Let me clearly say that Ireland finds the
report compelling in its analysis and in its general
conclusions. It names countries; it names individuals
and companies; it points a clear finger against those
who systematically plunder and rob the resources of
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
is a frightening assessment of what happens when
greed and rapaciousness spiral out of control and feast
on the suffering and misfortune of others.

It is the judgement of the Panel that, welcome as
recent troop withdrawals from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo by Rwanda, Zimbabwe and
Uganda may be,

"these withdrawals are unlikely to alter the
determination of Rwanda and Zimbabwe, and
Ugandan individuals, to exercise economic
control over portions of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo". (S/2002/1146, para.]3)
Moreover, the Panel alleges that the Uganda
People's Defence Forces (UPDF) "continue to provoke
ethnic conflict" (para. 14); that Rwanda has prepared
for withdrawal by putting in place economic control
mechanisms; that senior officers of the Zimbabwe
Defence Forces (ZDF) have enriched themselves from
mineral assets of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and that this pattern continues; that an elite
network of Congolese and Zimbabwean political,
military and commercial interests seeks to maintain its
grip on main mineral resources of the Government-
controlled areas.

There is no need here to elaborate on the detailed
findings of the Panel. My delegation will, of course,
carefully listen to the arguments put forward by
Governments, companies or individuals against whom
a clear finger is pointed.

What is important for all sides is to safeguard and
strengthen the peace process. My delegation finds
extremely persuasive the recommendations of the Panel
to consolidate this progress by a set of agreements or
initiatives on reconstruction and sustainable
development to address the economic dimensions of
the Lusaka peace process and to provide incentives for
continuing progress.

We fully support the proposal for a first set of
initiatives involving quick-disbursing aid for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other Great
Lakes countries involved in the conflict. We strongly
support, as others have today, the convening of an
international conference on peace, security and
sustainable development in the region. We agree on the
urgent need for reconstructing and reforming the State
institutions of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We agree also that a comprehensive economic and
social development programme in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo be set up to assist a
transition to a legitimate civilian administration.

My delegation supports the proposal for a review
by a special commission of all mining and forestry
concessions and contracts signed since 1997. Ireland
also agrees with the Panel that the Governments of the
countries where the individuals, companies and
financial institutions that are systematically and
actively involved in exploitation activities are based
should assume their share of responsibility.

The recommendations of the Panel are measured
and carefully calibrated in support of peace but in
adamant opposition to further theft of resources that
belong to the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is stated in the report that there is

"ample justification for donors to respond to a
Security Council resolution - which might be
necessary - which would propose certain
reductions in official aid to promote peace and
good governance". (para. 171)

The Panel recommends that measures should also
be aimed at making aid disbursements to Burundi,
Rwanda, Uganda and Zimbabwe conditional on their
compliance with the relevant agreements in the Lusaka
peace process and on verifiable measures taken to halt
illegal exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Non-compliance would
automatically trigger a review and reduction of
assistance programmes for those countries but, in the
recommendation of the Panel, this should not cover
sector-specific allocations. I should add that this latter
caveat seems to my delegation a wise and appropriate
one. It is the exploiters, not the innocent, who should
feel the strength of international concern.

The Panel recommends that implementation of
this proposal would proceed in three stages, beginning
with a grace period to permit verification of the
compliance of all the parties to the conflict. Overall,
this is an especially sensitive proposal, and the Panel
rightly presents it in that light. We will consider it
carefully with other Council members, not least
bearing in mind, on the one hand, the clear need for
disincentives against non-compliance and, on the other,
the need to also fully safeguard the interests of poor
people dependent on development funding support.

The Panel also recommends that the Council
consider imposing certain restrictions on a number of
business enterprises and individuals named in the
report, but with a short grace period of several months
before the restrictions are applied. That is a proposal
my delegation will also carefully assess in the period
ahead. It will, of course, be important for any actions in
respect of any company or individual to be based on
due assessment of evidence.

We agree with the Panel recommendations on
adherence of business enterprises to the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
guidelines.

As regards the need for a monitoring body to
report to the Council, I can state that Ireland fully
supports this proposal.

That Panel's report is detailed and well
documented. The recommendations are measured and
fair. As we move forward in our support for the
achievement of peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in the Great Lakes region generally, and
in guarding against those forces that are undermining
the peace, I would conclude by fully endorsing the
underlying theme that runs through this report: justice
and peace cannot rest on foundations of injustice and
wrong.

