Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica views this meeting as an important
occasion. We have just adopted a resolution, the text of
which renews the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
the commitment of this Council to peace in that region.

We always took part in the negotiations with the
purpose of ensuring that the resolution include all the
elements necessary for UNAMID to meet its
objectives. In the course of the negotiations, we stated
our opposition to the inclusion of elements that had no
direct bearing on the Mission and that should have
been addressed on a different occasion and in different
circumstances.

We would have liked the resolution to spell out
the role that justice should play, in the Council's view,
in resolving the conflict in the Sudan. That is why we
supported the original text, which referred to the
presidential statement of 16 June 2008. However, we
have voted in favour of a text that does not include that
reference but that, in the first preambular paragraph,
reaffirms all previous resolutions and presidential
statements adopted by the Council on the situation in
the Sudan. As far as Costa Rica is concerned, that
paragraph unconditionally reaffirms the presidential
statement of 16 June 2008, in which the Council
unanimously reaffirmed resolution 1593 (2005) and its
request to the Government of the Sudan to honour its
obligations stemming from that resolution, including
that of cooperating with the International Criminal
Court.

My delegation welcomes the fact that the
resolution we have just adopted maintains the
Council's commitment to bring to justice those who
have violated the rights of the most vulnerable in that
conflict.

We also would have liked to include in the text a
reference to other peacekeeping missions performing
their tasks in countries bordering the Sudan. As on
other occasions, we have advocated a regional
approach that responds to the needs of the Sudan as a
whole and takes into account the problems of

neighbouring countries, the conflicts of which
influence and determine the course of those in the
Sudan.

In conclusion, we would like to make it very
clear that we agreed to omit explicit reference in the
resolution to elements that are important to us and vital
for resolving the situation in the Sudan for the sake of
unity in the Council and in order to ensure that
UNAMID can carry out its mandate.

