Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): First and foremost, I
must praise you heartily for the initiative of the
Netherlands in organizing this important meeting of the
Security Council. The topic, "No exit without
strategy", and the paper you prepared to guide our
debate here today, go to the very heart of the action of
the Security Council and the role of the United Nations
in conflict resolution and the maintenance of
international peace and security. If the main problems
in mission closure and mission termination, including
the ones you have correctly identified, are resolved,
then I believe we are on our way towards turning
United Nations peace operations into an effective tool
to help end violence and establish the bases for durable
peace.

I recall our own efforts in this regard during our
membership of the Security Council just a couple of
years ago. It was under our own presidency of this
organ in April 1997 that we tried - somewhat
unsuccessfully, since some members were not yet ready
to discuss these matters as freely as we are doing
today - to get the Council to focus its attention on the
so-called twilight zone, the period of transition
between peacekeeping and peace-building that, because
of inattention, could actually result in a return to
violence in certain conflict situations. Then, as now, we
believed that the Security Council should include in
peacekeeping mandates the necessary elements that
would permit an operation to withdraw smoothly and
the next phase, the peace-building phase, to take over. I
am referring to now well recognized activities, such as
programmes for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former soldiers, as well as law and
order components and other institutional strengthening.
The role of United Nations civilian police in assisting
the establishment of functioning and effective police
forces in Bosnia, Kosovo and East Timor, for example,
is one such factor, which comes into play during the
peacekeeping phase, but must continue beyond it, as in
the case of Eastern Slavonia.

Since our time on the Council, this body has
increasingly and rightly focused on these and other
aspects crucial to the effectiveness of peacekeeping.
This is an important process of establishing definitions,
exploring concepts, identifying needs and proposing
solutions, which in an organ such as the Security
Council can ultimately be done only through its
practice. And informed practice is the goal here.

Portugal fully agrees with the Netherlands that
the Security Council, ably aided by the Secretariat,
should have a strategy for exit, which is, of course, a
strategy for the success of United Nations peace
efforts. The necessary resources should be combined
with a clear and achievable mandate to help bring
about the end of violence and irrevocably set the
course of peace-building. Therefore, as you have
pointed out, Mr. President, any long-term plan for
peace operations must include a commitment to the
post-conflict peace-building stage. We would go
further and reiterate that since certain peace-building
elements are part of peacekeeping they must be
included in the initial planning and deployment of the
operations.

Secondly, the Security Council should, as you
have suggested, stay involved in all phases of the
United Nations efforts to address a conflict situation.
This is the best way to ensure a smooth transition from
phase to phase, as well as to give a clear signal to all
involved that the withdrawal of a peacekeeping
component does not mean in any way that the United
Nations is going back on its commitment to furthering
peace-building and to resist a return to war.

All of these matters are an integral part of the
decision-making process of the Security Council. To
put it bluntly, this process is sometimes the "art of the
possible" and not necessarily a rational response to
crises, with optimal resources and clear objectives.
Similarly, the Secretariat has tended to plan for
addressing conflict situations according to the amount
of troop contributions made available to it and not
according to needs. It is hard to convince troop-
contributing countries to provide more forces for
peacekeeping operations when the United Nations,
because of the continuing non-payment of dues and
arrears, still owes them reimbursement for their
participation in earlier or ongoing operations. It is a
matter of principle, but also one of practical concern,
that assessed contributions be paid in full, on time and
without conditions; otherwise, this Organization cannot
function. We are hopeful that this situation will be
corrected in the near future, and we hope that troop
contributors - such as Portugal, which, with over a
thousand men and women in United Nations
operations, is currently the eleventh largest United
Nations troop contributor and first among its European
Union partners - will continue to provide the
lifeblood of United Nations peacekeeping, without
which there can be no peace strategy, exit or otherwise.

Under such constraints, however, the Security
Council has in the past failed to act or has authorized a
mismatched operation in terms of resources or
mandates or both. These factors also play a role in
leading the Council prematurely to decide to withdraw
from a conflict situation for political or economic
reasons or because further involvement would require a
new and strengthened strategy which, under the
prevailing circumstances, would not be politically
feasible. In such a world, the United Nations is
successful only when the parties are committed to
peace. If they are not, we are seriously challenged as an
Organization and as an international community to
come up with ways to stop the conflict.

It is more than evident that United Nations
peacekeeping is sick, and that something must be
done - and very soon - if the United Nations is to be
effective as the primary actor in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Thankfully, the
Secretary-General convened the Panel on peace
operations earlier this year, and the resulting report -
the so-called Brahimi Panel report - provides a clear
road map to correct peacekeeping. Many of the Panel's
recommendations have indeed been made before - by
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations -
and some of the resources and solutions already exist.
But much more is required, and it is clear that the
overwhelming majority of Member States believe the
time is ripe to make hard but far-reaching and
important decisions, once and for all, to establish
United Nations peacekeeping on a solid foundation.

This foundation of United Nations peacekeeping
is made up of three building blocks: the Member
States, the Security Council and the Secretariat.

First, Member States must reaffirm their
commitment to the United Nations as primarily
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security. They must afford it the necessary will and
the resources to pursue peace activities. Furthermore,
as countries contributing troops and other staff, they
must be generous - a small investment in peace will
always pay handsomely - and they must ensure that
their men and women are well-trained and ready to
deploy as quickly as possible.

Secondly, the Security Council, as the organ
under the United Nations Charter with the
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, must be able fully to discharge its
functions, with full knowledge and understanding of
the conflict situations brought to its attention, for
which it requires a clear supporting role from the
Secretariat. Furthermore, the Security Council must be
responsive to Member States and, in each case, to the
troop-contributing countries in question. Those who
place their nation's sons and daughters in harm's way
for the cause of peace must feel they have a voice in
the decisions that affect them directly.

Finally, I come to the Secretariat, the fundamental
structure required for the planning, deployment and
management of peace operations. Without a well-
resourced and well-staffed Secretariat, the United
Nations cannot hope to be effective in peace
operations. Before we can even begin to ask the
Security Council to pay attention to the problems of
transition between peacekeeping and peace-building,
the Secretariat must be able to plan for such a capacity,
including through the effective coordination of its
relevant departments and with other actors within the
United Nations system and beyond.

In conclusion, the issue you have raised for
discussion today, Sir, is a crucial part of the decision-
making process of the Security Council and one that is
part and parcel of the current efforts to reform United
Nations peacekeeping, following to a great extent the
recommendations of the Brahimi Panel. My delegation
is particularly pleased to welcome the work of the
Security Council in this regard, which culminated in
the resolution adopted on Monday. Portugal urges the
Council fully to implement its decisions and
recommendations and to continue its work in this most
important area.

Similarly, many troop-contributing countries -
such as Germany, as Ambassador Kastrup has just
announced - as recommended by the Brahimi Panel,
are implementing their own measures in order better to
respond to United Nations peacekeeping needs and the
Secretary-General has announced those measures under
his purview that are also being taken in response to the
Brahimi Panel to strengthen United Nations
peacekeeping.

It is now time for Member States to act to
complete this collective effort. They must make known
their concerns and their support for the reform of
United Nations peacekeeping. The commitment to this
vital role of the United Nations must be translated into
real decisions that will permit this Organization to
become an effective actor in helping to bring peace to
where there once was war and in keeping it that way.

