Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking your delegation,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate. I would also
like to express my gratitude for the statements by
Deputy Secretary-General Migiro; Mr. Costa,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime; and Mr. Sylvain-Goma, Secretary
General of the Economic Community of Central
African States. I would also like to welcome the
presence of Ambassador Duarte, High Representative
of the Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs.

Costa Rica welcomes your delegation's initiative,
Mr. President, to once again put the issue of illicit arms
trafficking before the Security Council. We have
reiterated before that the proliferation and illicit traffic
in small arms has a negative impact on the security of
people, exacerbates tensions, sparks conflicts, and
often poses a genuine threat to international peace and
security. One need not refer to the great number of
injuries and deaths they produce, or to the costs
required to address them, to conclude that the
proliferation of and illicit traffic in small arms are
problems that require the urgent and careful attention
of the international community.

Costa Rica believes that the Organization has an
inescapable duty to produce instruments to limit on the
manufacture and trade in weapons. However, until it
does, the issue of illicit arms trafficking should be the
focus of the Council's attention, in particular with
regard to specific situations such as those in Central
Africa, a region that is acutely suffering from the
damaging effects of the proliferation of small arms.

My delegation respectfully urges the members of
the Council to support the initiative of the countries of
that region to establish a legally binding instrument to
monitor small arms and light weapons and their
ammunitions at the subregional level. We also urge the
ministerial meeting of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa to draft instruments that ensure transparency in
the manufacture, trade and traffic in weapons,
contribute to the implementation of national weapons-
marking programmes, and launch a monitoring and
registration mechanism for existing weapons at the
subregional level.

We believe it important to offer international
support for any initiative that promotes an exchange of
best practices among the countries of the region and
ensures the full implementation of appropriate national
legislation on these issues. In that connection, it is
important to recall that the countries of the region must
abide by their obligations under Council resolutions on
arms embargoes. Greater interaction with the Council's
sanctions committees and their experts' groups would
contribute to the implementation of embargos and
make it possible to meet the challenges posed by their
implementation.

Costa Rica believes it necessary for the countries
of the region to contribute actively to the effectiveness
of the measures adopted by the Security Council. They
should provide the required information on measures
adopted to implement arms embargoes. In that regard,
we find it especially worrisome that there is a lack of
reports on the implementation of the arms embargo
against the Democratic Republic of the Congo -
information that is required under resolutions 1857
(2008) and 1896 (2009).

We also wish to reiterate the crucial
responsibility of arms manufacturers to abide by
weapons notification and transfer requirements
imposed by the Security Council. They should also
take every possible step to ensure that such weapons do
not fall into the hands of criminals or are used for
illegal purposes.

Costa Rica urges the international community to
focus anew on the issue of the proliferation of small
arms in Central Africa, by means of resources and
equipment and programmes for capacity-building and
institutional support. We believe that the donors who
support security sector reform programmes and
training for security forces should incorporate the
effective management of stockpiles of arms and
weapons into their programmes. Again, in those
countries on which the Council has imposed an arms
embargo, good stockpile management must be required
for the transfer of arms and the provision of assistance
by security forces.

Costa Rica believes it is important to include the
subject of small arms in the mandates and reports of
political peacebuilding and peacekeeping missions.
This would give a positive signal that the Security
Council is aware of its responsibility in such a serious
matter. We also believe it necessary for the Council to
continue buttressing disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration activities, including destruction of arms,
and reinvigorating sanctions follow-up measures
connected to arms embargoes.

I will end by repeating that Costa Rica believes
that the international community must adopt and
implement measures to combat the illicit trade in
weapons and must, essentially, strengthen substantially
the regulation of any arms trade. The bodies of the
United Nations must contribute to the achievement of
that necessary goal.

Although undeniable progress has been made
over the last decade, for example by adopting the
Action Plan to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its
Aspects, we believe that even more progress must be
made through the adoption of legally binding
instruments. My country has therefore supported and
contributed to the consideration of a treaty on arms
trading within the framework of the General Assembly.
The absence of measures ensuring mandatory
compliance with Security Council measures has led to
norms that have not gone beyond mere repetition of
principles, and that has proved to be of very little use.

