Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I wish to express our gratitude to the
Slovakian delegation for having organized the
discussion on this timely theme for the Security
Council and for the United Nations as a whole.
Peacekeeping missions conducted under the aegis of or
in accordance with the guidelines of the United
Nations have now become integrated and multifaceted
operations. An effective combination of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding instruments and close coordination
of the military, political, civilian, reconstruction and
humanitarian components are what guarantee the
success of the missions. Experience has shown that
only on the basis of a comprehensive approach can an
effective settlement and lasting peace be achieved, and
thus the reoccurrence of armed conflict be avoided. In
that context, we note the importance of the question of
security sector reform in countries emerging from
crisis, including in the reconstitution or strengthening
of the army, security services and other relevant
institutions. It is clear that the role of the United
Nations concerning the issue, like that of international
assistance, should be designed on the basis of national
needs and priorities as defined by the recipient
countries themselves.

The Security Council, when preparing the
mandates of multifaceted peacekeeping operations,
should give due attention to the operational
complementarity of tasks involved in supporting
security sector reform with other aspects of integrated
missions, in particular in the areas of restoring the rule
of law, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of combatants and the reconstruction of the institutions
of government. The Russian Federation therefore
considers it useful that reports of the Secretary-General
to the Security Council on specific operations should,
where appropriate, give appropriate information on the
problems of security sector reform in countries where
those missions are deployed.

However, we should bear in mind that this is
frequently a lengthy and complex process that goes far
beyond time-bound peacekeeping operations. Several
of those aspects fall within the competence of other
2

components of the United Nations system. Supporting
national efforts in security sector reform in countries
emerging from crisis is an area of close constructive
partnership and complementarity between the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council in order to achieve a common goal and
thus enhance the effectiveness of international work in
the area of peacebuilding. There is also a useful
consultative and coordinating role to be played by the
Peacebuilding Commission, in particular in the context
of its work with Burundi and Sierra Leone.

Improving the coordination of the contributions of
the United Nations system - donors, the international
financial institutions and regional partners - and
drawing lessons from integrated peacekeeping operations
over the last 15 years can help to enhance the
effectiveness of our collective efforts aimed at assisting
countries emerging from conflict. That is of key
importance for the successful implementation of the main
task and responsibility of the Security Council, namely to
maintain peace and security. The Russian delegation
supports the draft statement of the President of the
Security Council prepared by the delegation of Slovakia
and agreed to by the members of the Council.

