Mr. Lee (Republic of Korea): I would like to
begin by expressing my gratitude to you, Madam, for
taking the initiative to bring this important issue before
the Security Council. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his informative report on
children and armed conflict, contained in document
S/2001/852. Recalling the Security Council's landmark
resolutions 1261 (1999) of 25 August 1999 and 1314
(2000) of 11 August 2000, and considering the
upcoming special session of the General Assembly on
children, I am certain that the outcome of our
discussions here will add to the momentum generated
at the ongoing preparatory process and contribute to
the work of the special session.

Despite efforts to address the plight of children in
conflict situations, the current reality remains deeply
disturbing. In recent years, we have witnessed a surge
in the number of armed conflicts and innocent civilians
have been increasingly targeted. Among the many
victims are women, children and members of other
vulnerable groups. In this context, ensuring the
protection of children and of women is more important
than ever before.

Let me comment on some issues to which my
delegation attaches particular importance.

First, it is noteworthy that there have been some
encouraging developments in the effort to address the
effects of armed conflict on children. With the adoption
of resolution 1261 (1999), the issue of children in
armed conflict was placed on the peace and security
agenda. As a result, child protection advisers are now
deployed in peacekeeping operations and the roles of
both the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the United Nations Children's Fund have
been strengthened.

In this regard, we welcome the two discussions
on the issue of Violence against children held by the
Committee on the Rights of the Child, on 22 September
2000 and 28 September 2001. In particular, the
Committee's recommendation that an in-depth study be
conducted on violence against children deserves our
close attention. The outcome of the workshop held last
July in Florence, Italy, entitled "Filling knowledge
gaps: a research agenda on the impact of armed conflict
on children", could provide valuable guidelines for that
study.

Secondly, we are of the View that, as the most
universally accepted legal instrument, the Convention
on the Rights of the Child should constitute the
backbone of the legal framework for the protection and
promotion of children's rights. We also welcome the
adoption of two Optional Protocols to further protect
children from armed conflict and prostitution. Through
the adoption of these legal instruments, the
international community has expressed its strong
conviction that, in the twenty-first century, violations
of the rights of children will not be tolerated.

Thirdly, despite these positive developments, the
tasks that still lie ahead are tremendous. As mentioned
in the report in document A/56/453, prepared by Mr.
Olara Otunnu, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, gaps persist
between international standards and the actual
protection of children in the field. Children in many
corners of the world continue to be killed, sexually
abused and recruited into armed forces.

In this regard, we need to make every effort to
finalize the outcome document for the special session
on children, which includes a section on the protection
of children in armed conflict. That section addresses a
range of critical issues, such as the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflict; the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict; the
protection of refugee, unaccompanied and displaced
children; and effective and adequate assistance to
children affected by armed conflict.

Fourthly, particular attention should be paid to
the education of children in armed conflict.
International development and humanitarian agencies,
Governments, local authorities and civil society
organizations should make it a priority, during and after
periods of armed conflict, to ensure that children are
provided with educational materials and opportunities
at both the primary and secondary levels.

To enhance the effectiveness and sustainability of
this effort, it is imperative that local communities'
capacity-building be further developed. In this regard,
we appreciate the World Food Programme's recent
participatory approach in adopting a food delivery
method that requires parents to send their children to
school in order to have food distributed to them.

Finally, we recognize that the primary
responsibility for the prosecution of Violations rests
with national authorities. However, in cases where
there are gross violations of the rights of children, it is
important for Member States to collaborate in taking
concrete steps to investigate, prosecute and impose
sanctions upon individuals and groups involved in
illegal trafficking in currency, arms and natural
resources, which exacerbates armed conflict.

In closing, I would like to say that I am confident
that today's debate will be fruitful and that all Member
States will demonstrate the necessary political
leadership and will to fight those who exploit children.
This is a cause that concerns all of us, for children
represent the hope and future of our world. The
Republic of Korea is committed to ending the suffering
inflicted on children in armed conflict and will support
the international endeavour to this end with all possible
means.

