Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to congratulate Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, on his detailed briefing on the political process
in the Syrian Arab Republic.

C6te d'Ivoire reiterates its deep commitment to
dialogue as the best way to settle disputes in general
and in the Syrian conflict in particular, as part of an
inclusive political process that enjoys the support of
the international community. We support all initiatives
aimed at creating the conditions for a fruitful dialogue
between the parties to the conflict with the aim of
restoring peace and stability in Syria and creating the
conditions for shared prosperity.

In this respect, my delegation welcomes the
holding on 16 and 17 May in Ankara of the meeting
of the joint working group on the situation in Idlib,
and it calls on the Astana guarantors to continue their
efforts to ensure that the parties to the conflict respect
the ceasefire. We welcome the decision by Moscow and
Ankara to meet on the margins of the upcoming Group
of Twenty summit on 28 and 29 June in Osaka to assess
their efforts to relaunch the political process.

C6te d'Ivoire is of the view that actions that aim
to give new momentum to the process of resolving the
crisis must be supported by measures to restore and
build confidence between the parties to the conflict.
Here it encourages the joint working group and the
Syrian parties to continue their cooperation in the
context of the process that allowed for the reciprocal
release of detainees in November 2018 and February
and April 2019.

The resumption of fighting in Idlib Governorate
and its grave consequences for an already disastrous
humanitarian situation is a source of concern for Cote
d'Ivoire. It is undeniable that a lasting settlement of
the Syrian crisis will create the conditions necessary
to better address the disastrous humanitarian situation
and thereby help to provide relief for populations
in distress.

In this context, my delegation recalls that it is the
primary responsibility of the parties to the conflict
under international humanitarian law to create an
environment conducive to the safe, rapid, unimpeded
and sustainable delivery of humanitarian assistance,
including in Idlib Governorate.

To conclude, Cote d'Ivoire would like to reiterate
its full support for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Geir Pedersen. It encourages him to
continue his tireless mediation efforts to achieve a
political solution to the Syrian conflict, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of resolution 2254 (2015).

