I would like to ask you, Sir, to kindly pass on our welcome and thanks to Foreign Minister Vargas Maldonado for being with us today. I also want to congratulate the Dominican Republic on its efforts aimed at ensuring that the issue before us was properly discussed and debated, thereby showing the Security Council's transparency on the issue. Let me also thank our briefers for their briefings today and, more importantly, thank them and their teams - their vast teams, in many cases - for the actions that they are carrying out in some of the most dangerous places around the world. It is also particularly nice to see Mr. David Beasley back and well. Our briefers today have rung an enormous alarm bell about situations across the world. They have all made it clear that as the world faces the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the issue before us presents an increasingly urgent challenge. Many people will die from the COVID-19 virus, but it is a sad reality that every year many people will also die from food insecurity caused by conflict. The risk of a further knock-on impact from the virus on the food supply was made very clear by our briefers and, put simply, those who are well fed have a better chance of survival. I would therefore urge all States Members of the United Nations to respond today and generously to existing humanitarian appeals. While the United Kingdom is one of the largest humanitarian donors in the world, we see humanitarian aid as a last resort. It is a sign of political failing. I wish to focus today on two countries on the Council's agenda - Yemen and Syria - while recognizing the important comments made by our briefers on other situations around the world. In Yemen, more than half of the population - a staggering 15.9 million people - are severely food insecure. We therefore urge the Yemeni political leaders, particularly the Houthis, to respond constructively to the call of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy to immediately cease hostilities, focus on reaching a negotiated settlement and do everything possible to counter a potentially disastrous outbreak of COVID-19, including facilitating unimpeded humanitarian access. Taking these actions is more important than ever if a worsening of food insecurity and the already dire humanitarian situation in the country are to be avoided. Political leaders must now show real leadership, and they must act in the interests of their people. In north-western Syria, the United Nations reports increased rates of stunting from malnutrition. Today, three out of ten displaced children under the age of five in the Idlib region are stunted. Because the Syrian regime will not allow aid to flow from Damascus to the civilians in that area, those children, like millions of other civilians in north-west Syria, are entirely reliant on the cross-border delivery of humanitarian aid. It is therefore crucial that the Security Council renew resolution 2504 (2020) before it expires in July in order to allow the United Nations and its humanitarian partners to deliver the food, medical items and other assistance that people in north-western Syria so desperately require. Further, beyond the north-west, we are deeply concerned about the fate of civilians all over Syria who need to see effective humanitarian access throughout the country. That concern is why the United Kingdom has given over $4 billion to Syria and to Syrian refugees in neighbouring countries since the conflict began. It is unacceptable, illegal and inhumane to use hunger as a weapon of war. We call on all parties to conflict to recall their obligations under international humanitarian law, protect the most vulnerable, including women, children, persons with disabilities, older persons, refugees and internally displaced persons. However, the Council's response to this challenge must include horizon- scanning for future problems. In resolution 2417 (2018), the Council asked the Secretary-General to provide it with early warning about conflict-related famine and food insecurity conditions. It is through this mechanism that the Council must consider the situations in Yemen and in South Sudan. It is our hope that the Secretary- General will consider further ways to continue responding in a timely manner to this request, and Member States should not constrain his ability to do so. The Security Council must also be prepared to take robust action to ensure the flow of humanitarian assistance to populations in need. In resolution 2417 (2018), the Council recalled that it could consider adopting targeted sanctions - where appropriate and in line with existing practices - that would apply to individuals or entities obstructing the delivery or distribution of humanitarian assistance to people in need while ensuring that they do not negatively affect principles of humanitarian assistance. Therefore, just as it is vital that the Security Council take steps to ensure that humanitarian assistance can be received quickly and that the necessary exemptions are made from sanctions regimes to do so, as we did recently with respect to North Korea, so too must we pursue those individual actors impeding the delivery of aid to those who so desperately need it. In 2018, following the adoption of resolution 2417 (2018), the representative of the United Kingdom concluded his statement by saying, "The lesson is clear: humanitarian aid can only ever be a sticking plaster. The solutions are political" (S/PV. 8267, p. 3). That remains the case today.
