Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
submitting his report on small arms.

The Russian Federation has consistently
supported the strengthening of the United Nations role
in coordinating the efforts of the international
community to resolve the problem of illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons. We believe that
preventing the illegal proliferation of such weapons is
especially urgent in the context of the struggle against
terrorism and mitigating the consequences of armed
conflict.

The United Nations Conference to Review the
implementation of the Programme of Action on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons, which
took place in the summer of 2006, demonstrated that
the international community has yet to agree on a
unified approach to high-priority measures to combat
the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons. It is
important, however, that the Programme of Action
should remain the foundation of such efforts. We are
convinced that the Programme of Action has by no
means been exhausted and still has potential to be
tapped. We expect greater clarity to be introduced in
that respect at the Biennial Meeting of States to
Consider the Implementation of the Programme of
Action, scheduled for July.

We believe that the lack of progress in the
implementation of the Programme of Action can be
explained to a great extent by the lack of financial
resources hobbling the developing countries, first and
foremost, and by a lack of qualified personnel.
However, the dearth of the necessary political will also
makes it impossible to regulate that sphere
appropriately. Donor assistance to combat the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons is often not
spent in the best possible way. In our opinion, the
problem lies in the slow pace of implementation of the
International Tracing Instrument.

In our view, the situation with respect to the
submission of annual national reports on the
implementation of the Programme of Action is also not
entirely favourable. The number of submissions
continues to decline steadily from year to year. That is
an alarming sign of the possible weakening of States'
attention to the problem of the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons. At the same time, it would
seem obvious that, until that problem is resolved, it
will be impossible to achieve the comprehensive
settlement of existing conflicts, the eradication of
poverty, sustainable development, the effective
struggle against terrorism, or international security and
stability as a whole.

Another thorny aspect are the activities of illegal
brokers. Analysis by the Panel of Governmental
Experts has shown that only 40 countries have a
legislative basis governing brokerage activities. There
is a need to impose order in that sphere. The Russian
Federation advocates stringent control over brokerage
activities and a restricted number of arms brokers. The
basis of our approach is our own experience in granting
the right to engage in such activities to a single, State-
sanctioned intermediary broker.

States still have much to do to implement the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects at the national
level, and above all to enhance control over the
production and distribution of small arms and light
weapons and to strengthen regional cooperation.
Unfortunately, we note that, in several regions
throughout the world, the situation with respect to the
stockpiling of small arms and light weapons, the
security of arsenals, the collection and destruction of
surplus weapons, and the establishment and
implementation of an appropriate legislative basis is
not only not improving, but is in fact deteriorating.

In that respect, we favour intensified national and
regional efforts to put an end to the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons. We also attach great
importance to the implementation by all countries of
the International Instrument to Enable States to
Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons. We believe that
waging an effective battle against the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons would be assisted by the
adoption by the international community of a number
of additional measures to prevent weapons from
slipping from licit into illicit circulation, in particular
measures to end the production of small arms and light
weapons using expired licenses or without licences; to
ban the transfer of small arms and light weapons to
non-State end-users; to promote the verification by
exporters of importers' storage and end-use of various
types of small arms and light weapons; and to tighten
control over re-exports. We intend actively to
promote such measures at the upcoming Biennial
Meeting.

A distinct aspect of the problem of small arms
and light weapons is strengthening control over man-
portable air defence systems in the context of the fight
against international terrorism. We believe it advisable
to extend the control principles enshrined in a number
of international documents, including those adopted in
the framework of such regional organizations as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, to
all regions of the world.

In conclusion, we affirm the Russian Federation's
readiness and potential to render expert assistance, in
response to appropriate requests, in problems related to
monitoring the distribution of small arms and light
weapons and the destruction of surplus weapons. We
also express our thanks for the organization and
convening of today's debate, which provides yet
another opportunity to review the approaches adopted
by members of the international community to the most
important problem of the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons. We are ready to continue to work
constructively to resolve that issue.

