Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Sir, let me congratulate your
country, Gambia, on its assumption of the presidency of

 

the Security Council for the month of March. We are
particularly honoured, Mr. Minister, by your presence
today. We wish the Permanent Representative of Gambia,
Ambassador Sallah, success in his work as President, as we
are grateful to the President for the preceding month,
Ambassador Dangue Rewaka of Gabon, for the excellent
work done.

Today, the Security Council is about to take action
which has been awaited since the Secretary-General
returned from Baghdad last week. By the draft resolution
submitted for action, the Council endorses the
Memorandum of Understanding signed by the Secretary-
General and the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq on 23
February 1998.

We believe that this endorsement is appropriate and
helpful. It reinforces the agreement reached in Baghdad, an
agreement which in our view is fair, balanced and in
conformity with resolution 687 (1991) and other Security
Council resolutions.

By commending the initiative by the Secretary-General
and by endorsing the Memorandum, the Security Council
is doing its part in the efforts to secure compliance by the
Government of Iraq with its obligations.

The implementation of the Memorandum of
Understanding should begin without delay. We are
heartened to learn that progress is being made in the
preparations for the additional procedures for the inspection
of presidential sites. The implementation process will be
closely monitored by the Council. The message of today's
draft resolution is clear: full compliance by the Government
of Iraq with its obligations, reaffirmed in the Memorandum
of Understanding, is the way to implement Security Council
resolution 687 (1991). On the other hand, any violation of
these obligations would have extremely negative
consequences. It would destroy everything that has been
achieved through the difficult mission of the
Secretary-General. It would certainly prompt the Council to
consider other measures to ensure compliance.
In this context, we wish to emphasize that firmness
and resolve to use means other than diplomacy were of
critical importance for the mission of the Secretary-General.
Furthermore, the unity of the Security Council was, and
continues to be, of paramount importance.

It is our hope that the Government of Iraq will not
forfeit the unique opportunity that was provided by the
conclusion of the Memorandum of Understanding. Efforts
by Iraq to fully implement that Memorandum are essential
for the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM)
and International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
inspectors to continue and finish their work. That would
eventually enable the Security Council to consider the
lifting of the prohibitions referred to in resolution 687
(1991).

The draft before us reaffirms the commitment of all
United Nations Member States to the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of Iraq,
Kuwait and the neighbouring States. It is important that
we keep in mind the needs and the legitimate expectations
of these States, in particular those of Kuwait, which has
suffered the most seriously. It is appropriate to recall
today that some issues concerning Kuwait, have not yet
been resolved, including the issue of missing persons and
prisoners. The Security Council remains aware of these
issues and will have to address them on another occasion.

Today the Security Council is taking decisions at a
time which, in many ways, is a defining moment for the
United Nations. This is the time when the potential of
diplomacy is being reaffirmed. The role of the
Secretary-General has been again reconfirmed as an
invaluable asset of the Organization and of the
international community in general. This is also a moment
when the Security Council has to demonstrate its ability
to act with unity, swiftness and determination. T h e
adoption of this draft resolution today will be a positive
sign in this regard. We wish especially to commend the
delegations of Japan and the United Kingdom for their
efforts in preparing this draft resolution before us.

It is important that in the process of implementation
of this draft resolution the Security Council should show
the same resolve and ability to act as the situation may
require. The responsibilities of the Security Council under
the Charter, and corresponding obligations, ought to be
clearly borne in mind. In operative paragraph 5 of the
draft resolution before us, the Security Council will
decide, in accordance with its responsibility under the
Charter, to remain actively seized of the matter in order
to ensure implementation of this resolution, and to secure
peace and security in the area. We expect the Council to
continuously receive information on the situation and to
act as necessary in accordance with its powers.

Slovenia will vote in favour of this draft resolution.

