Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by expressing my appreciation to the
young participants in this meeting - Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, the Secretary-General's Envoy
on Youth, Ms. Wevyn Muganda and Ms. Sofia
Ramyar - for their briefings. I would also like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting, one
year after the adoption of resolution 2419 (2018), which
reiterated the important and positive contribution of
youth to efforts to promote and achieve international
peace and security, and the important role of youth
in preventing and resolving conflicts, as well as in
peacebuilding efforts.

We strongly believe that the development of
youth in any society is strongly linked to the level of
advancement and welfare of the population. Therefore,
we welcome this meeting to promote the implementation
of the youth, peace and security agenda in accordance
with the two resolutions adopted by the Council on this
topic, including resolution 2250 (2015) submitted by
Jordan in 2015, which was the first of its kind.

I would like to address three aspects in our
discussion today.

First, I will consider the challenges that impede
the implementation of the youth, peace and security
agenda. The proliferation of conflicts around the
world is a major obstacle to the positive contribution
of youth to peace and security. In our region, in the
Arab world, which unfortunately is home to some of
the worst conflicts in the world, many young people
face challenges that prevent them from achieving
their aspirations. Conflicts have dashed their hopes
and their future. Unemployment has increased their
despair and insecurity. Poverty has deprived them of
the right to live in dignity. Terrorism and radicalization
have hijacked their innocence. These challenges are
a serious threat to the future of countries and their
sustainable development. We must address the root
causes of conflicts.

Moreover, young people around the world are
struggling in developing and conflict-affected nations
to enjoy their basic needs, including education,
employment and health care, and to practice their civil
liberties and political participation. Unless those needs
are met, young people will have no means to prosper
or make their full contribution to society. These social,
economic and political needs are necessary to improve
the lives of youth and to eliminate poverty and hunger,
as well as to promote the welfare of and more peaceful,
inclusive societies.

Secondly, I would like to underscore some positive
examples of the agenda's implementation. It is important
to highlight the progress achieved in this regard in
recent years. Many initiatives have been undertaken
by Member States, the United Nations and civil society
organizations - including, most importantly, young
people themselves - to promote implementation of
the youth, peace and security agenda. These initiatives
range from peace missions that involve young people in
building social cohesion and stability in many conflict-
affected regions worldwide, including in Colombia, Iraq,
Kosovo and Somalia, to high-level political initiatives,
such as the first International Symposium on Youth
Participation in Peace Processes, in March 2019, which
was co-hosted by Finland, Qatar and Colombia, in
cooperation with the Office of the Secretary-General's
Envoy on Youth, as noted by Ms. Wickramanayake
in her briefing. We also welcome efforts undertaken
by the United Nations, including the development of
a joint plan of action on youth, peace and security to
support the implementation of the United Nations
Youth Strategy 2030.

Thirdly, I wish to highlight the measures needed to
guarantee the implementation of the youth, peace and
security agenda. We fully agree that young people are
the pivot of society's development. They are a critical
element in achieving peace and security. In that regard,
we welcome the recommendations contained in the
policy paper on youth in peace operations commissioned
by the Office of the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth.
We would also like to emphasize the need to implement
the Sustainable Development Goals, a critical element
with a very important link to peace and stability. The
Goals can be achieved only through the development of
youth and support for civil society organizations and
institutions that are interested in their welfare. We also
emphasize the need to invest in young people in order
to build their capacities, in line with the principles and
values that prevent them from falling victim to crime
and extremism, by developing and promoting national,
regional and global peace networks.

In conclusion, I reiterate Kuwait's readiness to work
closely and constructively with the United Nations and
the international community to support efforts aimed at
promoting the youth, peace and security agenda, within
and beyond the Council, and especially through our
continued cooperation with the Office of the Secretary-
General's Envoy on Youth.

