Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We meet
again today to make our statements and stress our
various positions on the Syrian crisis, which has lasted
for over five years. Regrettably, this meeting is being
held against the backdrop of continued differences
between regional and international Powers with
influence on the ground, which have thus far failed
to realize that the only party bearing the brunt of this
crisis is the Syrian people, particularly Syrian mothers
who have had to choose between letting their children
face great danger on the high seas rather or having them
stay with them at home.

We have held several meetings in New York in
the past few days on the crisis in Syria, both in the
Security Council and in the International Syria Support
Group (ISSG). All have agreed on two major points:
first and foremost, that we all recognize that the war
in Syria is a proxy war and that stopping the bloodshed
is up to the forces taking part in military operations,
whether directly or indirectly; and, secondly, that the
implementation of the recent agreement between Russia
and the United States on a cessation of hostilities is the
only available opportunity to achieve a ceasefire and
restart the political process before it is too late.

I will not speak at length, as the assessment of the
current situation is glaringly clear. However, I would
like to express my regret that the co-Chairs of the ISSG
have thus far failed to implement their agreement. We
would also like to express our surprise and regret with
regard to the differing accounts of what is taking place
on the ground at this critical juncture, although the
United States and Russia both possess the necessary
technological prowess to monitor the situation.

I once again call upon them both to set aside their
rivalries and political differences in order to bear their
responsibilities and focus on coordinating their bilateral
cooperation to implement the cessation of hostilities,
without any media confrontations that may be used by
some to aggravate the situation and kill all hope for a

political process.

I also call upon all Powers with an ability to
influence the conflict and the battles taking place on the
ground to support the implementation of the agreement
between Russia and the United States in good faith.
I also call upon Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura to
prepare for the relaunching of direct negotiations
among the Syrian parties as soon as possible, without
preconditions by any of those parties.

This is a wake-up call: hundreds of thousands
have died and millions have been displaced. The time
has come for us all to think first and foremost of the
interests of the Syrian people. This must be done free
of narrow interests, political aspirations or acts of
external polarization on the part of those that have
never cared for Syria, which have served to destroy the
country and open the door to armed groups and terrorist
organizations, allowing them to infiltrate Syria and
impose their will.

