Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We welcome
this opportunity to address the situation in the Middle
East - a crisis that dates back to the very beginning of
this Organization and has been the subject of countless
United Nations resolutions in this Council and in other
intergovernmental bodies. While there is a stated
commitment to lasting peace on the basis of a two-
State solution, we have not seen a credible peace
process for quite some time now - that is a process
based on past resolutions and commitments and respect
for international law.
09-55901

We reiterate our hope for a political solution that
provides for an independent and viable State of
Palestine living peacefully side by side with the State
of Israel, with secure and internationally recognized
borders. One of the prerequisites for such an outcome
is the full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) of
this Council. Nine months after its adoption, the
humanitarian situation in Gaza still gives rise to
serious concern.

The report of the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict submitted to the Human
Rights Council in Geneva gives a detailed account of
violations of international humanitarian law committed
by both parties to the conflict. We are concerned about
the findings of the report that indicate a systematic
disrespect for the principle of proportionality and grave
violations of international humanitarian law, including
deliberate attacks on civilian institutions that led to
massive civilian casualties.

The conclusion that some of the acts committed
may amount to crimes against humanity is particularly
disturbing to us. As a State party to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court, we fully subscribe
to the principle that national jurisdictions have primary
jurisdiction regarding such crimes and an obligation to
investigate and prosecute them. We therefore support
the recommendation of the Fact-Finding Mission that
the parties to the conflict establish, within a set
timeframe, independent investigations in conformity
with international standards, of serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
Against that background, we welcome the pledges
made by both parties to investigate and prosecute the
alleged crimes.

We understand that this issue is again under
consideration by the Human Rights Council in Geneva,
which will convene in a special session tomorrow. But
we also believe that the Security Council has an
obligation in this respect. First, it must make it clear
that there is no choice between peace and justice. Quite
the contrary: measures taken to combat impunity will
contribute to a lasting political solution in the Middle
East, as accountability for serious crimes will promote
confidence in the peace process.

Furthermore, this Council must insist on respect
for the applicable rules of international humanitarian
law, without any exception. The laws of armed conflict
apply irrespective of the parties" reasons for engaging
in combat - be it to fight against terrorism or to fight
against foreign occupation. The protection of civilians
must always be the primary consideration - in
accordance with international humanitarian law and in
accordance with the most basic principles of humanity.

