Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the delegation of Japan for having organized this
open debate on working methods. Argentina has
witnessed the constructive efforts pursued by Japan on
this issue, having participated in 2006 in the drafting of
the presidential note contained in document
S/2006/507, a legal instrument that has become the
document of reference for this topic, filling, to some
extent, the gap in the Security Council's rules of
procedures.

The issue of the lack of transparency in the
working methods of the Security Council is directly
related to questions regarding the effectiveness and
representativeness of the Council. In this regard, we
believe that the valuable efforts deployed by Japan,
Slovakia, Panama, Belgium, Viet Nam, Uganda and
Costa Rica in recent years are valid and commendable,
but we also believe that they are not enough. We still
do not have measures that genuinely improve the
transparency, participation and effectiveness of the
work of the Council.

We believe it very important to pursue reform
aimed at strengthening the institutional balance and
relations between the Security Council and the other
principal organs of the United Nations through regular
official consultations, cooperation mechanisms and
adequate exchange of information. In addition to
enhancing cooperation between the Council and the
General Assembly, regular and substantive dialogue
should be established with the Economic and Social
Council, reinforcing the communication provided for
by Article 65 of the Charter of the United Nations, as
well as with the Human Rights Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission.

With regard to the accountability of the Security
Council for its actions to the membership of the United
Nations as a whole, a more detailed and analytical
substantive annual report should be submitted to the
General Assembly. The Council should also, whenever
necessary or relevant, submit special reports to the
General Assembly, pursuant to Articles 15 and 24 of
the Charter.
Finally, we believe that there is a tendency to
convene too many open thematic debates, which run
the risk of becoming marathons of speeches without
specific, clear and effective results. As I already noted,
we recognize the progress that has been made in
several areas, such as the monthly programme of work,
the monthly briefings and assessments by the
President, the clear improvement of the annual report
to the General Assembly, and relations with troop-
contributing countries.

In closing, we note our recognition of the
substantial and very useful nature of the latest report
on working methods produced by the organization
Security Council Report.

