Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like warmly to welcome Deputy President
Jacob Zuma and to thank him for his excellent
statement, which was particularly useful to us. I should
also like, on behalf of my delegation, to welcome
Ambassador de la Sabliere.

My delegation would like to express its
appreciation for the information provided by Deputy
President Zuma on the positive developments that have
taken place recently in Burundi, in particular the
agreement just signed between the Transitional
Government and the National Council for the Defence
of Democracy-Forces for the Defence of Democracy
(CNDD-FDD).

My delegation would pay tribute to all those who
have contributed to these developments, in particular
the Burundian negotiators and the heads of State of the
region. We warmly welcome the commendable efforts
made by Deputy President Jacob Zuma as well as his
important contribution to the negotiations aimed at
achieving a ceasefire in Burundi. We would like also to
endorse his appeal to the international community to
provide ongoing assistance to Burundi in the
implementation of the agreement that was just
concluded, with a view to the restoration of peace and
stability to Burundi.

The Deputy President stressed one very important
point which is a challenge to the Security Council in
many respects. He spoke of the trust that all of the
combatants have in the United Nations and in its vision
of a just and lasting peace. Do we have the right to
dash such hopes? Of course we cannot.

The statement made by the Deputy President also
highlighted the capacity of regional organizations to
contribute positively to the maintenance of peace and
security. In that connection, he stressed the support
expected from the international community in respect
of the implementation of the ceasefire agreement.

Lastly, my delegation would like to ask two
questions. First, what is the likelihood of bringing the
Party for the Liberation of the Hutu People-National
Liberation Forces (PALIPEHUTU-FNL), which
remains on the margins of the peace process, into that
process, with a view to concluding a ceasefire
agreement, as the heads of State of the region have
urged?

I think that some other speakers may have already
asked my second question, which relates to the role
that the Burundian parties expect the United Nations
and the international community to play in the effective
implementation of the ceasefire agreement.

