Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to commend the Swedish presidency for delving
into the promising concept of sustainable peace through
this debate devoted to one of its essential components,
namely, conflict prevention. We have taken careful note
of the important initiatives of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres, on that topic, which Peru
appreciates and values, as well as the proposals and
ideas presented earlier today by delegations.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to point out three fundamental factors that contribute
to more efficient prevention: the optimization and flow
of high-quality information on emerging conflicts,
an integrated, cross-cutting approach to addressing
the structural causes of conflicts, and the search for
renewed political commitment.

With regard to the topic of information, Peru
welcomes the recent measures adopted by the Secretary-
General after assuming his post. Of particular
importance is the strengthening and enhancement of
the United Nations Operations and Crisis Centre. Peru
understands that that unit is to be used to improve the
processing and analysis of information from reliable
sources. In order to do so, we must strengthen review
and evaluation units, both on the ground and at
Headquarters, by providing them with adequate human
capital and the necessary logistical resources and by
increasing our use ofinformation technology.

My delegation also believes that any analysis of
a chain of events and the choice of response to those
events always require a multidisciplinary approach,
in which political, economic, sociological, cultural
and other elements are considered and assessed in a
comprehensive manner. Only then will we be able to
more efficiently address the complexities and specifics
of each scenario and conflict, and find timely and
adequate responses to them.

As for the need for conflict prevention through a
more multidimensional and integrated approach, the
Council should take note of and support the efforts of
the international community to implement the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. As the Agenda
recognizes, there can be no sustainable development
without peace and security, and peace and security are
precarious without sustainable development. The 2030
Agenda also notes, inter alia, the need to build peaceful,
just and inclusive societies. To that end, it holds us to
our commitment to achieve Goal 16 - to which Peru
attached particular importance during the preparatory
negotiations. Specifically, that Goal seeks to address the
factors that generate violence, insecurity and injustice,
such as inequality, corruption, bad governance, violent
extremism and illegal flows of financial resources
and weapons.

In that connection, we should recall that, in
December, in its latest resolution regarding the policy
review of operational activities for development
of the United Nations system (General Assembly resolution 71/243), the General Assembly recognized
that sustainable development can play a positive role
in mitigating the causes of conflict, disaster risk,
humanitarian crises and complex emergencies. In that
regard, an integrated systemic response requires greater
coordination and complementarity among the needs
for development, disaster risk reduction, humanitarian
action and the maintenance of peace. That is essential
if we seek to respond to the needs of all as effectively
and efficiently as possible and to reach the Sustainable
Development Goals.

Finally, I note that we must strengthen political
will so as to enhance conflict-prevention efforts as
they relate to the primacy of the principles of national
ownership and a people-centred approach, both of
which appear in the 2030 Agenda and in the identical
resolutions on sustaining peace that were adopted in
April by the Security Council and the General Assembly
(resolutions 2282 (2016) and 70/262, respectively). The
United Nations system, with the legitimacy granted to
it by its universal membership and the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, is called upon to play a
crucial role in conflict prevention - by providing the
assistance, political support and the necessary funding
to lay the foundation for lasting peace. It is a new role - in
which the pillars of peace and security, development
and human rights come together for the first time under
the banner of sustainable peace - an approach that
Peru believes is the most fitting and promising.

