Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Chinese delegation voted in favour of resolution
2098 (2013), which the Council just adopted. China
is seriously concerned about the worsening security
and humanitarian situation in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and is deeply
worried about the serious consequences that it has for
regional peace and security.

We strongly support the efforts made by the
Government ofthe Democratic Republic ofthe Congo in
maintaining national sovereignty, territorial integrity,
security and stability, and we commend the United
Nations, the African Union and the relevant regional
organizations for their positive role in addressing the
problems in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We hope that the parties concerned will,
as called for in resolution 2098 (2013), take effective
measures to implement the Framework for Peace,
Security and Cooperation for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. We hope that the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) will
continue to strengthen its efforts in communicating and
coordinating with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and strictly abide by its mandate,
as conferred by the Council, so as to make a greater
contribution to the long-term peace and security of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

China believes that the three peacekeeping
principles of the United Nations, including the consent
of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force,
except in self-defence and in defence of the mandate,
provide an important guarantee for the success
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. They
have been widely supported by the vast majority of
developing countries and therefore should continue
to be adhered to. At the same time, we have always
supported the efforts made by African countries and
regional organizations to maintain regional peace
and security. We therefore attach great importance to
the request by the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the relevant regional organizations in Africa for
the deployment of the Intervention Brigade and the
adjustment of the mandate of MONUSCO. In View
of what I have just mentioned, China agrees on an
exceptional basis to the deployment of an Intervention
Brigade within MONUSCO. Under the terms of this
resolution, the deployment of this Intervention Brigade
does not constitute any precedent, nor does it affect
the continued adherence of the United Nations to the
peacekeeping principles.

