Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote
d'lvoire welcomes today's open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

We thank Special Coordinator Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, whose briefing has provided us with
the context surrounding the multiple and complex
challenges to peace and stability in a region notably
affected by the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We also
thank Mr. Hagai El-Ad for his briefing.

My delegation is concerned about the breakdown
in the relative lull in the conflict owing to renewed
violence between Israelis and Palestinians, particularly
in the Gaza Strip. Faced with this new outbreak of
violence, Cote d'Ivoire remains convinced that there
is no alternative to a negotiated solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian crisis and urges the parties to exercise
restraint and refrain from unilateral actions that can
only damage and distance prospects for a peaceful
settlement of the crisis.

My country values both the security of the State of
Israel and the inalienable right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination. We reaffirm our firm support for
the two-State solution, namely, peaceful coexistence
within the 1967 borders. Consequently, Cote d'Ivoire
reiterates its call on the Israeli and Palestinian parties
to show restraint in order to preserve the achievements
won so far and create conditions favourable to a just
and lasting peace.

We need hardly recall that the consequences of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict have been disastrous for the
people living in the Gaza Strip. That unprecedented
humanitarian crisis is accompanied by a high youth
unemployment rate of up to 47 per cent, as well as by
incessant shortages of water and electricity. That is
why my delegation calls for the opening of negotiations
between Israelis and Palestinians with a view to lifting
the current blockade. We also encourage the Palestinian
parties, on the basis of enhanced cooperation, to pursue
dialogue for an effective return of the Palestinian

Authority to Gaza, which would enable humanitarian
issues to be better addressed.

Moreover, Cote d'Ivoire remains concerned about
the budget deficit facing the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). That situationjeopardizes the effectiveness
of the assistance and protection provided by that United
Nations agency to more than three million Palestinian
refugees. Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the pledges made by
donor countries on the sidelines of the general debate
of the General Assembly at its current session of
$122 million to UNRWA, which will enable it to fulfil
its mission.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire would like to assure
all stakeholders of its support for initiatives aimed
at promoting dialogue promoting the achievement
of lasting peace and stability between Israelis and
Palestinians, as well as throughout the region.

