The Secretary-General: I thank the President for
convening this important debate.

Over the past decade, the world has been afflicted
by over 250 conflicts. While no two have been the same,
the widespread availability of small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition is common to all. More
than 50,000 men, women and children are killed each
year as a direct consequence, and the number of those
displaced has reached levels not seen since the Second
World War. Civilians, including children, suffer the
most. Ruthless, targeted attacks on schools, hospitals
and markets continue, against all basic principles of
international law.

The diversion of weaponry, including from
Government stockpiles, is further fuelling conflict,
allowing rebels, gangs, criminal organizations,
pirates, terrorist groups and insurgents to bolster their
firepower. Poor weapons management is an area of
alarming concern. Many States lack thorough planning
and consistent attention to the safe storage, handling,
transportation and disposal of their arsenals.

The recent entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT) laid the foundations for a global framework of
arms transfer controls, including for small arms and
light weapons and ammunition. The ATT is designed to
help advance international peace and security, reduce
human suffering and promote cooperation, transparency
and responsible action on the part of States. The ATT
requires exporting States parties to ensure that their
arms exports will not be used, for instance, to violate
arms embargoes, fuel conflict, facilitate terrorism or
engage in serious violations of international human
rights or humanitarian law. I encourage all Member
States to accede to the Treaty and to faithfully implement
it. A universal ATT, adequately implemented, is critical
to removing the tools for armed conflict. The ATT and
other instruments can prevent the misuse and illicit
circulation of the thousands of weapons that are often
part of the roots of conflict.

My report to the Council highlights (S/2015/289)
two key elements to tackle this worldwide challenge.
First, we need to ensure that the use of weapons and
ammunition by national security forces conforms with
commitments under global treaties and instruments.
That also means ensuring the proper and safe storage
of weapons and ammunition. Secondly, we need
further measures to combat the proliferation of illicit
weapons. States must enforce arms embargoes and
strengthen United Nations missions tasked with arms
and ammunition identification, recordkeeping, tracing
and stockpile management. States contributing troops
and police can assist by deploying personnel with the
relevant expertise. I also encourage greater efforts to
accelerate the exchange of operational information on
arms trafficking.

In all aspects of arms and ammunition management,
States can make use of the tested standards and
guidelines developed by the United Nations. And as an
international community, we should think creatively.
States may already be implementing good practices
that could become a global standard. One area that
deserves far more attention is ammunition. Monitoring
ammunition flows can help identify sources, trafficking
patterns and diversion points. It can remove source
material for improvised explosive devices and interrupt
the resupply of ammunition into crime and conflict
areas. Cutting ammunition flows has an immediate
impact on the intensity of armed activity. In situations
where there is high risk to civilian populations, this
should be a priority.

The causes of conflict are complex. However,
weapons, ammunition and their storage facilities
are physical commodities. Guns can be licensed,
marked and confiscated; ammunition can be tracked,
removed or destroyed; and depots can be guarded,
cleared or secured. Deny access to illegal weapons and
ammunition, and you deny criminals, armed groups
and extremists a central means to perpetrate violence,
intimidation and harm. That must be our common goal.

