Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): It is
very significant that the Security Council should
dedicate this open meeting to the topic of
peacebuilding. We appreciate the initiative of the
Danish delegation in that respect.

It is very important for my delegation that the
efforts and resources of the international community
also be mobilized on a preventive basis to help States
that are undergoing stress - in other words, countries
that run the risk of imploding into civil war and turning
into chaotic, ungovernable entities that are showcases
for massive violations of human rights, ethnic
cleansing and even genocide. By failing, at the
international level, to provide intensive preventive care
to many States undergoing stress, in the post-cold-war
era we ended up producing more than 30 civil conflicts
that resulted in more than 5 million deaths and I7
million refugees.

Recent experience has shown that death,
destruction, chaos and the plague of hatred left by
those conflicts make the task of reconciliation and
reconstruction of those States more complex. Many of
those so affected have been abandoned to their fate and
remain in a collapsed and ungovernable state. Many of
the tools used today for peacebuilding in collapsed
States are the same tools that could have been used to
prevent conflict. But what is different is the cost in
human lives and the destruction of property. For that
reason, peacebuilding strategies must also include
conflict prevention. That is the inescapable
responsibility of the United Nations.

Having spoken about prevention, now I will
address today's topic of post-conflict peacebuilding.

One of the main goals of the peacebuilding
process in post-conflict situations is to develop a viable
economy. What does a viable economy signify? It
means that reconstruction should not replicate the
dysfunctional economy that had caused the State to
fail. In other words, we should not rebuild a primary
economy that is based on a single crop or that exports
low-tech products that do not generate sufficient
resources for collapsed States with growing urban
populations.

The building of a new economy that is viable in
the global economy implies, first, the provision of
financial and economic intensive care for the collapsed
State. That means emergency measures designed to
write off a sizeable proportion of the debt, provide new
credits, massively increase assistance to meet the most
urgent social needs and, in particular, to increase
access to food, water and energy. Once intensive initial
care has been provided, structural measures will be
required to modernize and diversify the technological
component of exports, in order to release those
countries from the trap of primary production that
cannot compete in today's global economy.

That could be achieved with the help of
entrepreneurs and executives from the private sector,
members of the Global Compact created by the
Secretary-General. Those executives have global
experience in trade in transnational goods and services.
They could thus play a more creative and more realistic
part in modernizing non-viable economies than could
many technocrats in the international financial
institutions.

To create businesses that can produce competitive
goods and services in collapsed States, instead of
economists from the financial bureaucracies, we need
entrepreneurs with transnational experience, members
of the Global Compact. What we must not do is rebuild
a non-viable primary economy that is incapable of
producing enough resources in the context of a global
economy that increasingly demands goods and services
with a high degree of technological advancement.

Entrepreneurs and transnational businesses
participating in reconstruction policies should continue
to honour the Ten Principles they accepted in the
Global Compact, including respect for human rights,
decent working conditions, protection of the
environment and anti-corruption efforts.

The need to not recreate the backward, non-viable
primary economy and to create a new competitive
economy should also guide the institutions of the
international financial system, which up to the present
have focused more on economic adjustment than on
modernizing economies that are dysfunctional within
today's competitive global economy.

We have to understand that today's conflicts are the
product of non-competitive, dysfunctional economies
marginalized by globalization, leading to tremendous
social exclusion and environmental degradation, to the
extent that the entire national market system becomes
non-functional and leads to the collapse of the State.
Many ethnic, religious and cultural conflicts have been
aggravated by the social marginalization produced by
non-viable economies, sometimes reaching levels of
violence that lead to genocide, ethnic cleansing and other
crimes against humanity.

It is not by chance that most of the civil conflicts
being addressed nowadays by the Security Council are
occurring in countries where primary production has
not increased sufficiently, where there has been
explosive growth in the urban population, and where
personal income has grown no more than 2 per cent in
the last 28 years. Such countries, victims of the
perverse interplay between population growth and
primary production, have been marginalized in terms
of investment flows, trade and technological research.
They have had to go further and further into debt to
purchase the technology that they cannot produce on
their own, to the extent that they can no longer honour
their debts. In order to continue to obtain credit, they
have to undergo structural adjustment, which, instead
of modernizing them, only makes them more unstable
politically.

While modernizing the non-viable economies of
collapsed States, we must also set in motion a process
of political reconstruction. In other words, while
building a viable economy, we also have to create an
effective institutional democracy.

In building such democratic institutions, the
commitment of the international community is
required. That is why Peru has consistently advocated
that all Security Council peacekeeping missions
incorporate institutional reconstruction programmes
that will lay the foundation for a solid democracy.

The first thing to be done is to promote national
agreement - in other words, arrive at an effective
social contract within the collapsed country. That
social contract has to be secured by United Nations
peacekeeping forces, which must ensure that power is
gradually transferred to the people through national
democratic institutions.

Reconstruction should also lead to a revitalized
national civil administration capable of providing basic
public services such as water, energy, health care,
education and infrastructure. It is also crucial that such
a civil administration be created on the basis of
democratic principles that will strengthen the rule of
law.

What is most important, however, is for such a
democratic civil reconstruction to start at the local
level. First priority has to be accorded to setting up
local democratic governments. Democracy must spread
from the local level to the regional level, and from the
regional level to the State. Thus democracy spreads
from the citizenry to the State.

These thoughts on the democratic reconstruction
of collapsed States are based on important socio-
political studies that have been carried out with respect
to specific cases, in particular Kosovo, Timor-Leste,
Liberia and Sierra Leone. I am thinking in particular of
the research done by the International Institute for
Democracy and Electoral Assistance, which now has
observer status with the General Assembly.

Up to now, the greatest constraints on
peacebuilding have been a lack of strategies aimed at
preventing conflict, and then, in the post-conflict stage,
a lack of strategies aimed at creating a modern, viable
economy and at building democracy, starting from
small local communities and working up to the national
level.

Post-conflict peacebuilding must evolve into an
economic and political process that simultaneously
creates viable economies and democratic institutions.
Such a process must be innovative and be led by the
United Nations, with the participation of, and fresh
input by, Global Compact transnational companies as
well as institutions and civil society.

