The Secretary-General: It is an honour to join
the Security Council this morning. I am grateful to the
Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom for bringing
us together to discuss the critical question of how the
international community can respond effectively in the
immediate aftermath of conflict.

Over the past two decades, the United Nations
has deepened its understanding of what it takes to
prevent a relapse into conflict. We have learned how to
better create space for national authorities to establish
processes for sustainable peace, security and

development. Lessons from many countries - the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone,
Timor Leste, Haiti, Burundi and Liberia - all

demonstrate that, while each context is different, there
are three common and immediate priorities.

The first is to establish viable political processes
to buttress peace agreements and to put in place
legitimate national authorities. The second is to restore
security and the rule of law, including early
development of professional and accountable security
services and justice systems. The third is to deliver
immediate and tangible benefits to the affected
population and create enabling conditions for longer-
term development.

How, then, can we strengthen our collective
response in the immediate aftermath of conflict and
deliver on these critical priorities?

First, we must be coherent. While the primary
responsibility for rebuilding after conflict undoubtedly
belongs to national authorities, the United Nations has
a major obligation. My Special Representatives are
responsible for coordinating the response of all United
Nations actors in the field. We have put in place
structures, planning and monitoring processes to
support this effort in the immediate term and
throughout the transition to longer-term peacebuilding.

But the United Nations is only one of several
actors in the field. Regional organizations, Member
States and international financial institutions contribute
critical elements of a collective international response.
Where we work together, as in Liberia or in Sierra
Leone, we deliver a vastly more effective response.
Coordination and clarity of leadership are critical to
ensuring that each partner brings its distinctive strength
to the broad collective effort.

Secondly, we need sufficient capacity. If the
United Nations is to lead on the ground, my Special
Representatives need to be empowered to do so. They
need the means to identify strategic priorities,
elaborate plans and mobilize funds with others, in
particular development partners. By aligning, if not
integrating, our respective instruments, such as reports
to the Security Council, donor pledging conferences
and relief frameworks, we can ensure that priorities are
pursued consistently. We should also consider joint
assessments and strengthened reporting to the Security
Council on critical recovery needs, drawing on
expertise from the whole United Nations family as well
as from international financial institutions.

Thirdly, we need to build up civilian expertise.
The small but agile United Nations standing police
capacity is an important step in the right direction, as is
the recent launch of the standby team of mediation
experts. The creation of the Office of Rule of Law and
Security Institutions in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations reflects my commitment to a
team approach to upholding the rule of law, security
sector reform and respect for human rights.

But we remain desperately short of judges, prison
wardens, state administrators and managers,
particularly those with knowledge and experience of
the countries and systems in which we operate. Not
only should they be well equipped when they are
deployed; they need start-up funding at their disposal.
Many Member States and regional partners, including
the European Union, are exploring ways of building
deployable capacities in this critical area. We need to
broaden and pool our efforts to deliver global resources
for peace.

This need for civilian expertise also extends to
recovery and development. We need to do much better
in delivering early peace dividends. That means scaling
up relief and development capacities to enable national
authorities to pay their civil servants, restore
agricultural life and initiate employment programmes.
It may be time to draw on the experience of the
humanitarian community in launching urgent recovery
in a rapid and predictable way, including through
greater use oflocal resources and capacities.

Ultimately, all of this requires early and flexible
funding. Early investment does indeed entail risk. But
the cost of failure and the potential for rewards are
much higher. Bold and innovative steps are required to
meet critical priority needs. To facilitate rapid delivery
in the earliest phase, let us explore approaches such as
a common start-up fund.

The immediate aftermath of conflict is the
crossroads at which peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding meet. We need to ensure that the road
taken is the one that leads us most rapidly and
effectively to our goal of a nationally owned,
sustainable peace, with strengthened national
capacities. Many of these issues have been identified
by the Peacebuilding Commission, which has a key
role to play in supporting national actors in achieving
their long-term objectives for sustainable peace and
development.

Today's debate is, I hope, the start of a collective
effort to reach that objective.

