Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing
on the latest North Korean nuclear test.

The provocative nuclear missile activity by
Pyongyang recently gained dangerous momentum. We
are deeply troubled by the testing of a thermonuclear
explosive device for an intercontinental ballistic
missile, as announced by Pyongyang officials. There is
no doubt that we are experiencing one of the gravest and
most dramatic stages of developments on the Korean
peninsula. It is no exaggeration to state that peace in
the region is being sorely tested, and the threat of this
conflict morphing into an active conflict is greater
than ever.

The latest blatant display of North Korea's
disregard of the relevant Security Council resolutions
and the norms of international law warrants the most
vehement condemnation. We cannot but regret the
fact that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
leadership, through its action to undermine the global
non-proliferation regime, is posing a grave threat
to peace and stability on the Korean peninsula and
globally. The pursuit of such a policy is fraught with
serious repercussions for the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea itself.

At the same time, it is evident to us that military
solutions cannot settle the issues plaguing the North
Korean peninsula. Given the unfolding situation,
there is an urgent need to maintain a cool head and
to refrain from any action that could further escalate
tensions. We reaffirm the need for comprehensive and
full compliance by all stakeholders with the relevant
Security Council statements and resolutions, including
the recent resolution 2371 (2017), adopted by concensus.

Many today delved into the history of attempts to
halt the Democratic People's Republic of Korea nuclear
and ballistic programme. That historical exploration
only serves as evidence that we have failed to resolve
this issue through Security Council resolutions that were
geared only towards leveraging sanctions mechanisms.
We call upon all stakeholders to immediately return to
dialogue and negotiations, as that is the only way to
comprehensively settle the issues besetting the Korean
peninsula - including nuclear issues. We reaffirm our
willingness to engage in concerted efforts along those
lines, including in the context of the implementation of
the Russian-Chinese road map.

The Russian Federation calls on the international
community to not yield to emotions and to act in a
calm and balanced way. We once again stress that a
comprehensive settlement to the nuclear and other
issues plaguing the Korean peninsula can be arrived
at solely through political and diplomatic channels,
including by leveraging the mediation efforts of the
Secretary-General.

