Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Let me
first thank Special Representative Ould Abdallah for
his informative update on the situation in Somalia and
for his critical work of monitoring and reporting under
often dangerous conditions. Let me also welcome
Foreign Minister Omaar and African Union
Commissioner Lamamra back to the Council and thank
them for their informative statements.

The United States condemns in the strongest
terms the continuing military offensives against the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia,
which are designed to overthrow the TFG's legitimate
authority by force. The United States particularly
condemns the 19 July raids by Al-Shabaab on - and
forced closure of - the offices of the United Nations
Development Programme, the Department of Safety
and Security and the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia in Wajid and Baidoa, during which
communications equipment, automobiles and supplies
were looted, as well as its 17 May raid on the UNICEF
compound in Jowhar town; the compound remains
occupied by the militia.

We are very concerned by reports that Al-Shabaab
is recruiting seasoned fighters from abroad and
collaborating with Al-Qaida to remove the TFG.
Al-Shabaab and other extremists have ratcheted up
bomb attacks and targeted assassinations to spread fear
in an attempt to intimidate the Somali people into
submission. There are troublesome reports not only of
recent violence by extremists in Mogadishu but also of
renewed fighting in the central regions of Somalia. And
in its drive to forcibly gain power, Al-Shabaab has
even recruited Somali children to take up arms.

We second the Special Representative's call to
donors for urgent military and financial support to the
TFG and AMISOM. Supporting AMISOM. should be
central to the international community's strategy of
stabilizing Mogadishu and supporting the Somali peace
process. We thank AMISOM. for its brave and critical
work in the face of continuing danger, and my
Government urges donors to fulfil the pledges made at
the April security conference in Brussels to address the
continuing threat to regional stability posed by
extremists.

Currently, AMISOM. is four battalions short of its
mandated strength of nine infantry battalions, or a little
over half of its mandated strength of 8,000 troops. The
United States welcomes the pledges made by Sierra
Leone and Malawi to contribute one battalion each to
AMISOM. and thanks Uganda and Burundi for their
roles, in particular Burundi for the steps it is taking to
contribute a third battalion to help strengthen
AMISOM's capacity.

We are deeply concerned about the worsening
humanitarian situation in Somalia, including that of the
estimated 200,000 people who had recently returned to
Mogadishu only to again be displaced when the
fighting began anew. The violence makes distributing
critical food and other humanitarian assistance to the
3.2 million Somalis who require it more challenging
and sometimes impossible.

The United States deplores violence against
humanitarian agencies and staff, in particular
Al-Shabaab's 17 May raid on the UNICEF compound,
which resulted in the destruction of thousands of doses
of vaccines intended for Somali women and children
and nutritional supplements intended for the most
vulnerable women and children.

The United States is committed to addressing the
humanitarian situation and has provided nearly
$149 million in food and non-food emergency assistance
since the start of our current fiscal year. We urge the
international community to contribute to the
consolidated appeal for Somalia, which, as of 30 June,
covers only 40 per cent of the $984 million requested.

In spite of these challenges, the United States is
encouraged by President Sharif's continuing efforts to
reach out to opposition groups that wish to join the
national reconciliation process, and we welcome the
TF G's declaration of cooperation with the Ahlu Sunna
Wal Jama'a. We also welcome the TFG's institution-
building efforts and the steps taken to hold
parliamentary and cabinet sessions despite increasing
attacks in Mogadishu.

On piracy, we are concerned by reports from the
International Maritime Bureau of an exponential
increase in activity as well as the reports of the use of
more sophisticated weapons. We must continue to
prosecute suspected pirates, as piracy is without a
question a symptom of, as well as a contributing factor
to, the instability and insecurity in Somalia. Without
stability in Somalia, there can be no durable resolution
of the piracy problem. Nonetheless, my Government
believes that the paying of ransom simply perpetuates
piracy. The United States does not offer concessions to
hostage-takers, whether they are driven by political or
financial motives, and we encourage other States to
take a similar position.

Finally, we remain deeply concerned about
Eritrea's actions in the region, particularly in Somalia.
The Monitoring Group has noted in its reports that

Eritrea has provided funding, weapons and training to
armed insurgents in Somalia. Like others here, the
United States has repeatedly stated that we remain
willing to engage the Eritrean Government should it
end its destabilizing activities in the Horn of Africa and
take steps towards improved regional relations.
Unfortunately, Eritrea has thus far refused these offers,
and the window is rapidly closing.

