Judge Meron: It is a great honour for me to
appear before the Security Council today as President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and to do so under the presidency
of the Russian Federation. I congratulate Ambassador
Churkin for his able management of the Security
Council.

As the Council may be aware, I assumed the
presidency of the Tribunal on 17 November. The report
(see S/2011/716) that was submitted to the Council
earlier this month details the work of the Tribunal
under the leadership of my predecessor Judge Patrick
Robinson. I would like to pay tribute to his outstanding
achievements, which have significantly strengthened
the ICTY. In particular, I would underscore his
initiative to establish a victims' trust fund - a plan
that has my full support. In that regard, I am pleased to
note that the International Organization for Migration
has secured funding to carry out a comprehensive
assessment study.
Before I turn to the current state of the Tribunal, I
believe it is fitting to underscore the significant
successes that we have achieved. The recent arrests of
indictees Goran HadZie and Ratko Mladie mean that
there are no outstanding fugitives. All living persons
indicted by the Tribunal have been, or will be, tried in
a court of law, either at the Tribunal or in courts of
national jurisdictions.

With respect to legal doctrine, the greatest
achievement of the Tribunal and of its sister court, the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
has been their contribution to developing substantive,
procedural and evidentiary international criminal law.
That corpus of jurisprudence outweighs by far that of
Nuremberg.

I would also underscore that the Tribunal has
made tremendous strides in assisting national
judiciaries of the region of the former Yugoslavia
through the War Crimes Justice Project and its outreach
offices, as well as through its assistance in creating the
War Crimes Chamber of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Partly due to the example and assistance of the
Tribunal, national judiciaries in the former Yugoslavia
are successfully prosecuting war-crimes cases. In that
respect, I am pleased to note that the statute of the
Residual Mechanism provides for assistance to be
given to national judiciaries in response to their
requests.

Let me now turn to the current state of affairs at
the Tribunal. I note that the report of President
Robinson gives details with respect to all cases
currently pending before the Tribunal. My comments in
that regard can therefore be brief.

The Tribunal continues to work as rapidly as
possible, given the constraints imposed by limited
resources and the need to ensure the highest standards
of procedural fairness. Proceedings are ongoing against
35 persons - 18 at the trial level in seven cases and 17
at the appellate level in six cases. It is anticipated that
judgements in six trials will be issued in 2012, with the
Karadzie judgement issued during 2014. It is still
impossible to predict when judgements will be issued
in the cases of Mlaa'ic' and Hadeic', who were recently
arrested. One appeal judgement is expected to be
delivered in 2012, with a further five delivered in
2013, including the two multi-accused cases of
Sainovic' et al. and Popovic' et al.

I am acutely aware of the requirement of
resolution 1966 (2010) that the Tribunals do all in their
power to ensure the completion of all cases by
December 2014. I would note that this resolution was
adopted prior to the arrests of Mladie and Hadzie. All
efforts will be made to complete their trials prior to
December 2014, but appeals emanating from them will
fall under the aegis of the Residual Mechanism.

It is also my duty as President to draw the
Council's attention to the charts attached to President
Robinson's last completion report, which indicate that
the Tribunal may not be able to conclude appeals
emanating from the Tolimir, Seselj', and Prlic' cases by
December 2014. Further, according to the charts
recently presented by the ICTR, the appeal, if any, of
Ngirabatware may go to the Residual Mechanism
because the notice of appeal would miss the July 2012
deadline. In addition, I am advised that the completion
report's estimate for the translation of the Prlie case
must be corrected. It is actually 21 months, reflecting
an anticipated 4,000 or more judgement-sized pages.
That said, the Tribunal will do its utmost to ensure that
its proceedings are completed as expeditiously as
possible, while ensuring that the fair trial rights of the
accused are fully respected.

In line with that commitment, among my first
acts as President was to review the Tribunal's activities
to identify possibilities to reduce the time needed to
complete appeals. On the basis of that review, I
identified the translation of judgements as a potential
area for exceptional measures. It is estimated that one
ICTR trial judgement will take 18 months to translate.
At the ICTY, the eventual judgement in one ongoing
ICTY trial case is currently projected to take 21
months, while those in two others are each projected at
nine months. Despite our resort to embedded
translators in judgement drafting teams, the translation
time represents a considerable impediment to a timely
appellate process, with the risk of running beyond the
target dates set by the Security Council.

Therefore, as President of the ICTY and the ICTR
Appeals Chambers, I have instructed the Registrars of
both the ICTR and the ICTY - Mr. Adama Dieng and
Mr. John Hocking, respectively - to take immediate
and exceptional measures to bolster the number of staff
assigned to judgement translation and to make every
effort possible to expedite translations, even if it means
reverting to outside contractors. As I see it, after the
various reforms already carried out in the Tribunals,
judicial work must run its course, or else the principle
of judicial independence and fairness would be
compromised. But I can certainly address the logistical
question of translations, with the object of drastically
reducing the time allocated to them through
exceptional measures. My goal is to halve the
translation time in the cases of Butare, with its seven
appellants, Prlic', with its six potential appellants,
Seselj and Tolimir. I am pleased to report that both
Registrars have committed in writing to that goal. I am
also requesting the Registrars to ensure that those
extraordinary measures do not significantly slow down
translations of other judgements. Even with those
efforts, however, I must underscore that the four
appeals I have referred to may still not be completed
by the target date of3l December 2014.

A second measure that I am considering is
directed towards minimizing the disruption caused to
our substantive caseload by contempt proceedings.
There are currently 10 outstanding contempt cases. The
burden of those cases is, for the most part, borne by the
Tribunal's eight permanent trial judges. Some of those
judges are currently sitting on seven or eight contempt
cases in addition to their substantive cases. This
situation represents a real obstacle to the efficient
completion of the Tribunal's substantive cases. Under
these circumstances, it is my intention, unless I hear
objections from the Security Council requiring
additional steps, to depart from the previous practice of
the Tribunal, which precluded assignment of the nine
ad litem judges to contempt cases not arising from their
trials, and assign them to any contempt cases which a
fair and efficient distribution of the workload warrants.
Of course, these assignments - and let me emphasize
this - would not trigger an extension of service
beyond the cases to which an ad litem judge has
already been formally assigned.

Another serious matter that may severely impact
the efficiency of our proceedings is the issue of staff
retention. That problem was repeatedly raised by
President Robinson, most recently and fully in his
report to the Council of 15 November, and was referred
to in the last three Security Council resolutions -
1931 (2010), 1954 (2010) and 1993 (2011) -
concerning the Tribunal, in which the Council
requested that the Secretariat assist the Tribunal in
addressing this challenge. However, no progress was
made in the meetings held in November with the
Secretariat by President Robinson and separately by
Registrar Hocking with respect to our modest
proposals for a retention bonus in the form of a small
termination indemnity of the type that is paid under
staff rules to staff whose contracts are terminated or
abrogated prior to the expiry of their term. While a
termination indemnity may assist the Tribunal in
retaining such critical, long-serving staff, it will not
prevent staff departures, particularly with regard to the
junior professionals in Chambers, a category critical
for judicial work, where we have already suffered
serious attrition.

In the Tribunal's view, many problems would be
remedied if it were allowed to hire its most talented
interns directly to open posts. In cases where an intern
has participated in a trial for some time, allowing him
or her to replace a departing staff member can ensure
that retraining, which might cause months of delay, is
rendered unnecessary. However, General Assembly
resolution 51/226 is currently interpreted as preventing
such interns from being employed by the Tribunal for a
period of six months following the completion of their
internships. Without an interpretation or authorization
for the Registry, the Tribunal will be prevented from
implementing this solution.

I would urge the Council to request the
Secretariat to revisit this matter and come up with a
pragmatic and flexible solution. Given the limited life
of the Tribunal, the fact that it is not fully integrated
into the Secretariat, and the interest of the Organization
in the completion strategy, I believe that the case for a
narrowly focused green light is compelling. I would
therefore be grateful for the Council's explicit support
for this proposal and for its assistance in obtaining the
necessary assent for this cost-free measure, which
would, in any event, apply only to a very small number
of interns.

Finally, I would note that President Robinson has
already drawn the Council's attention to the difficulty
of finding additional places appropriate for convicted
persons to serve their sentences. I would find it most
helpful if the Council could reiterate the request it
made in resolution 1993 (2011), asking States to
cooperate with requests by the Tribunal relating to the
enforcement of sentences.

Having reviewed the Tribunal's past successes
and described our current work and challenges, I will
turn briefly to the future. The establishment of the
Residual Mechanism, with judges whose remuneration
will be per day of work only and who will be allowed
to hold outside occupations, will inevitably present
many challenges for the Tribunal. We are moving into
uncharted territory. I personally am committed to
making the transition to the Residual Mechanism and
its functioning as smooth as possible.

Before I conclude, I would like to express how
honoured I am to serve for a second time as President
of the ICTY. I am privileged to follow in the footsteps
of my two predecessors, Judges Patrick Robinson and
Fausto Pocar. Their outstanding efforts have greatly
strengthened the Tribunal.

Born of the darkness emanating from
Yugoslavia's break-up, the Tribunal faced particularly
difficult challenges in its early years. While the
Tribunal will soon cease to exist, it will leave a world
transformed, and its legacy will be an indelible
testament to the international community's
commitment to justice: the noblest of human ideals.

