Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the
President for organizing, presiding over and co-leading
our highly successful visit to Colombia 10 days ago.
It was a great privilege to co-lead it with you, Sir. I
also want to thank all of the Permanent Representatives
around the table for taking part and for participating so
energetically. I think we all got a lot from the visit.

As the President said, myjob is to briefthe Security
Council on the second day of the visit, when the Council
travelled to the Vista Hermosa, municipality in the
Meta department in the south. It was approximately one
hour by airplane, plus an hour by helicopter, south of
Bogota. We visited the La Reforma local transitional
zone, where the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) are laying
down their arms. We were accompanied by Jean Arnault,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, by
senior Government officials, including the Colombian
Foreign Minister and the Colombian Permanent
Representative, and by the High Commissioner for
Peace, plus members of the FARC-EP secretariat,
including Ivan Marquez and Pastor Alape.

There were three key elements to the day. First
of all, when we arrived, we received a fascinating
briefing from leaders of the Tripartite Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism. They gave us a tour of their
site, which gave us an insight into the challenging
terrain that they have to operate in but also the unique
character of the Mechanism and the remarkable joint
working between the United Nations, the Colombian
Government and the FARC members of that Mechanism.

Then we went on to a town hall-style meeting
at a community centre with members of the local
community and the Governor of the Meta department.
The rain by then was beating down on the corrugated
iron roof of the hall, and we were absolutely crammed
in shoulder to shoulder. There were many community
leaders, women, children, teachers and others present,
who gave us fascinating insights into what peace means
for that community.

Thirdly, and in a way even more remarkably, we
had an opportunity to meet members of the FARC-EP
at one of the newly built reception centres, just outside
their camp area, along with the Special Representative,
the Foreign Minister, the Permanent Representative and
the High Commissioner for Peace. It was a fascinating
site to see, at very short notice, all of these families
coming to us, carrying their chairs with us to this new
place to sit down together and really overcome the
conflict, which, until recently, had driven the country
apart for 52 years.

I mentioned before the challenging weather
conditions. Our bus did get stuck completely in
the mud on our way back to our helicopter, but we
managed to navigate that challenge successfully. I
think we all left confident that the parties - between
them - can navigate all challenges that the peace
process is speeding up.

I wantto leave the Council with the three main
conclusions that I think we came away. First of all, it is
remarkable how much has already happened since the
Peace Agreement was signed. Yes, we heard a lot about
the challenges. We heard about the difficulties and the
obstacles, but, actually, when we consider how much
has been done, it is very impressive, particularly given
the challenging terrain and so on.

Almost 7,000 members of the FARC-EP have
arrived smoothly in the transition zones, and they
have begun their process of laying down of arms. That
Tripartite Monitoring and Verification Mechanism,
led by the United Nations, is working well. Twenty
per cent of those observers are women. And the local
community spoke powerfully about the positive results
that they hoped to see as a result of the peace process.
It was fascinating to hear FARC members pay tribute
to the leadership of the military and the police of
Colombia. That is the first point: how far the parties
and the people of Colombia have come.

Secondly, I think we heard vividly about the impact
of the conflict on the communities most affected by it,
particularly away from the big cities, and the challenges
ahead. We heard about killings of community leaders,
as illegal armed groups moved into new areas. We heard
about the importance of sustained implementation of
all parts of the Agreement, not just the bit about the
laying down of arms, and that is going to be crucial,
particularly for those communities most affected by
the conflict.

Thirdly, I think that we were all impressed by the
commitment of both parties to stay the course, to see
this through, to make sure that every single part of the
Agreement is implemented, with continued support
from the international community. I think we heard
that both on the first day and on the second day, out in
the field. As I said, yes, they are real challenges ahead,
but I think that having that united view that peace is
now irreversible was a strong message for us all to
take home.

In conclusion, I think it is worth noting again in
this Chamber the strength and the unity of the Security
Council support for Colombia, for the people of
Colombia, for the Government of Colombia and for the
FARC as they continue to implement this crucial Peace
Agreement. The issue, I think, is still a ray of sunlight
on our agenda, and I hope that we all feel privileged
to be able to lend our support to the implementation of
the Peace Agreement. As we said in our presidential
statement (S/PRST/2OI7/6) upon our return, we all
remain fully committed to the peace process and are
determined to play a constructive and active role in the
months ahead.

Finally, I would like to thank the United Nations
Mission for supporting the visit and for its tireless work
in challenging conditions, as well as the Secretariat
for all of its efforts during their visit. I also thank
Ambassador Mejia Ve'lez for everything that she and her
colleagues and the Government of Colombia have done.

