Mr. Idd (United Republic of Tanzania): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. The Security Council's
consideration of this matter demonstrates its
determination to seek a lasting solution for peace and
security in the Middle East region. Tanzania aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The statements made by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Palestine and the Permanent Representative
of Israel show that both parties want peace and security
in the Middle East region. The only remaining issue is
how to conclude the ongoing process so as to achieve
that goal. My delegation welcomes the various efforts
made by the United Nations, the European Union, the
United States, the Russian Federation, Egypt and other
regional players in their different initiatives, searching
for durable peace and security in the region.

Tanzania reiterates its concern with regard to the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, as a result of continuing unlawful
activities by Israel. In particular, we are very
concerned by the ongoing Israeli actions in support of
illegal settlements in the heart of East Jerusalem. We
urge the Israeli Government to lift the embargo it has
imposed on Palestinians and to open without delay all
border crossings to allow the free movement of goods
and persons and, most importantly, humanitarian
assistance for the Palestinian civilians.

We call upon the international community, in
particular the Security Council, to fulfil its
responsibilities and to take the necessary action to
pressure Israel, the occupying Power, to act in
accordance with all of its legal obligations and
commitments under the Quartet Road Map as
enshrined in resolution 1515 (2003). We encourage all
parties involved in the process to exercise restraint,
observe a permanent ceasefire and embark on sincere
dialogue to negotiate the implementation of the Road
Map. In that regard, we urge the leadership on both
sides of the conflict to avoid inflammatory statements
and stop all forms of violence, especially against
innocent civilians, such as women and children.

In conclusion, we take this opportunity to
reiterate our support for the peace process and the right
of the Palestinians to regain their fundamental rights,
including the right to existence as an independent State
living in peace and security side by side with Israel.

