Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): Like
my other European colleagues, in my following
comments, I align myself with the statement to be
made by Portugal on behalf of the European Union
later today.

Belgium welcomes the direct contacts
particularly in Jericho between the Israeli Prime
Minister, Mr. Olmert, and the Palestinian President,
Mr. Abbas. This dialogue constitutes a major step
forward in the quest for a durable solution to the
conflict between Israel and Palestine. We must
encourage them to continue along this course.

The Quartet has met several times over the last
few months. Its renewed vitality is reflected in part in
the appointment of Mr. Blair as its representative. We
await his first report at the next meeting of the Quartet
here in New York on 23 September.

Regional initiatives also are very topical. For
Belgium, the Arab Peace Initiative remains key to
regional peace. We know that a high-level international
meeting on the Middle East is also scheduled for this
autumn and it is important that this meeting should
genuinely be viewed as an opportunity not to be missed
by any of the parties involved, directly or indirectly, in
the process.

Belgium appeals to the parties to undertake
specific actions to improve the situation of the
population. The deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip is a cause for concern.
Reopening the Karni Terminal for both imports and
exports is of critical importance to avoid the total
collapse of the economy in the Gaza Strip, with the all
too predictable humanitarian consequences.

In Lebanon, all political forces should focus on
seeking a solution to the current political impasse. That
is all the more important given the prospect of the
upcoming presidential elections. Belgium is pleased to
note that all parties in Lebanon state that they are ready
to work on the matter. Now is the time for words to be
translated into deeds, and for specific measures to be
taken to ensure that the elections really do take place in
due time and with respect for democratic rules. I call
on all sides to act with a sense of urgency and
responsibility.

The renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) is a way for the
international community to show its firm determination
to continue to support Lebanon on its journey towards
total recovery of its sovereignty, territorial integrity
and independence.

The attack last June which targeted UNIFIL and
cost the lives of six Blue Helmets reminds us of the
need to step up our efforts to ensure the security of
troops, but it has certainly not shaken the
determination of the international community, nor of
Belgium specifically, to continue to fulfil this mission.

I would like to end by thanking both personally
and on behalf of my Government Mr. Michael
Williams for his outstanding work, imbued with a great
sense of responsibility, that he performed for the
United Nations and for its Member States during the
past year. Belgium believes that he will continue in his
new capacity to contribute to the quest for a durable
peace for the Middle East.

