Ms. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Allow
me to warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, and
the people of the Dominican Republic on your elected
membership of the Security Council and for having
convened this debate on an issue that, as you know, is
very close to our hearts. With its membership on the
Council, the Dominican Republic has an opportunity to
represent the voice of the small island developing States
(SIDS) - a voice that we amplified throughout our
membership of the Council, as a Kingdom consisting of
four autonomous countries, of which Aruba, Curacao
and Sint Maarten are SIDS. Unfortunately, the Prime
Minister of Sint Maarten, who had really wanted to be
present here at today's debate, had to cancel her trip at
the last minute owing to pressing engagements.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself
with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union.

By organizing today's debate on the impacts of
climate-related disasters on international peace and
security, the Dominican Republic is asking Member
States to address an issue that the Secretary-General
deemed as the defining issue of our time: climate
change. As the countries in our Kingdom are some of
its closest neighbours, we welcome this focus.

The Caribbean is a region that is especially
vulnerable to the effects of climate change. As the
Council is aware, Sint Maarten was among the islands
most heavily affected by Hurricane Irma, in September
2017. The strongest Atlantic hurricane on record, it
left 70 per cent of the houses there severely damaged,
forcing an unprecedented number of people into public
shelters. Today still, St. Maarteners and other Caribbean
citizens are confronted with its aftermath.

The link between climate change and security is clear
and undeniable. Increased risks of climate disasters mean
increased threats to human security and exacerbated
vulnerabilities. Today's briefers demonstrated this
by emphasizing that climate-related disasters such as
hurricanes severely impact socioeconomic development
and cause environmental degradation.

In this context, let me draw the Council's attention
to the "3P" approach: if we want to prevent, we need
to predict and prepare. If we could predict the security
implications of natural disasters, we would be one step
closer to addressing such risks. It is for this reason that
the Kingdom of the Netherlands has repeatedly called
for an integrated risk assessment and analysis, and for
the strengthening of institutional capacity in that area.
Integrated risk assessments should include all threat
multipliers, including water stress and climate change.
During an Arria Formula meeting on water, peace
and security, which we co-hosted with the Dominican
Republic, among others, the World Resources Institute
presented an early-warning tool to enhance such risk
assessments. Tools such as these can help Governments
and the United Nations system enhance risk assessment
and analysis.

We welcome the progress that the Council has
made to this effect and encourage it to expand this to
the relevant country situations and mission contexts.
Sound risk assessments would enable us to develop
joint risk management strategies, in other words,
prepare. The United Nations system and Member States
need to be better prepared not just to identify risks, but
also to strengthen operations and develop programmes
accordingly. For this, it is crucial that mandates reflect
the necessity for integrated risk assessment and that
missions and United Nations entities are given the
institutional capacity and means to do so. The United
Nations should respond coherently across its pillars in
order to address climate- and water-related security
risks in a timely manner.

Outside of the United Nations, we need to do more
to share knowledge and best practices and explore
actionable responses. To that end, on 13 December
2018, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, together with
the Centre of Excellence for Sustainable Development
of SIDS and the Caribbean Community's Caribbean
Disaster Emergence Management Agency, organized
a Caribbean conference on planetary security. Its
outcomes will contribute to the Planetary Security
Conference to be held in The Hague on 19 and
20 February. We hope to see many ofthe participants in
today's meeting at that Conference.

To conclude, if we predict better through early
warning and prepare better through early action, we can
prevent conflict. The Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) are the ultimate prevention agenda, in which
addressing climate change - SDG13 - is embedded.
Its security implications are as pertinent as rising sea
levels, environmental degradation and the growing
number of climate-related disasters affecting human
security. Sint Maarteners remember all too vividly what
this could lead to. We therefore welcome the Secretary-
General's climate summit this September. The summit
is an opportunity to address all aspects of climate
change, including addressing the adverse effects of
climate change on international peace and security and
building resilient societies through adaptation.

As the Secretary-General has said, climate change is
the biggest threat that our generation faces, and we urge
the Council to assign the issue the priority it deserves by
calling for integrated risk assessments and encouraging
climate- and conflict-sensitive programming.

