Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to thank you
and your delegation, Mr. President, for organizing this
important debate, and in particular for your ambassador
and Permanent Representative's unwavering dedication
to promoting the rights and protection of children in
armed conflict. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his statement, as well as his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and the Executive Director of
UNICEF, our friend Mr. Anthony Lake, for their
briefings.

I would also like to thank our young brother and
son, Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, for sharing with us his
moving story about what he endured as a child soldier
with the rebel forces in Sierra Leone. Indeed, his story
resonates well with our own tragic past in Rwanda,
where, in 1994, hundreds of thousands of children were
arbitrarily killed, abducted or maimed, and others were
forced to join the militia by the very same Government
that was supposed to protect them.

It is unfortunate that today, millions of children are
still caught in conflicts around the world, in which they
are mere bystanders but targets. Some fall Victim to a
general onslaught against civilians. Others die as part
of a calculated genocide, as was the case in Rwanda
20 years ago. Evidence of the plight of children is the
death toll of civilians, which include a high number of
children in places such as Syria, the Central African
Republic and Afghanistan, to name a few. That is a
gruesome reminder that children are the first victims,
and that more remains to be done. Still more children
suffer the effects of sexual violence of the multiple
deprivations of armed conflicts that expose them to
hunger or disease. As the Secretary-General correctly
said, "Let our children be children".

I think that we are equally concerned with the
persistent reports of widespread and deliberate atacks
against schools, teachers and students as a tool of war.
Whatever the causes of those attacks or occupation of
schools, we call on belligerents to halt such inhumane
acts and to publicy announce that children simply have
no part in warfare and should therefore be in schools,
not in the bushes.

Although adequate protection of children in
situations of armed conflict should be the primary
responsibility of Governments, we believe that all
parties to conflict must deploy the necessary and
sustained efforts in protecting children and abide by
the relevant international obligations to desist from
recruiting and attacking children. That is why we call
for the universal ratification and implementation of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Rwanda
was one of the first countries in the world to ratify
that Convention, which contains the core principles of
helping children to meet their basic needs and ensuring
that that they are protected from violence, abuse and
exploitation and can reach their full potential.

Those principles are reflected in our national
development programmes and are also evident in the
Government's strong legal and policy framework, as
well as the practical measures to protect children. We
also welcome other positive developments, including
the signing of action plans and some listed State and
non-State parties as a unique tool that can successfully
improve the situation in armed conflicts.

The signing of action plans by a number of
Governments, in addition to the progress made by
other parties in releasing children, is a good step in that
regard. Rwanda strongly supports the recommendations
of the Secretary-General in his recent report (see S/2013/245), especially his call on the donor community
to enjoy a discussion to address the funding gaps for
the implementation of the action plans and associated
monitoring and to call on the Security Council to tackle
the issue of persistent perpetrators of grave violations
against children.

We take the opportunity to reiterate our call
on concerned Member States to prioritize the
implementation of those action plans. As the adopted
resolution 2143 (2014) puts it, the important step
is the development of national capacity-building
as well as close cooperation with States for such
implementation to materialize. In that context,
post-conflict peacebuilding should include, among
other priorities, issues of security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, the
establishment of an adequate birth registration system
that would help prevent future underage recruitment,
as well as institutions of accountability, and the fight
against impunity. The process of integration must help
children to establish new foundations in life based on
their individual capacities. Recovery and reintegration
should take place in an environment that fosters the
health, self-respect and dignity of the child, as outlined
in the Convention on the Rights of the Child.

Before I conclude, I pay homage to the role played
by regional and subregional organizations in meeting
the challenges associated with the issue of children and
armed conflict. Specifically for the African Union, we
commend the aggressive protection mandates exercised
in its peacekeeping missions, including under the
African Union Mission in Somalia, the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. Furthermore, we welcome the
ongoing discussions on the alignment of the national
legislations of African States with international
instruments on child rights and training to troop-
contributors to the African Union and United Nations
peacekeeping missions. We also take this opportunity
to call for the deployment of an adequate number of
child protection advisers thoughout United Nations
peacekeeping missions to cover child protection
functions.

Finally, let me take this opportunity to affirm
Rwanda's unequivocal support for the advancement of
the child protection agenda both at home and regionally
through our engagement with international community.

