Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like others, I too
wish to welcome Minister Rassoul to our meeting
today and to thank him for his very important
statement. I would like to say a special word of thanks
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Staffan de Mistura for his very comprehensive and, as
usual, very lucid briefing. Let me also once again
commend him, his staff and his team for their constant
efforts and their perseverance in the midst of a very
difficult, dangerous and complex situation.

The statement by Minister Rassoul, the Secretary-
General's report (S/2011/590) and the briefing by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General have
covered the essential aspects of the situation in
Afghanistan. Portugal naturally associates itself with
the statement that will be delivered later by the
observer of the European Union.

This summer has indeed been a difficult season in
Afghanistan. One of the most disturbing aspects of this
difficult summer - as the Special Representative
underlined - has been the political assassinations
targeting notable figures at the national, regional and
Government levels, of which Mr. Burhanuddin
Rabbani, former President of Afghanistan and Chair of
the High Peace Council, is the latest victim. Let me
reiterate my country's utter condemnation of that
murder and extend our condolences, through the
Foreign Minister, to the Government and the people of
Afghanistan.

Those assassinations are one more effort to
distract us and the Afghan people from what is
happening on the ground - the gradual normalization
of the country and, ultimately, the defeat of the
enemies of a democratic Afghanistan. As the Minister
has said, however, we are confident that the
reconciliation process will continue and achieve peace
in Afghanistan.

With regard to transition, we note that regions
undergoing that process face, as the Secretary-General
mentioned, resilient insurgency. It is not surprising that
those areas are particularly targeted by insurgents, who
know that the Afghan and international efforts against
them will be judged by how the transition evolves. It is
also natural for national institutions at the security and
public service levels to show themselves in
autonomous action before the Afghan people and to
deliver. In that regard, allow me to quote once more the
Secretary-General's report, in saying that what is
needed is

"effective governance and delivery of services to
the population. The momentum behind the
security transition should not be at the expense
of, or outstrip, efforts to invest in governance and
development processes". (S/2011/590, para. 59)
We also take positive note of the separation of the
sanctions regimes regarding Al-Qaida and the Taliban
and the de-listing of a number of individuals. We
believe it was a useful measure towards dialogue and
national reconciliation in Afghanistan.

The High Peace Council and the Salaam Support
Group, in which the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) plays an important
assistance role, are an unequivocally valuable tool for
fostering dialogue and outreach inside and outside
Afghanistan. Their relevance has only been reinforced
by the recent attacks on its President. We are sure that
the Special Representative will pursue his engagement
of the High Peace Council leadership, despite the latest
events.

At a regional level, the initiatives of Afghanistan
and its neighbours are noteworthy. Once more
integrated within its region and closer to its immediate
neighbours than ever before, Afghanistan is recovering
its place in the world and widening the horizons of
countless Afghans. The opportunity for business,
connectivity, investment and regional economic
cooperation will, I am sure, strengthen the country's
independence and institutions and improve the lot of
ordinary Afghans.

Civilian casualties have been increasing in
numbers, notably due to suicide attacks cruelly
designed and undertaken against civilian targets, such
as hospitals and mosques. Those are, by any account,
crimes whose victims require justice and whose
perpetrators renew, at every occasion, their lack of
legitimacy to represent Afghans or Afghanistan.

Moreover, the use of children as soldiers and as
deliverers of weapons and explosive devices by
anti-Government forces is particularly heinous. That
practice, perhaps before any other, must be stopped,
and we welcome the efforts of the Afghan Government
regarding the recruitment and use of children by its
security forces. We hope that further progress can be
achieved within a short time frame.
The protection of civilians needs greater attention
as the numbers of their victims rise. That is a task, I
believe, that is too important and too essential for the
national reconciliation of Afghanistan to be left
without the strong participation, indeed ownership, of
Afghan institutions. Providing relief, care and
compensation to civilian victims is possible and
feasible within Afghan means, legislation and tradition.

Portugal follows with the utmost attention the
situation of Afghan women, and wholeheartedly
supports the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan
and of UNAMA to promote and protect the human
rights of women and in advocating and monitoring
implementation of the Law on the Elimination of
Violence against Women, as well as in promoting the
political participation of women in peace and
reconciliation processes.

I would also like to mention UNAMA's assistance
to the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission.
I believe that the mainstreaming of human rights into
the justice system, and the independent monitoring
thereof, will surely reinforce the rule of law and the
legitimacy of the institutions.

I have a couple of words regarding the
humanitarian situation and the counter-narcotics
efforts. Food assistance to hundreds of thousands in
Afghanistan will be needed in the coming months. That
situation, beyond its evident humanitarian dimension,
is an emerging threat to the security situation as well,
as it may very well help in reversing the progress
achieved in counter-insurgency.

As regards the growing opium production, in
itself a very worrying development beyond its
connection to terrorism, Portugal encourages the
Government to pursue its national counter-drugs
policy, but also to seek regional solutions, including by
sharing information, material and strategies, to the
cross-border issues raised by drug trafficking and its
link to other forms of international crime.

I conclude by sharing the Secretary-General's
view of the requirements for a successful transition: the
recognition that development, governance and the rule
of law are crucial; the need for capturing momentum
and accelerating sustainable development activities;
assessing operational and support costs for
development projects; and long-term international
support and private sector investment.
The coming Istanbul and Bonn conferences will
allow us to start discussing such decisive issues very
soon. They will be the stepping stones towards winning
the battle of peace, stability and economic and social
development in Afghanistan.

