Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. Minister, your presence at this meeting honours us
and also attests to your country's commitment to the
subject that we are considering today.

May I begin by expressing our solidarity with the
Afghan people in these painful times as a result of the
severe earthquake. We would request the Ambassador
to pass on our sincerest condolences.

We are grateful for the presentation made by the
Deputy Secretary-General, Louise Frechette, and for
the report of the Secretary-General, which emphasizes
the historical complexities of the situation in
Afghanistan, as well as the shape of the challenges to
be confronted by the United Nations in the months and
years to come.

We agree with the Secretary-General that security
is, one the one hand, a vital prerequisite for
safeguarding the peace process in Afghanistan and that
it is also, on the other hand, the first issue to be
addressed in the context of the reconstruction of that
country, as is indicated in the relevant paragraphs of
the report, including paragraphs 45 and 126. This is the
most important need of the Afghan people at the
present time, and the Security Council, through its
actions, must contribute to meeting it.

Indeed, without security, the Interim
Administration will not be able to fulfil its functions
adequately throughout the territory. Without security,
the legitimacy of the outcome of the Loya Jirga will be
called into question. Without security, the United
Nations presence will face difficulties, and, without
security, it will be virtually impossible to provide
humanitarian assistance.

Colombia therefore expresses its resolute support
for expanding the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) beyond Kabul. As paragraph 59 of the
report emphasizes, "the main threats to the Interim
Administration emanate from the provinces".

I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to invite
those countries that lead the Force or are members of it
to explore mechanisms to respond to this appeal from
the Afghan people. We have taken note of the
reservations expressed thus far in this connection.

This could be the best way to begin to respond to
the risks and the threats that are mentioned in
paragraph 123 of the report of the Secretary-General.
In the face of these risks, it is necessary to strengthen
security measures in order to meet short-, medium- and
long-term needs and to make it possible for
Afghanistan to be a viable country from an economic
and political standpoint.

In this respect, I wish to emphasize the report's
assertion that:

"The only way to ensure the eradication of
terrorism from Afghan soil is by empowering the
country's legitimate authorities to police their
own territory." (S/2002/2 78, para. 123)

In addition, on the subject of security, we must
always bear in mind the military operation that has
been under way for six months now, fighting against Al
Qaeda and Taliban forces, and realize that, as things
stand now, there is a need for careful coordination with
the activities of ISAF if it is expanded to the remainder
of Afghanistan.

We would like to refer to some specific points of
importance to our delegation.

First, let me express our deep satisfaction at the
return to school, on 23 March, of boys and girls. We
welcome the actions of the Interim Administration that
made it possible to fulfil this objective, and, in doing
so, we extend our appreciation to all of those who
facilitated that return, in particular the United Nations
Children's Fund and the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization.

Secondly, we wish to refer to the financial
situation of the Interim Administration, because we
believe this to be a subject that deserves our
consideration. We are referring to the delays and the
difficulties in channelling those resources that were
pledged during the Tokyo Conference - problems that
could paralyse the Administration and jeopardize the
credibility of the emerging institutions in Afghanistan.
We trust that these delays and difficulties do not reflect
a lack of commitment on the part of the international
community.

Thirdly, a comment on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Colombia supports the proposed structure that has been
submitted to us for consideration, and we are prepared
to support a concise Security Council draft resolution
endorsing this concept. As Ambassador Levitte has
informed us, the draft resolution has already been
prepared. We wish to emphasize nevertheless that
UNAMA is an integrated mechanism that will have to
coordinate many agencies and programmes free of any
subordinate relationship. That will not necessarily be
easy.

If in the future we achieve a real process of
cooperation among the various intergovernmental
organs of the United Nations, we may be able to
produce decisions that make the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General easier. There
is clearly a role for the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, which we must identify
and relate to the decisions that the Security Council
will be taking on that structure.

Little time has elapsed since the establishment of
the Interim Administration in December 2001.
Nonetheless, in this brief period fundamental changes
have occurred in Afghanistan's political structure that
are encouraging. The report indicates the frankly
overwhelming magnitude of the tasks ahead. That is
why we believe it timely to revive the initiative of
conducting a comprehensive assessment of the
situation in that country. We feel that such a
comprehensive assessment will be the best starting
point for the new United Nations mission in
Afghanistan. We should perhaps initiate that exercise
some time in July. It should put the international
community's role in a clear perspective and help the
Security Council itself fully to grasp the most complex
challenge that the United Nations faces in that region,
which is particularly critical to international peace and
security.

