Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and the delegation of your friendly
country on the assumption by the Russian Federation of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also would like to express our deepest appreciation for
your country's positions, which are underpinned by the
principles of international law and the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, which are defended by
your country.

A well-known Arab philosopher, Al-Mutanabbi,
who lived 1,000 years ago in Baghdad, Damascus and
Aleppo, said something that remains very valid today.
He said, "If someone does something wrong, then his
suspicions worsen". I will explain why that saying is
still valid.
The Governments of some permanent members of
the Council, which are supposed to be entrusted with
upholding the principles of our Charter and maintaining
international peace and security, continue to misuse
the mechanisms of this international Organization,
including this important forum, to politicize the
humanitarian situation in my country, Syria. They are
using it also as an instrument in a hostile campaign
aimed at undermining the security and stability of my
country, supporting terrorism and levelling accusations
aimed at tarnishing the image of the Syrian Government
and its allies and at covering up the crimes committed
by those same countries and by their allies, proxies and
tools in the region.

Many realize that some parties have gambled a
great deal of money, effort, weapons and diplomacy in
the market for Syrian blood, within the Wall Street of
terrorism, located in the caves of Idlib. I am pleased
to tell those investors that they have lost their bets and
investments, which, to themselves and to those they use
as tools, will only bring them defeat and debacle on our
beloved national soil in Idlib.

The truth that is absent in the statements of those
countries that have adopted hostile positions against
Syria in the Council and in the briefings of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is that
alleviating the situation in Syria and addressing the
challenges that the Syrians are facing to secure their
basic living needs require the following.

First, there is a need for full respect for the
sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic and its
unity and territorial integrity. This is the substantive
principle underscored by the Security Council in the
more than 20 resolutions that have been adopted over
the past eight years on the situation in my country at the
humanitarian and political levels.

Secondly, there must be support for the efforts of
the Syrian Government and its allies in combating the
remnants of armed terrorist groups and foreign terrorist
fighters to implement the 12 resolutions of the Council
on counter-terrorism.

Thirdly, there is a need to put an end to the illegal
presence of foreign troops on Syrian Arab Republic
territories and to end the war crimes and crimes against
humanity perpetrated by the illegal global coalition.

Fourthly, there must be cooperation with the Syrian
Government as a key partner at the humanitarian
development level, free of any political preconditions,
rejected diktats or extortion attempts aimed at
undermining reconstruction efforts and the return
of refugees.

Fifthly, an immediate end must be put to the
unilateral coercive measures that have significantly
affected the lives of Syrians and impeded their ability
to meet their basic daily needs.

The Syrian Government is sparing no effort to lend
support to and secure the basic needs of all its citizens,
wherever they may be on the Syrian territories. The
Government is also supporting and facilitating the
efforts of the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners, in accordance with the guidelines set out in
General Assembly resolution 46/182.

I would recall that the Syrian Government accepted
the ceasefire in the de-escalation zone in Idlib effective
from 31 August while reserving the right to reply to
any violation by terrorists. My Government also
coordinated with the friendly Russian side the opening
of a second humanitarian corridor in Abu Al-Duhur,
in Idlib, in addition to the first humanitarian crossing
that had previously been opened in the city of Souran
to enable civilians to leave the areas where armed
terrorist groups are present - groups that use them as
human shields. This would enable those civilians to go
to areas that have been liberated from terrorists by the
Arab Syrian army and its allies. But terrorist groups,
for the seventh day in a row, are targeting and shooting
civilians to prevent them from leaving through those
two crossings.

Coordinated Syrian-Russian efforts culminated
in the removal from Rukban camp of more than
29,000 civilians who had been held there and in
securing temporary shelters to receive them and then
move them to areas liberated from the terrorists. The
Syrian Government recently facilitated a visit by a
United Nations assessment mission and the Syrian
Red Crescent, as well as an aid convoy to the camp
in the occupied area of Al-Tanf, which is controlled
by United States troops and the Maghawir al-Thawra
terrorist group.

The United Nations, following that visit, announced
that only 13,000 people were in the camp and that 37 per
cent of them wished to leave and return to the areas
controlled by the Government. But the terrorist groups
supported by occupying United States troops did not
allow them to do so and forcibly seized a significant
part of the humanitarian assistance and transferred it
to one of their posts in the Al-Tanf area. The Syrian
Government continues to cooperate with humanitarian
partners to address the situation in Al-Hol camp. The
Government granted the International Committee of
the Red Cross authorization to bring a mobile field
hospital into the camp along with 100 technicians and
medical personnel, as well as to render assistance to
those in need in the camp and surrounding areas. Here
we would underscore the responsibility of the countries
concerned to withdraw their terrorists and their families
from the camp without delay.

These points are but a few examples that demonstrate
the significant efforts, about which there is no doubt,
made by the Syrian State at the humanitarian level. This
also testifies to the results of international cooperation
when there are good intentions and willingness. I
reiterate my thanks to the Russian Federation for its
efforts to this end.

I would recall that had it not been for the support
provided by the Syrian Government for the work
of the United Nations and other partners in terms of
humanitarian action, the United Nations would not
have been able to perform the achievements noted in
its reports.

In the past few weeks, humanitarian penholders
have drawn up a draft resolution on my country. The
draft has nothing to do with its declared objectives.
My country categorically rejects it for many reasons,
foremost of which are the following.

First, there was no serious consultation and
coordination with the key party concerned: the
delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic.

Secondly, the draft resolution ignores the root
causes of the exacerbated humanitarian crisis, namely,
the globally supported terrorism, the illegal presence
of foreign troops on my country's territories and their
policy of imposing a new fait accompli that contravenes
the stipulations of the Council's resolutions regarding a
full commitment to the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic.

Thirdly, the draft resolution ignores the need
to exclude terrorist groups from the cessation of
hostilities, flouting the Sochi and Astana agreements.
It also elides the responsibility of Member States to
repatriate the foreign terrorists and their families and
to hold them accountable, rather than the practice of
some to show indifference and of others to shirk their
responsibilities. They revoke the citizenship of those
terrorists in order to keep them in Syria, at the expense
of the Syrian people.

Fourthly, the countries that submitted the draft
resolution were hasty, not out of benevolence but in their
belligerence against the Syrian State, reflecting the
efforts of certain States to undermine the security and
stability ofthe region to serve the interests of the Israeli
occupation. They joined the illegal global coalition and
have stained their history of relations with the Syrian
people. They have perpetrated economic terrorism
against the Syrians by imposing and implementing
unilateral coercive measures.

I advise those who harbour illusions and believe
that they can turn Al-Tanf into an occupied pocket
like Guantanamo, or Idlib into another Tora Bora,
to abandon those illusions. My delegation therefore
invites the members of the Council to vote against
the draft resolution that has been submitted by the
humanitarian penholders.

