Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank the delegation
of Malaysia for convening today's open debate and
welcome you, Mr. Ahmad Zahid Hamidi, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Home Affairs ofMalaysia, for
presiding over this important meeting. We also thank
the briefers for their important insights on this critical
issue, and the Secretary-General for his remarks and
contribution to the discussion on the threat posed by
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) falling into the
hands of non-State actors, armed groups and terrorists;
on the measures aimed at tackling these threats and
the responsibilities of States to reinforce operational
control mechanisms of weapons and equipment
related to WMDs; in adopting appropriate legislative
frameworks for preventing the proliferation of WMDs
to non-State actors, armed groups and terrorists; on
States' response to international cooperation and the
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004) with respect to
reporting on national and regional measures taken
for the resolution's implementation; and on the
review under way of resolution 1540 (2004) towards
strengthening international commitments in preventing
and confronting such threats. In that regard, we
commend Spain as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) for its stewardship
of the comprehensive review process of the resolution.

The Government of Angola is deeply concerned
about ongoing challenges and conflicts on the
African continent and elsewhere. We avail ourselves
of this opportunity for an incursion into a subject
correlated to the matter under discussion since, more
than this somewhat virtual exercise, the real issue in
contemporary conflicts is that weapons are easily
obtainable, cheaply purchased through criminal
networks and largely supplied by States to non-State
actors, armed groups and terrorists in a dangerous
game of influence and power, spreading destruction,
anarchy and chaos.

Small arms and light weapons are the real weapons
of mass destruction in the conflicts in Africa, in the
Middle East and elsewhere. Furthermore, they are at the
root of developments conducive to the use of weapons
of mass destruction by non-State actors. Given the
massive destructive character of these weapons, we are
of the view that the regime impeding the traffic and
supply of small arms and light weapons to non-State
actors should be strengthened, and identical restrictive
measures should be applied, pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). We furthermore think that the definition
of non-State actors in resolution 1540 (2004) should be
broadened and applied to a larger scope of non-State
actors than those defined in the resolution.

Angola is a State party to major international
instruments relating to weapons of mass destruction,
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction. We are devising and
implementing the relevant legislation and institutions
that would allow for more effective implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), domestically and regionally, in
order to enhance cooperation and collective efforts to
ensure that all chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear materials, equipment and technologies on the
African continent are used exclusively within the tenets
of the law and for peaceful purposes.

As a means of fulfilling its commitment to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and to the
non-proliferation regime, and in response to increasingly
frequent reports of attempts by terrorist groups to
produce or obtain biological agents and pathogens, as
well as the use ofchemical agents in certain conflicts, the
Angolan Government has redoubled its efforts to create
an effective, institutionalized national mechanism to
address such threats. Currently, Angola is working on
drafting legislation to establish a national authority for
weapons ofmass destruction - a body to be coordinated
by the Ministry of National Defence and whose main
purpose will be to assist in formulating national action
plans and in preparing national implementation reports
on the country's capacity relating to the control of
WMDs. Greater interaction with neighbouring States
is key for facing a most pressing challenge to the
countries of Africa, specifically on questions related to
cross-border movements, controlling illicit trafficking
and the need to reinforce national and regional security
and increase technical assistance from the 1540 (2004)
Committee and other subsidiary organs of the Security
Council dealing with counter-terrorism.

Finally, we are of the view that the effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) has to be
coupled with significant progress in the prevention
of conflicts and the resolution of protracted ones,
not outright interference and inflaming of conflicts
through the supply of weapons to non-State actors
and oppressive unreliable regimes. The root causes of
terrorism have to be addressed as well as the serious
socioeconomic and political difficulties faced by the
countries of the region. If the growth of terrorism and
its recruitment appeal are to be curtailed, the issues of
unemployment among young people and corruption
must be duly addressed, while development and good
governance must be top priorities in countries affected
by conflict and terrorism.

