Mr. Ryan (Ireland): We welcome to the Security
Council the Minister for External Affairs of Angola,
Mr. Joao de Miranda. Today's meeting, coming soon
after the recent visit to the Council of your colleague
the Minister of Interior, Mr. Dias dos Santos, is
evidence that the Council continues to treat the
situation in Angola with great seriousness. Indeed, it
could reasonably be suggested that on a number of
fronts the Council and the United Nations are as
closely engaged today on Angola as at any point in
recent years. In addition to the work of Under-
Secretary-General Gambari, the sanctions Committee
and the Monitoring Mechanism, under the direction of
Ambassador Juan Larrain, have been working
systematically to improve the situation in Angola. The
recent visit of the inter-agency team to Angola and,
before that, the visit of the Executive Director of the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF),
demonstrate further an engaged United Nations -
committed to supporting the Angolan people's desire to
achieve peace, stability and national well-being.

The past months have seen atrocious attacks by
UNITA on Angolan civilians. These attacks, which
have claimed the lives of hundreds of people, confirm
that UNITA continues to embrace violence as a means
to secure the power denied it democratically by the
Angolan people in 1992.

Ireland continues to believe that the Acordos de
Paz and the Lusaka Protocol must be the basis for
peace and progress in Angola. The Protocol charts a
political path for all shades of Angolan political
opinion. Under the Protocol, UNITA has the
opportunity to abandon violence and to join other
parties in a democratic national dialogue. We believe
that if UNITA takes these steps, it could rightly expect
a role in this dialogue. We would be less than frank if
we did not acknowledge that the recent flurry of
statements and letters from UNITA has left us none the
Wiser about its readiness to enter into meaningful
dialogue. We believe, however, that, despite
understandable temptation to the contrary, the Angolan
Government should remain open to the possibility that
UNITA could yet change course. That said, the
obligation and responsibility to take a new course lie
entirely in UNITA's hands.

We believe also that the courageous efforts of
civil society and the churches should be recognized and
embraced as a central part of a forward-moving
process. The people engaged in these organizations are
taking hard risks for peace. They should be supported
strongly and listened to by all for the expertise and the
wise perspectives they bring consistently to our
common concerns. I am very pleased to hear of
President Dos Santos's meeting today with an
important non-governmental organization
representative in Luanda. This is a most welcome
development. We look forward to further such
interaction, building on this significant meeting.

We are firmly of the view that the implementation
of the Security Council's sanctions against UNITA is
making an important contribution to the international
effort to end its campaign of violence. Few would now
argue - or try to argue - that the sanctions and the
work of the Monitoring Mechanism have not severely
diminished UNITA's capacity to wage conventional
war against the Angolan authorities and the Angolan
people. Many of those States, organizations and
individuals which in the past supported UNITA in
different ways have over the last three years either
reversed course or decided against risking further
illegal involvement in the Angolan conflict. These
changes have not come about by accident, and the
United Nations should not waver in maintaining its
successful sanctions regime. At this point, we wish to
record the important role that improved relations
between Angola and neighbouring States have played
in the last few years. We would urge that the political,
diplomatic and military cooperation that has brought
about these improvements should be maintained and
enhanced.

While UNITA's capacity to sustain conventional
warfare has greatly diminished, this has not been
reflected in any significant improvement in the
humanitarian situation. We were most disappointed
that, because of the poor security situation, the
Secretary-General recently reported that the expected
progress in relation to access to the enormous at-risk
population has failed to materialize and that the
resettlement plan for 2001 has fallen so far short of
expectations.

So many of Angola's social and economic
indicators remain at the wrong end of the spectrum -
all the more so for a country with such a plentiful
supply of valuable natural resources. The child and
mother mortality rates for Angola, which UNICEF's
annual report ranks as the second highest in the world,
are a bleak commentary on the country's present
situation and future prospects. The magnitude of
internal displacement - estimated at up to 25 per cent
of the population - is horrific. The fact that there are
almost as many landmines as people in Angola further
underscores the huge agenda before us all.

We have spoken before of the crisis level of the
population's humanitarian needs. There is an enormous
health, education and infrastructure deficit. There is an
urgent need for the international support in these areas
to be supplemented systematically by a greater
diversion of steadily increasing State revenues from
natural resources into programmes to rebuild Angola
for the people of Angola, who are the natural owners of
those God-given resources.

We were greatly encouraged to hear the Minister
of the Interior of Angola, Mr. Dias dos Santos, tell the
Council on 20 September that he recognized the need
for the Angolan authorities to do more for their people
in this regard. We would make the case that this should
be done not only for the welfare of the people - the
clear and absolute first priority a but also to confirm
in all eyes the legitimacy of Angola's institutions and
State structures. We look forward to hearing more on
this subject over time, in the full realization that the
Angolan Government's task is a very difficult one. We
are very encouraged by Minister Miranda's comments
today confirming this commitment.

UNITA's forced reduction to hit-and-run
guerrilla-level violence and terror against civilians is
aimed at achieving continued national instability. At
the same time, the decreasing support for UNITA
would, I believe, be further eroded if the people as a
whole saw clearly that sustained national programmes
were under way to meet their everyday rightful needs.

The steady and expanded United Nations
involvement on the ground in Angola - through the
presence of the United Nations Office in Angola
(UNOA) and the ongoing work of Under-Secretary-
General Gambari - is very important. We would
prefer to see UNOA provided with more resources,
including its work in the area of human rights. We see
Under-Secretary-General Gambari's intention to return
to Angola in the coming period, following the recent
visit there of an inter-agency team, as a further
strengthening of the relationship between Angola and
the United Nations. We also see it as a recognition by
both sides that much work remains to be done by us all,
together.

