Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
should like to thank Special Representative Ould
Abdallah for his comments and for his efforts, and
those of the staff of the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia, on behalf of the Somali people. I should
also like to welcome to the Council today the
Permanent Representative of Somalia, Ambassador
Duale.

The scourge of piracy off the coast of Somalia
affects us all through increased risk to our citizens, the
disruption of global commercial shipping routes and
09-61200
damage to property and goods. This problem shows no
sign of abating. As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/590) notes, there were 160 instances of piracy
in the East Africa area from I January to 30 September
of this year, up from 136 during the same period last
year. Many of these attacks are now shifting from the
Gulf of Aden to the western Indian Ocean in response
to successful naval operations in the Gulf.

The deep concern of the international community
over this issue has resulted in extraordinary counter-
piracy cooperation off the coast of Somalia. Dozens of
States and international organizations are working
together to suppress piracy and protect vulnerable ships
transiting Somali waters or seeking to deliver badly
needed humanitarian aid to Somalia's shores. In
particular, the United States commends the efforts of
the European Union's Operation Atalanta, of NATO's
Operation Allied Protector and Operation Ocean
Shield, and of the Combined Maritime Force's Task
Force 151. We also commend the role played by
individual States in these important efforts. The Shared
Awareness and Deconfliction initiative has allowed for
excellent operational and tactical coordination, and we
thank all partners for their participation.

The Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia has also made significant contributions to the
global effort to suppress piracy, and we greatly
appreciate the role that the United Nations has played
here. In cooperation with the Contact Group, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crimes and the
United Nations Office of the Legal Adviser have
worked to enhance the judicial capacity of States in the
region. We are also grateful to the International
Maritime Organization (IMO) for its work to
coordinate and implement the Djibouti Code of
Conduct. In this regard, we should like to acknowledge
Japan's generous donation to the IMO's international
trust fund.

The United States believes that the international
community must continue and intensify efforts to
combat piracy. We should like to raise five issues today
that we think are important in this regard.

First, renewing the authority of Security Council
resolutions 1846 (2008) and l851(2008) is essential.
These authorities provide a basis for ongoing counter-
piracy military operations and allow Member States to
prevent pirates from using Somalia's territorial waters,
land and air as safe havens to evade forces in the area.
5
Secondly, we must continue to share information
and best practices. On 10 September, the United States,
along with several other flag States, signed the New
York Declaration, a political commitment to ensure
that vessels operating under the signatory flags
implement internationally recognized best management
practices for self-protection. These best practices
include guidance from the International Maritime
Organization, the maritime industry and flag States. We
encourage other States to sign the New York
Declaration and require vessels to implement self-
protection measures.

Thirdly, we are concerned that ransom payments
have contributed to the recent increases in piracy, and
encourage all States to adopt a firm no-concessions
policy when dealing with hostage-takers, including
pirates.

Fourthly, the United States believes that affected
States should give favourable consideration to
prosecuting suspected pirates. We encourage States to
enact domestic legislation to enable the prosecution of
piracy as a crime in their national courts. We also urge
support for regional States to enhance their capacities
to prosecute and incarcerate pirates, and we encourage
States to utilize the Contact Group's multi-donor trust
fund. And we should especially like to commend
States, in particular Kenya, that have taken the lead in
prosecution.

Finally, the United States believes that a focus on
Somalia's economic development, political stability
and humanitarian needs is critical. Piracy is closely
linked to instability, weak governance and rule of law,
and a lack of opportunity on land. We strongly support
efforts to assist the Transitional Federal Government in
developing its institutions, including its security sector,
and to boost Somalia's economy and create viable
livelihoods. We also applaud the forces of the African
Union Mission in Somalia that are helping to stabilize
Somalia and the role of the United Nations in
supporting the Somali people.

We are encouraged that Somalia is taking further
initiatives to address piracy, including plans to
reactivate the coast guard to help patrol Somalia's
waters. The United States remains committed to
working with the Transitional Federal Government and
the international community to combat piracy. We laud
the excellent cooperation to date and look forward to
seeing it continue.
