Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would not
normally take of the floor ahead of consultations,
but as both Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and
the Ambassador of France have expressed so clearly,
these simply are not normal times for the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Indeed, for
many people in the Kasai region, these are the darkest
moments of their lives. The reports emanating from
that region should send a shiver down each and every
spine in the Chamber. They are reports that bear all
the hallmarks of the very worst of humankind: mass
killings, beheadings, mass graves, millions displaced.

Sadly, as highlighted by the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide,
the Government's own security forces are responsible
for much of this death and destruction in certain areas
of the Kasai provinces. Nearly 100 children have
been maimed and killed by their own Government's
forces, and children have been sexually abused by
Government forces. This represents a wider, worrying
trend. The Secretary-General reports that 60 per cent
of 1,444 human rights violations and abuses recorded
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo over the past
three months have been committed by the forces of the
Government - the same Government that bears the
primary responsibility to protect its citizens. When
faced with hell, people should be able to look to their
Government in hope. For the people of the Kasai, they
do so only in fear.

This does not mean that the militia operating in
these areas are innocent - not by any stretch of the
imagination. As we heard from Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix, they too are responsible for rape,
killing and high levels of child recruitment.

It is clear that the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo compels us all to take a stand.
That is why we welcome the international investigation
mandated by the Human Rights Council last month.
It must act as soon as possible and be conducted
to international standards of independence and
transparency. We urge the Government to cooperate
fully with the investigation. Those responsible for these
horrific crimes must be held to account.

Sadly, the situation in the Kasai is by no means
an isolated example in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. There is also renewed violence in the
east of the country, much of which has a worrying
ethnic dimension. Such violence in different areas of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo only further
reinforces our belief that political uncertainty and
instability in Kinshasa are fuelling violent uncertainty
and violent instability across the country, and this is
now presenting a serious threat to regional stability.

We all know what needs to happen, and the
Ambassador of France set that out very clearly. The
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
knows what it needs to do - stop the violence, ensure
accountability for the violations and abuses and
implement the 31 December agreement in full. As set
out in the agreement, elections should be held in six
months. We simply must see progress that gives the
Congolese people and the world the confidence that this
will be realized. That is the issue that is fundamentally
increasing frustration and tensions in the country.

To deliver on this, the Independent National
Electoral Commission must release an electoral
timetable setting a date for elections, in line with the
31 December agreement, and agree a budget so that
vital international funds can be released. Let me take
this opportunity to welcome the progress in electoral
registration and the positive role played by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in support of that.
But this progress must continue; insecurity cannot be
used as an excuse for further delay.

In truth, none of this new. We have known what needs
to happen for some time. It is clear that our message is
simply not getting through to the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The killings have
continued; the horror has continued. What has failed to
continue is genuine implementation ofthe 31 December
agreement, which laid the path towards elections. It is
therefore incumbent upon all of us in the Council to do
more. With the eyes of the world looking on us today in
an open meeting, I ask all Council members to support
a clear, unequivocal message: stop the violence, hold
those responsible for violations and abuses to account
and implement the 31 December agreement in full and
without delay.

