Mr. Pedersen: One year ago, many believed that
the Syrian conflict was winding down. Yet the past 12
months have seen a steady stream of violence punctuated
by escalations that continue to this day across many
areas of Syria, such as the north-west, the north-east
and south. Proscribed terrorist groups have also not
been defeated and continue to pose a major security
threat. All of that serves as a constant, grim reminder
that the need for a comprehensive political process,
as mandated by the Security Council in resolution
2254 (2015), is more pressing than ever. Today, let me
start by updating the Council on one aspect of that
process - the Constitutional Committee.

On 25 November, the small body of the Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned Constitutional Committee convened
for its second session. Before arriving in Geneva. I
had asked each co-Chair to put forward proposals
for an agenda for the second session, in line with the
terms of reference and core rules of procedures. On
21 November, the co-Chair designated by the opposition
Syrian Negotiations Commission sent me a proposed
work plan with 10 constitutional headings, as well as an
agenda focusing on the preamble to the Constitution and
basic principles of the Constitution. On 25 November,
the co-Chair designated by the Syrian Government
proposed an agenda regarding national pillars, that is
to say, national pillars of concern of the Syrian people.
At the same time, the co-Chair designated by the
Government insisted that constitutional issues could not
be discussed until those national pillars were discussed.
For his part, the Syrian Negotiations Commission
co-Chair stated that national pillars could be discussed,
provided that that would occur within the context of the
agreed terms of reference and core rules of procedures
or within an agenda of basic constitutional principles.

From 25 through 29 November, I sought, in line
with my mandate and consistent with the Syrian
leadership and ownership of the process, to facilitate
consensus between the co-Chairs and bring their
viewpoints closer together. We had serious discussions
in that regard. Different formulas were put forward
that might have enabled both sides to table and discuss
the issues of interest to them within the scope of the
Constitutional Committee's mandate. By the end of
the week, however, it was clear that consensus would
not be reached and that the meeting of the small body
was not possible. During that recess, I remain focused
on facilitating agreement on an agenda for the next
session of the small body. To that end, I hope that I
will soon be able to consult directly with the Syrian
Government in Damascus, as well as with the Syrian
Negotiations Commission.

My team also remains in contact with the middle
third civil society delegation and I stand ready to
support them along the lines I outlined in my most recent
briefing to the Council (see S/PV.8674). I have also met
with international stakeholders with regard to that and
all other aspects of the process. This past month, I met
with the Foreign Ministers of Russia, Turkey, Italy,
Jordan and Algeria, as well as senior officials from
the United States, France, Iran and Germany, and they
all expressed support for my mediation efforts. I hope
agreement can be reached promptly on an agenda that
falls in line with the terms of reference and core rules of
procedure of the Constitutional Committee. As things
stand, and absent an agreed agenda, I see no reason to
convene another session of the small body.

When I last briefed the Council, we had just
concluded a successful opening session of the
Constitutional Committee. That second session was
obviously very different in both substance and tone, but
disagreement on the agenda is typical for any political
process. I do, however, believe that there are several
lessons that we can draw from the experience of the
second round. Let me highlight three experiences.

First, the Constitutional Committee is and will
remain fragile. Progress depends on the Syrian
Government and the Syrian Negotiations Commission,
the two sides whose agreement made the creation of
the Constitutional Committee possible, allowing their
members to work professionally on the constitutional
issues and without dissociating themselves from the
work of those nominated. The Constitutional Committee
needs to be nurtured and genuinely supported if it is to
succeed. That is the responsibility ofthe Syrian parties.
International stakeholders also have a supporting role
to play. I know I can count on the support of the Council
in that regard.

Secondly, any proposed agenda must comply with
the terms of reference and core rules of procedure
agreed between the Government and opposition. That
means that all issues are open for discussion within the
Committee, without preconditions and without making
considerations on one issue when its outcome depends
on the resolution of another issue. It also means that
issues should be framed and fall under a constitutional
heading. The Constitutional Committee is mandated
by agreement to prepare and draft the constitutional
reform as a contribution to the political settlement. If
the Constitutional Committee is to deliver on that, it
must focus on its constitutional mandate.

Thirdly, the second round only underscores the
need for a broader and comprehensive political process.
The Government and the opposition reaffirmed that
when they agreed in the terms of reference and core
rules of procedures on the need for a broad political
process moving forward to build trust and confidence
and implement resolution 2254 (2015). Indeed, I
believe that, while the Constitutional Committee
cannot solve the crisis, it can help foster the trust and
confidence among the parties that can open the door to
a broad process. Such a broad process can equally feed
positively into the work on constitutional issues.

I believe that a meaningful, wider political process
will be one that delivers tangible actions, such as
progress on the release of detainees and abductees, and
clarification on the fate of missing persons. It remains
a matter of great frustration for me that there has not
been meaningful movement on that issue. My Deputy
and I will continue directly engaging with the Syrian
parties, as well as with all the relevant actors. We also
remain committed to actively contributing to the efforts
of the working group that was set up to deal with that
issue. In this context, I met with senior officials from
Russia, Turkey and Iran in Nur-Sultan last week and,
along with discussions on other issues, I stressed the
need to move beyond the one-for-one exchanges and to
see the release of children, women and the sick on a
meaningful scale.

De-escalating violence and a nationwide ceasefire
should underpin a wider political process. North-
western Syria has seen a deeply troubling escalation
of violence in recent days. Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller briefed the Council in detail yesterday (See S/PV.8694) on the terrible suffering of civilians there.
The devastating humanitarian cost of a full-scale
military offensive for the 3 million people living in
north-western Syria is a price that they simply cannot
afford to pay. All sides must de-escalate urgently.

Civilians also continue to suffer in north-eastern
Syria, where the security situation remains volatile,
even if it is calmer relative to the days and weeks after
Turkey first launched its intervention. It is crucial
that the various ceasefire understandings negotiated
among actors there be respected and lead to a sustained
de-escalation in violence. The security situation in
southern Syria also remains turbulent and should
be addressed.

Countering Security Council-listed terrorist groups
is also imperative through an approach that is
cooperative, ensures the protection of civilians and
respects international humanitarian law and human
rights law. As always, while the security situation is
the most devastating threat, Syrians are also facing
increasing economic hardship, including as a result
of commodity shortages and entrenched poverty. A
broader process must ultimately address that too. A
broader process should respect and ultimately restore
Syria's sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and
independence, and such a process should achieve long-
lasting, real and genuine reconciliation.

A broader process must also be inclusive. We
continue to consult with the Syrian Women's Advisory
Board on the concerns and priorities of diverse Syrian
women and their perspectives on a sustainable and
inclusive political solution. Syrian civil society should
be fully included in any broader process. Ultimately,
the process should help develop a safe, calm and
neutral environment that sees the safe, voluntary and
dignified return of refugees to their places of origin
or places of their choosing; an environment in which
a new constitution, adopted by popular approval, can
be genuinely reflected in institutions and in practice;
and an environment in which inclusive, free and fair
elections can take place, which include the diaspora
and which are administered under the supervision of
the United Nations, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).

Many of these issues touch upon constitution-making,
and some could be discussed under a constitutional
rubric, but a constitution-making process itself is not
likely to resolve them in a way that meets the urgent
and legitimate concerns of the Syrian people. I remain
convinced that the steps-for-steps model could help
unlock practical progress - steps that build trust
and confidence among Syrians and between Syrians
and the international community, undertaken in a
reciprocal fashion. I continue to press on this in all my
engagements with the Syrian parties and international
stakeholders. I continue to offer my good offices in that
regard, and I continue to support the convening of a
new international format to bring together the will of
the key players.

This is my last briefing of my first year as Special
Envoy. When I first briefed the Council (see S/PV.8475),
I said that my priorities were a sustained dialogue
with the Syrian Government and the opposition, the
launch of the Constitutional Committee as a door
opener, a wider dialogue with civil society, action on
detainees, abductees and the missing, and international
discussions in support of a political solution. Those
remain my priorities, but it is now time to update them.

The Committee has been launched but needs to
work expeditiously and continuously to produce results
and continue progress. I appreciate my open and direct
dialogue with both Syrian parties, but if we are to take
it to the next level, we will need to address the full array
of issues. We must enable de-escalation leading towards
a nationwide ceasefire, as well as a cooperative, lawful
approach to countering proscribed terrorist groups. As
part of the dialogue, we must generate concrete action
on detainees, abductees and missing persons.

I think that all of that could take shape for the
benefit ofall Syrians through a steps-for-steps approach,
and I think that a key part of this is for international
discussions to deepen and for a new international
format to take shape to underpin the process. We know
that none of this will be easy, and I will continue to
count on the full engagement of the Syrian parties and
the full support of the Council.
