Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): At the outset I would
like to pay tribute to the President of the sister country
Timor-Leste, Xanana Gusmao, and praise his heartfelt
commitment to the full empowerment and development
of the Timorese people. Likewise, I welcome Foreign
Minister Ramos-Horta to the Security Council.

This is the first time I take the floor since the
completion of Brazil's term as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council last December. It
pleases me to do so, Mr. President, when the Council is
addressing the important issue of Timor-Leste under
your highly skilful presidency.

I wish to express our thanks to Ambassador
Jones-Parry and to the members of the delegation of
the United Kingdom for their competent work in the
presidency last month. Finally, I thank Special
Representative Hasegawa for the presentation of the
Secretary-General's report and for the tireless and
effective work he has carried out in Timor-Leste as
head of the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL).

Brazil is one of the partners of Timor-Leste. In
close collaboration with the United Nations
Development Programme, my country is supporting the
justice sector, and we are also engaged in efforts to
increase bilateral cooperation in the areas of education,
health and professional training. Now we are also
exploring possibilities of further cooperation with the
National Parliament of Timor-Leste.

As stated by Mr. Hasegawa, other bilateral and
international partners are likewise coming forward
with their contribution, mainly with a View to assisting
in the consolidation of Timorese institutions. Among
the members of the Community of Portuguese-
Speaking Countries, in addition to Brazil, I recall the
support given by Cape Verde and Portugal.

However, despite the outstanding efforts made by
the Timorese people and their Government and the fact
that progress has been achieved in establishing
democratic governance in the country, international
cooperation remains essential to sustain core
administrative structures, which are critical to the
viability and political stability of Timor-Leste.

The main challenge goes beyond maintaining
current levels of performance. That performance has
already helped to ensure the successful conclusion of
local elections, the strengthening of the legal
framework through the adoption of key legislation and
the improvement in the observance of human rights by
the police. The challenge consists of proceeding with
the work of building national and local institutions,
which are not now self-sufficient and which will have
an uncertain future if partnerships to train their
personnel and enhance their means and capacities are
not made available. Timor-Leste relies on international
assistance to consolidate its newly independent State,
whose first Government was sworn in only 3 years ago.

The Security Council will soon face an important
decision regarding the overall future of Timor-Leste.
My delegation understands that the smooth transition
to a sustainable development framework, as stressed in
resolution 1559 (2005), is still to be fully implemented,
with the assistance of bilateral and multilateral donors,
regional mechanisms, non-governmental organizations,
the private sector and other interested actors. Brazil
expects that the Council will duly take that into
consideration during its deliberations on the issue of
the needs of the Government of Timor-Leste, in order
to consolidate the success story of United Nations
involvement in that country since 1999.

It is our view that the international community
will have to remain engaged in Timor-Leste beyond
May 2006, when UNOTIL's mandate expires, and for
as long as necessary to secure a stable and self-
sufficient institutional governmental structure for that
country. In that regard, my delegation firmly supports
the statement made by President Xanana Gusmao in the
Council, and requests Council members to consider the
possibility of adopting a strategy to phase out the
presence of the special political mission in Timor-Leste
while replacing its advisers and personnel with reliable
assistance to be provided by other equally committed
partners as needed.

In conclusion, I would also like to welcome the
improvement in Timor-Leste's relations with
neighbouring countries, particularly with Indonesia and
Australia. Sensitive issues such as those pertaining to
border disputes and the exploration of shared natural
resources are being successfully dealt with, thereby
contributing significantly to the focusing of all efforts
on the agenda of peace and development for Timor-
Leste.

