Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. I
welcome Indonesian Foreign Minister Marsudi and
thank her for joining us in the Security Council for
today's briefing. We offer our deepest condolences
to Chad on the loss of 10 peacekeepers in Mali over
the weekend.

Turning to today's subject, as we have often said in
the Chamber, the Security Council spends far too much
time focused on Israeli-Palestinian issues, while not
paying enough attention to the many other threats to
international peace and security that exist in the Middle
East. The approach of this monthly meeting not only
has failed to advance Israeli-Palestinian peace but has
distracted us and the world from looking at the region
as a whole. We fail to focus on steps that would address
the instability affecting the Syrians, Lebanese, Iraqis,
Yemenis, Libyans and Iranians, among others.

In order to address the region's challenges, with our
colleagues from Poland, the United States will jointly
host a ministerial meeting to promote peace and security
in the Middle East in Warsaw on 13 and 14 February.
The ministerial meeting will provide an opportunity
to share our experiences, insights and assessments
as we work together to support a more stable and
peaceful Middle East. The meeting will serve as a
global brainstorming session, where we can develop the
outline of a stronger security architecture in the region
and establish clear benchmarks for measuring progress.
Agenda items include a discussion on the humanitarian
crises in Syria and Yemen, as well as sessions on missile
development, extremism and cybersecurity.

It is also important to state clearly what the
ministerial meeting is not. It is not a forum to relitigate
the merits of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA). While we have made our concerns about the
JCPOA clear, we respect the decision by other States to
support it. It is also not a venue to demonize or attack
Iran. Indeed, the United States Secretary of State has
outlined a clear strategy to reach a new comprehensive
deal with Iran, built on the shared global understanding
that the country must cease its destabilizing activities.
Recent months have made clear the need for further
international action on Iran's missile programme.
Only last week, Secretary Pompeo called attention to
Iran's firing of a space launch vehicle, which yet again
demonstrates Iran's defiance of the Security Council and
resolution 2231 (2015). Similarly, we see Iran's proxies
taking dangerous steps that threaten international peace
and security. Israel has exposed extensive tunnelling by
Hizbullah under the Blue Line. As the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) made clear, such
construction violates resolution 1701 (2006). We
commend UNIFIL's work to keep the Blue Line under
control. However, it is unacceptable that the Lebanese
Government has not yet given UNIFIL access to the
tunnel entrances on its side of the Blue Line.

Given the events over the weekend, let me state
clearly that the United States condemns the launching
of a rocket from Syria towards Israel. That was an
unacceptably provocative act by the Iranian and Syrian
regimes. We again call on Iran to withdraw all forces
from Syria and to reaffirm Israel's right to self-defence.

The upcoming ministerial meeting in Warsaw
will acknowledge such activities, among others, as
drivers of instability in the Middle East. However, the
scope of the discussion will be much broader than any
one country or set of issues. As a testament to that,
countries from around the world have been invited to
participate. The meeting will provide an opportunity
for all countries that attend to engage in a dynamic
discussion and collaborative thinking with the goal of
contributing to a more peaceful, stable and prosperous
Middle East, which would also be a more productive
and appropriate approach for these monthly Council
meetings. We look forward to following up on the
outcomes of the ministerial meeting with the Security
Council in the coming months.

