Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
too welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Joachim Rucker, and thank him
for his presentation. We also welcome the
representative of Serbia, Ms. Raskovic-Ivic, and to
thank her as well.

We wish to commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
for their continued support and assistance in the
implementation of standards in Kosovo and for their
efforts to find a solution to the problems in that
country.

We welcome the progress made by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo
in their sustained effort to implement the 13 priority
points for standards implementation presented by the
Contact Group. We note from the report of the
Secretary-General that substantial progress has been
made in that regard. We also commend the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo for the
steps they are taking to strengthen democratic
institutions and promote the rule of law in Kosovo.

While we hail the progress in the implementation
of standards, we regret that the issue of the future
status of Kosovo remains in abeyance. Undoubtedly
that has taken more prominence and visibility in the
political life of Kosovo. Nevertheless, we commend
the Special Envoy, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, for all his
efforts in convening further rounds of direct talks
between Belgrade and Pristina. We are, however,
concerned that the positions of the two parties still
remain far apart. We are mindful of the caution given
by the Secretary-General in the report concerning the
impact of the failure to bridge the differences between
the two sides. We are troubled by the risk that further
delay could potentially raise instability in that country.

We therefore reiterate our call to the leaders of
both sides to negotiate in good faith. We appeal to the
Serbian side to encourage Kosovo Serbs to participate
in political institutions and to the Kosovo leaders to
reach out to the Serbs and other minorities. We also
urge them to refrain from any public pronouncements
and unilateral decisions that may be construed by the
other side as being hostile and provocative. Continued
violence that seeks to effect political change is
unhelpful and can only serve to undermine the peace
process.

Since we are about to conclude our term in the
Council, we shall not be members when the Special
Envoy is expected to present his recommendations next
March. However, we believe that it is in the interest of
all the people of Kosovo that they and their leaders use
the opportunity between now and March to promote
reconciliation and dialogue. We urge them to accept
and support the recommendations of the Special Envoy
when they are presented.

