Mr. Radomski (Poland): I thank you very much
for giving me the floor, Madam. I would like to thank
the presidency of Argentina for having convened
today's open debate. Poland believes that the process
of improving working methods is crucial for enhancing
the Council's ability to carry out its responsibilities.

We are confident that transparency in the Council's
activities serves not only the wider membership, but
also the Council itself. Public wrap-up sessions and
briefings for United Nations members are a useful way
of providing information outside the Council. However,
there is still much more to be done. Troop-contributing
countries should be involved in the Council's
peacekeeping deliberations to a greater extent. The
Council should work towards closer cooperation with
civil society. Arria Formula meetings and informal
dialogues are extremely useful in that respect.

Guided by the excellent concept paper (S/2014/725, annex) prepared by the Presidency, I would like to pay
special attention to the question of sanctions and the
Council's referrals to the International Criminal Court.
Sanctions are an important tool in the maintenance and
restoration of international peace and security. Security
Council sanctions regimes should grant fair and clear
review procedures that can improve the Council's
credibility and effectiveness. In that regard, the
creation of the Office of the Ombudsperson was a step
in the right direction. Let me thank Ms. Kimberly Prost
and reiterate our full support for her work. In our view,
the Council should seriously consider the possibility of
extending the mandate of the Ombudsperson to other
sanctions Committees.

There is a general consensus among Member
States that if the Security Council decides to refer a
situation to the International Criminal Court (ICC), it
must also urge the States concerned to cooperate fully.
Lack of follow-up by the Council with its own referrals
undermines the credibility of the ICC. It also hinders
our efforts to put an end to impunity for those who have
committed the most serious crimes falling under ICC
jurisdiction.

The establishment of a mechanism to implement
the Council's referrals to the ICC will be a positive step.
We believe that entrusting the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals with that task is the right
thing to do, given the fact that the Group already has
the necessary expertise in the matter. The international
community, particularly members of the Security
Council, must take action to enhance cooperation with
the Court.

Finally, let me also stress Poland's full support
for the French proposal to limit the use of veto in the
situations of mass atrocities. The initiative is much
appreciated especially as it is the first one coming
directly from the permanent Council member. We hope
that constant progress in the reform process will make
the Security Council a stronger and more credible body
that will be able to face emerging challenges.

