Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Having a long-standing
history of cooperation with the friendly country of
Somalia, Indonesia has always joined others in
assisting Somalia in meeting the major challenges that
have afflicted its stability and security for almost
17 years now. My delegation would therefore like to
reiterate that Indonesia fully supports the request of
Somalia - as reflected in the letter of the Transitional
Federal Government to the President of the Council -
for assistance from the international community in its
efforts to address acts of piracy and armed robbery
against ships off the coast of Somalia.

In attempting to formulate a positive response to
the Somali request in the form of the draft resolution
upon which the Council is about to take a decision,
Indonesia is guided by the proposition that any draft
should be formulated in consistency with two
fundamental principles.

First, the draft resolution shall be consistent with
international law, particularly the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) of 1982,
and shall not envisage any modification of the existing,
carefully balanced international law of the sea, which
is encapsulated in the constitution of the ocean, that is,
UNCLOS, which was brought into being after decades
of negotiation. It shall also not become a basis of
customary international law for the repression of piracy
and armed robbery at sea. Actions envisaged in the
draft resolution shall only apply to the territorial waters
of Somalia, based upon its prior consent.

Secondly, the draft resolution must address solely
the specific situation of piracy and armed robbery off
the coast of Somalia, as requested by the Somali
Government.

Like Somalia and most other Members of the
United Nations, Indonesia is a faithful party to
UNCLOS, of 1982. Consequently, we have legal
obligations to preserve the rights, obligations and
responsibilities of Member States derived from it, as
those were carefully negotiated in order to ensure, in a
balanced manner, the interest of coastal and user
States. A burden of responsibility rests upon us all to
maintain the Convention's integrity and sanctity. Thus,
it is our duty to voice strong reservations if there are
actions envisaged by the Council or any other forum
that could lead to modifying, rewriting or redefining
UNCLOS, of 1982.
08-36123
Ample safeguards, therefore, need to be
imbedded, ensured and maintained. We are pleased in
this regard that that is reflected in the formulation of
paragraph 9 of the draft resolution (5/2008/351), which
states, inter alia,

"That the authorization provided in this
resolution shall not affect the rights or
obligations or responsibilities of Member States
under international law, including any rights or
obligations under the Convention, and it
shall not be considered as establishing customary
international law."

The constitution of the ocean, which
provides guiding principles for all activities
pertaining to the use of the sea and ocean affairs,
including international cooperation for the
repression of piracy and armed robbery against
vessels, is thus not modified, rewritten or
redefined. It is in the interests of all that any
actions against illegal or criminal acts shall not
violate existing laws and norms.

We are mindful of the specific situation of
Somalia. The continued political instability that has
constantly faced that country has led to the inability of
its law enforcement to maintain stability and security.
That situation occurs not only on its mainland but also
extends to the waters off the coast of Somalia. Thus,
we understand that the unique situation of Somalia
requires an exceptional measure by the international
community to deal with the problem of piracy and
armed robbery against vessels. In that regard, the
request and consent of the Somali Government serves
as the legal basis for the Council to formulate
appropriate responses within the parameters of
international law, in particular UNCLOS, of 1982.

While we are mindful that piracy and armed
robbery at sea would affect the safety of international
navigation, we constantly are of the view that the
Council needs to exercise caution in trying to address
such acts in other parts of the globe. We are pleased in
this context that such caution is exercised in paragraph
14, which reads as follows:

"Requests the Secretary-General of the IMO
to brief the Council on the basis of cases brought
to his attention by the agreement of all affected
coastal States and duly taking into account the
existing bilateral and regional cooperative
08-36123
arrangements, on the situation with respect to
piracy and armed robbery".

This caution, undoubtedly, once again reflects the
unwavering commitment of the Council to uphold
international law in spirit and in letter - nothing more,
nothing less. Indonesia strongly believes that the
principle of respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, as enshrined in the Charter, has to be
espoused by the Council at all times. We consider that
in exercising its mandate for the maintenance of
international peace and security, it is possible for the
Council to act without having to challenge the integrity
of international law; that can certainly be done. Those
two objectives are mutually reinforcing, not mutually
exclusive. The stability and predictability of the
international system that we all treasure are ensured as
long as those two objectives continue to serve us in
guiding our work. Today, the Council will shortly
confirm that that is the case.

As it stands, we view that the current text has
accommodated those two fundamental principles, as
my delegation stated earlier. Those are: consistency
with UNCLOS; and the specific situation of piracy and
armed robbery off the coast of Somalia. After all, the
text is first and foremost about Somalia. It is about
how the Council, together with the international
community, can assist Somalia to fight that crime. This
text will ensure that Somalia will be the beneficiary of
our common efforts.

Before concluding my remarks, I wish to express
my delegation's gratitude for the understanding shown
by all members of the Council. The spirit of
cooperation and resourcefulness exercised by the
sponsors has led us to this consensus text that meets
the needs and legitimate interests of all members of the
Council. For those pertinent reasons, my delegation is
now ready to support it.

