The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Toaray
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/495, which contains the text of a
draft resolution concerning the measures imposed by
resolution 1171 (1998) and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1132
(1997), submitted by the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2010/496, which contains the text of a
draft resolution on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone, submitted by the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

Members of the Council further have before them
document S/2010/47l, which contains the fifth report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolutions before it.
2
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolutions to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2010/495, concerning the
measures imposed by resolution 1171 (1998) and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1132 (1997).

A vote was taken by a show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1940 (2010).

I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2010/496, on the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1941 (2010).

I give the floor to the representative of Sierra
Leone.


