The President: I now wish to make a statement
in my capacity as representative of the United
Kingdom.

I join others in thanking all the briefers today.

The United Kingdom believes that the protection
of civilians should remain at the forefront of the
Security Council's work. We know from experience
why that needs to be the case.

In the Sudan, civilian protection is central to
peacekeeping missions, particularly in Darfur, where
more than 10 per cent of the population is living in
camps. As the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator said, the continued poor security situation
in parts of Darfur causes great suffering to the civilian
population and impairs the ability of humanitarian
agencies to provide essential assistance.

In Burma, we remain deeply concerned about the
lack of progress towards national reconciliation and the
implications for civilians living in ethnic minority
areas and the border regions. In many of those areas,
civilian continue to be targeted by the military. We
remain very troubled by reports of indiscriminate
attacks on vulnerable people, including women and
children. Reports also document that many have had
their land confiscated and their homes destroyed and
have been forcibly relocated. The United Kingdom
urges the Burmese regime to undertake meaningful
dialogue with ethnic groups to maximize the
opportunities presented by the election for national
reconciliation.

Recent mass rapes in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo highlight the urgent need for enhanced
civilian protection in the east of the country. The
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians, as
in other host Governments, rests with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo authorities. However, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo plays an
essential role in supporting the authorities where they
lack the capacity to provide such protection.

Today, we are pleased that the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2010/25) recognizes the valuable
role of the informal expert working group on
protection of civilians and endorses the updated aide-
memoire.

The protection of civilians debates are biannual
and, unfortunately, I have to note again the lack of
progress on issues of humanitarian access. The United
Kingdom particularly deplores and condemns violent
attacks on humanitarian workers by parties to the
conflicts. We call on States and other parties to ensure
that all affected civilians have access to humanitarian
aid according to need and without discrimination. We
need to see progress on that point before the next
debate on this important issue. I now resume my
functions as President of the Council. I give the floor
to the representative of Italy.

