Mr. Christian (Ghana): Allow me to thank the
President of the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
Mr. Justice King, and the Prosecutor, Mr. Rapp, for
their presentations. I also thank the Deputy Secretary-
General for her statement.

It is gratifying to note that the Special Court -
which has been in operation since July 2002, with the
mandate of prosecuting persons who have the greatest
responsibility for serious violations of international
humanitarian law and Sierra Leonean law - has been
making steady progress towards its completion
strategy. Indeed, we recognize the invaluable role
being played by the Special Court in the prosecution of
the serious crimes committed in the civil wars since
1996. It is through justice and closure for the victims
of war crimes and other atrocities that the basis for
peace, reconciliation and stability can be laid in Sierra
Leone and provide the standard for the administration
of transitional justice in the West African subregion.

The Court's completion strategy is therefore of
great importance. Without the conclusion of the most
serious cases, the mandate of the Court will not be
fully discharged. There should be no impunity for the
crimes and atrocities committed during the civil war.
On this point, we view the commencement of
proceedings against Charles Taylor in The Hague as a
significant development in the fight against impunity,
and we hope that the other perpetrators of heinous
crimes in the civil war will also be brought to justice.

From the report of the President, it is reasonable
to assume that the completion strategy of the Court is
on track with two milestones achieved - the
completion of the hearings in the Civil Defense Forces
and Armed Forces Revolutionary Council cases. We
also wish to welcome the progress made by the Court
in amending the Rules of Procedure and Evidence,
since without efficiency in the proceedings, the
attainment of stated objectives and milestones may be
compromised.

The Court's outreach programme is to be
commended. In the fight against impunity and in the
quest for justice for the most serious crimes, it is
important that the Court's proceedings in particular,
and justice in general, should not be seen as a remote
and distant process with no relevance to the lives of
citizens. Justice must be brought to the people. By
creating a sense of participation for the victims and the
population at large, we bring in an element of
ownership and understanding of the process. That will
leave a lasting impact on the population.

Finally, we call on the international community to
give the Court the fullest support to discharge its
mandate by making available adequate resources for its
budget.

