Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I want to
respond to a couple of points that have been made so
that we set the record straight.

Russia's assertion that we should see an end to the
cross-border assistance due to gains made in access
is false. Mr. Lowcock just briefed the Council that
in August the United Nations was able to reach only
280,500 people with inter-agency convoys - out of
the 1.3 million requested. That is only 21 per cent.
Meanwhile, the United Nations reaches more than
1 million people cross-border each month. Those are
1 million people who would be left without anything
if we ceased cross-border aid. Meanwhile, the Syrian
regime continues to remove medical items from convoys
and artificially reduces the beneficiary numbers. Those
actions are not demonstrations of goodwill from the
Government, nor are they a Government we can trust.
Now is not the time to reduce our tools to reach people
in need. Syrians have suffered for nearly seven years.
In short, cross-border assistance must continue in order
to save millions of people from death and destruction.

I would also like to say that so many of us want to
see an end to the Syrian crisis. We have all watched
too many people suffer, we have all met in the Security
Council too many times to discuss the situation. But
I would like to explain to our Syrian counterpart
that the refugees did not leave Syria just because of
terrorists. I went there to speak to refugees in Jordan. I
spoke to refugees in Turkey. And all of them, whether
they were in a camp or not, said that their bigger fear
was the regime. The reason they left Syria was out
of fear of terrorism, but also out of fear of their very
own Government.

Mr. Ja'afari was talking about aid. It is actually
$697 million that is going to host countries. We are
giving that money to host countries because we know
they take care of their people. We have seen proof that
they take care of their people. We would like to give
that money to Syria. We would like to give that money
to its Government - ifwe can see proofthat it is taking
care of its own people. Trust has to be earned. It has to
be taken based on good faith and goodwill. We have
not seen that. We are not giving up on seeing that, but
there is no way that he can come to the Council and talk
about the fact that anyone is doing anything politically
in the situation. The truth of the matter is that the only
political thing we all want is for Syrians to be able to
go home and live under a Government that takes care
of its own people. He must give us proof that they are
doing good by their people. Give us proof that Syrians
are better off for being back in Syria, and not in Turkey
or Jordan - because right now they are better taken
care of in Jordan and Turkey than they have ever been
in Syria. They deserve to go home. They deserve to
feel safe. And they deserve to be in a place where the
Government takes care of them.

