The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council today celebrates, together
with the rest of the United Nations family, the award of
the 2001 Nobel Peace Prize to the United Nations and
to its Secretary-General, Kofi Annan.

"The United Nations is the embodiment of
cooperation among States in safeguarding peace,
advancing international development and combating
common threats to the dignity and well-being of
peoples everywhere.

"The United Nations remains today, in its
activities around the world and in the ideals it sets, the
best hope for a future in which peoples everywhere can
work together to meet common challenges and to
advance common goals.

"The Security Council today pays special tribute
to all the men and women who work for the United
Nations, whatever their tasks or duty, wherever they
may be in the service of peace.

"The decision of the Nobel Committee to award
the 2001 Nobel Peace Prize to the United Nations and
to the Secretary-General reflects the high esteem
shared by people throughout the world for Secretary-
General Kofi Annan. It rightly honours his exceptional
achievements in the service of the United Nations and
of the entire international community, as well as
honouring the achievements of the United Nations
itself.

"In warmly congratulating the Secretary-General,
Kofi Annan, the Council reiterates its own strong
support for his efforts in upholding the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and for his
role in assuring to the Organization its full and rightful
place in the world and in leading its search for new
ways forward for all men and women in all countries to
live their lives with dignity and peace."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2001/28.

This is a very happy occasion for the Security
Council. It is, I know, a great pleasure for all members
of the Council to join the worldwide congratulations
for the United Nations and its Secretary-General upon
the award for them today, the Nobel Peace Prize. The
members of the Council are delighted to welcome
Secretary-General Annan among us. I reiterate our
welcome to the Secretary-General, and I give him the
floor.

