Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
following countries also align themselves with this
statement: Albania, Bulgaria, Croatia, Montenegro,
Romania, Serbia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Turkey, as well as the Republic of
Moldova and Ukraine.

The European Union welcomes this opportunity
to exchange views and contribute to the process of
consolidating peace in West Africa. The EU commends
the considerable progress made in recent years in
establishing peace and security in West Africa,
especially in Liberia and Sierra Leone.

Liberia has held its first free and fair elections
and has chosen Africa's first woman President to lead
the country into reconstruction and recovery. Liberia's
democratic Government has taken bold measures to
improve the transparency of its budget. We welcome
the Governance and Economic Management Assistance
Programme, which has already assisted in the partial
lifting of sanctions. The arrest and trial of former
President Taylor demonstrate that those responsible for
war crimes, crimes against humanity or violations of
3
international humanitarian law cannot escape justice.
The EU appreciates the essential work of the Special
Court for Sierra Leone and its vital contributions to the
establishment of the rule of law in the region.

The European Union welcomes the request of
Sierra Leone to be included on the agenda of the newly
established Peacebuilding Commission, as well as the
Commission's positive response to that request. Sierra
Leone will now benefit from the Commission's support
for post-conflict peacebuilding and recovery during the
crucial time of the preparation of the June 2007
elections.

Notwithstanding those positive developments,
many West African countries remain in precarious
situations. The European Union remains concerned
about the fragile political and socio-economic situation
in Guinea-Bissau.

In neighbouring Guinea, the reform process has
stalled. The EU strongly reiterates its call for the new
Government to engage in a dialogue with all parties
concerned in order to improve political stability and
pave the way for democratic reform. The volatile
situation in Cote d'Ivoire continues to hamper peace
and stability in the region. The EU is concerned about
the serious delays in the peace process, in particular in
the implementation of the road map aimed at the
scheduling of elections by the end of October this year.
The stability of the entire West African region depends
to a great extent on developments in Cote d'Ivoire.

The European Union adopted a comprehensive
Strategy for Africa in December 2005. Within the
framework of the Strategy, the EU is committed to
strengthening the dialogue on peace and security in
Africa and to supporting the efforts of its African
partners to build stability on the continent. In line with
the Strategy, the EU maintains an open dialogue with
the African Union and with subregional organizations
on a wide range of issues related to peace and security
on the continent. Notably through its African Peace
Facility, the EU actively supports institutional
capacity-building in these areas.

A year earlier, in 2004, the European Union
adopted its Strategy for West Africa on conflict
prevention, management and resolution. The objective
of the Strategy is to promote regional approaches to
West African transnational problems and to improve
coordination in close cooperation with the main
partners active in the region.
The European Union is well aware that national
solutions alone are not sufficient to address the security
threats in West Africa, owing to the cross-border nature
of problems such as small arms and light weapons,
child solders, refugees, the illegal exploitation of
natural resources, human trafficking and immigration.
In addition to providing its support to each country of
the region through national programmes, the EU is
committed to a regional approach and to improved
coordination with the key partners active in the region,
namely, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the United Nations Office for
West Africa.

The European Union, as Co-Chair of the
International Contact Group on the Mano River Basin,
is also closely involved in a number of political
dialogues in the region within the framework of the
International Working Group on Cote d'Ivoire and
looks forward to the first meeting of the International
Working Group on Guinea-Bissau. The Special
Representative of the European Union Presidency for
the Mano River Union will ensure the continued
promotion of peace and stability with political
interlocutors in the region.

The European Union also engages in internal
cooperation and coordination among its member States,
relying on the coherent and harmonized use of various
instruments at its disposal, such as political dialogue
and development cooperation.

The European Union attaches special importance
to the development of crisis prevention, management
and resolution capabilities in Africa.

An EU Action Plan for support for peace and
security in Africa under the European Security and
Defence Policy was adopted in 2004. Using the full
mix at its disposal, the EU combines European
Commission development programmes and European
Security and Defence Policy actions to support African
capacity-building in the field of peace and security.
Efforts are under way to further strengthen EU support
to African capabilities for the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts.

Against that background, the EU continues to be
fully engaged in conflict prevention and management
in West Africa in support of regional organizations and
the countries of West Africa in their efforts to enhance
peace and stability.
06-46124
