Mr. Marin Bosch (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
May I extend the appreciation of the Mexican
Government to you, Sir, for presiding over this
important meeting. It is an excellent initiative of the
Mauritian presidency, since it addresses a major
regional security matter in which the international
community has a great stake.

We welcome the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), Mr. Amara
Essy, a good friend of Mexico for many years. His
presence at this meeting strengthens the dialogue
between the United Nations and his organization.

We firmly support the New African Initiative,
which seeks a renewed partnership for the development
of Africa and lays the foundations for establishing a
stronger, more democratic and freer African Union.

My Government expresses its solidarity with the
Government and the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in particular the inhabitants of Goma, so
severely affected by the eruption of the nearby volcano.
This act of nature further compounds a situation that was
already difficult. Our condolences go likewise to the
Government of Nigeria and the citizens of Lagos.

Conflicts in Africa demand greater attention from
this Council and the OAU to find lasting solutions.
Mexico has advocated the strengthening of
international cooperation to resolve the grave economic
and social problems of peoples, which in many cases
are among the causes of conflict.

Analysis of conflict in Africa must be approached
from a comprehensive perspective, including the
causes of conflicts and means to prevent and resolve
them and, once they are resolved, ways of laying
foundations for sustainable economic growth and
peace. The Government of Mexico believes that given
the dimensions of conflict in Africa, it is necessary not
only to involve the Security Council in isolated
strategies but also to integrate into this effort the
General Assembly and other organs and programmes of
the United Nations system to carry out tasks in the
region, including the Bretton Woods institutions, of
course, and the OAU itself. In Africa, as in other
regions, the United Nations must be less reactive and
more proactive.

The reports of the Secretary-General on the
various African issues on the agendas of both the
General Assembly and the Council have certain
elements in common. In addition to looking at the
evolution of conflicts from their visible inception to
recent developments, they review their consequences
as well. In almost all reports we see with concern a
deterioration of the living standards of the populations
of the countries in conflict. There are also other
factors, such as environmental disasters, especially
drought in various regions, and health disasters, such
as AIDS, which have struck the continent and have
weakened the economically active population.

The data on human development in the latest
report of the United Nations Development Programme
indicate that only 15 of the 53 African countries are
found at the average human development level. None
of those 53 countries has a high human development
index, and more than two thirds are at the low level.

In addressing the agenda item "Causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa" at its last session, the General
Assembly requested the Organization to focus its
efforts on education and transfer of technology. We
believe that the role of education in preventing
conflicts is crucial to the solution of regional crises.

Life expectancy in Africa is among the lowest in
the world. Education will help to cope with the AIDS
pandemic. If to all of this we add the problems of
malaria and malnutrition, prospects are not
encouraging. We of course recognize the efforts being
made by various humanitarian organizations. However,
we believe that those efforts are not yet sufficient, and
the international community should increase its
cooperation and inter-agency coordination in order to
address the problems at their root and attend to the
more immediate consequences.

In order to be in a position to resolve its
economic and social problems, the continent requires
greater investment flows, a higher level of official
development assistance, a concessional approach to the
treatment of its external debt and greater access to
international markets. It also requires steady efforts by
its Governments to consolidate democratic institutions,
respect and promote human rights and strengthen the rule
of law. The Secretary-General's initiative to eliminate the
debt of the most indebted countries, contained in the final
document of the Millennium Summit, is an encouraging
measure that we should pursue.

At the Millennium Summit, African leaders
underscored the need to achieve greater market access
for African products. To achieve that, developed
countries should adopt special measures. We propose to
the group of major industrialized countries that it
include on the agenda of its next meeting the question
of making progress, both bilaterally and through the
World Trade Organization, in the reduction of trade
barriers imposed upon products from Africa.

Mexico is convinced that only through economic
development will it be possible to prevent and resolve
conflict and, once they are resolved, to lay foundations
for lasting growth and peace. This subject is closely
linked to the questions that will be addressed in March,
in Monterrey, at the International Conference on
Financing for Development.

In the case of Africa, there are problems that
require a speedier solution, which the letter of the
Permanent Representative of Mauritius has identified.
Among those that require immediate attention, let me
briefly refer to three: illicit trafficking in firearms,
illegal exploitation of natural resources and
humanitarian crises.

In the region we can observe illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons that requires urgent
solutions in order to prevent conflicts and stop present
conflicts from deteriorating further. All States have the
right to ensure their own national defence, but the
excessive accumulation of arms has a destabilizing
effect and has a deep impact of the development of
peoples. The production of and illicit trafficking in
firearms represent a global problem, whose solution
requires adherence to the provisions agreed to in
international instruments and regional mechanisms.
Africa has shown a willingness to address the problem,
as exemplified by the Bamako Declaration of 1997 and
efforts made in the framework of the Organization of
African Unity.

The African States can and should contribute to
reducing their military expenditures, applying measures
of transparency and confidence-building. Further, one
might investigate more rigorously the sources of
shipments of arms to Africa, especially as regards their
export to areas of conflict or tension. Exporting countries
also have a responsibility to prevent the diversion of
weapons for illicit purposes and their dispatch to
conflict areas.

Regarding humanitarian issues in conflict areas,
unfortunately, it has not always been possible to
effectively apply the already existing rules of
international humanitarian law. In the past, the civilian
population was an indirect victim of combat between
belligerent armies. Today, they tend to be the principal
target of those attacks. We must pay special attention to
children involved in conflicts. Recruiting or enlisting
children in armed forces or encouraging them to
participate actively in hostilities is a war crime, as laid
down by the Statute of the International Criminal Court.

We also note with concern the problem of the
illegal exploitation of natural resources. Not only are
African nations being deprived of resources
indispensable for development, but the illegal
exploitation of these resources also serves to finance
belligerent groups. It is time to design new approaches
to stop the pillaging of natural resources, a practice
occurring in most African countries where conflict
exists. One possible solution to this problem is the
Kimberly process, which proposes the use of
certificates of origin to prevent the illegal import and
export of diamonds. As chair of the Sierra Leone
Sanctions Committee, my country will endeavour to
make control regimes effective.

Given the primary responsibility of the United
Nations in matters of international peace and security,
it is necessary to strengthen support for the regional
and subregional measures adopted in Africa. This
support is necessary because the United Nations has
neither the capacity nor the resources to deal with all
the problems that might arise on the African continent.
Therefore, the United Nations should as far as possible
try to complement, rather than monopolize, efforts
made in Africa to solve the continent's problems.

Mexico attaches great importance to the New
African Initiative. The President of my country,
Vicente Fox, has expressed personally the value he
attaches to and his interest in the strengthening of the
Initiative and the emergence of the African Union.

I would like to extend a message of friendship to
the nations of Africa. My Government is determined to
reorient our foreign policy towards Africa. It aims to
give new impetus to our ties of friendship and
cooperation, taking advantage of the processes of
change developing in Mexico and Africa. Our country
is convinced that the African peoples require special
attention. We are willing to assist in the promotion of
the most important themes of the continent's agenda.

In conclusion, those of us who have followed the
activities of the United Nations for some time know
that the Organization's interest in the problems of
Africa is usually sporadic. We hope that we are now
seeing the beginning of a qualitative change in the
relationship between Africa and the United Nations.

