Mr. Eliasson: Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for inviting me to make this briefing to
the Security Council.

As members are aware, it has been over one year
since my African Union (AU) counterpart, Mr. Salim
Ahmed Salim, and I embarked on our work to
re-energize the political process for Darfur. In that
pursuit, we have received active, persistent and
committed support from the Secretary-General and
from the AU Chairperson. We have met and consulted
widely with the parties, with civil society, with
regional partners, with the international community
and, of course, with the Security Council. We convened
a productive meeting with the movements last August
in Arusha. We launched the first phase of the peace
talks through the opening session in Sirte on
27 October.

Since then, we have been working intensely with
the parties in preparation for substantive talks. Some
progress has been made in bringing the parties closer to
the negotiating table. But we have also been faced with
a deteriorating security situation, as well as other
constraints largely beyond our control.

When I briefed the Council in November, I
highlighted the key role of the political process in
bringing about normalization and peace in Darfur. At
the same time, I stressed that progress will be
impossible without the creation of an environment
conducive to substantive negotiations.

Over the past few months, the security and
humanitarian situation in Darfur and in the region has
dramatically deteriorated, most recently through events
related to Chad. During this time, the parties have not
08-23190
been able to finalize their preparations for substantive
talks or engage in confidence-building measures to
improve prospects for negotiations. Those problems
have been compounded by the slow deployment of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), undermining the chances to
demonstrate to the people of Darfur that the
international community is bringing security to them.

As Council members are aware, for some time
there have been serious clashes between the
Government of Sudan and Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM)-Khalil Ibrahim forces in West
Darfur. Earlier this week, Sudan Liberation Army
(SLA) Unity movement units clashed with forces of the
Government of Sudan in North Darfur, and there have
been reports of continued aerial bombardments. In
recent months, there have also been several cross-
border incursions between Chad and Darfur, as we all
know. After the attacks on N'Djamena by rebel groups
last weekend, the situation is now calmer, but it
remains fluid and fragile. All these developments, and
the subsequent continued tensions between Chad and
Sudan, have detrimental consequences for the Darfur
political process.

It should be added that humanitarian actors
remain deeply concerned about the safety of their staff
and about their ability to provide assistance to the
civilian population. This comes at a time when
malnutrition continues to rise and crop failures are
occurring or foreseen in parts of Darfur. Coupled with
the slow deployment of UNAMID, not seeing positive
change on the ground will continue to frustrate a
population with rising expectations regarding security,
protection and early recovery programmes. That is
particularly the case not only in the camps for
internally displaced persons, but also in rural
communities where the population is in dire need of
support. I saw that with my own eyes during Visits in
December and January.

The launching of the peace process in Sirte in
October served as a catalyst for accelerating the
movements' preparations for the talks. Mr. Salim and I
were encouraged by recent steps forward by the
movements to reorganize and unite. In Juba, the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) was able to
successfully assist a number of them in coming
together during the autumn. Further consultations have
also continued within and between them on the ground
in Darfur.
08-23190

As a result, as of now, the movements have
coalesced around five groupings: SLA-Unity, the
United Resistance Front (URF), SLA-Abdul Shafi,
SLA-Abdul Wahid and JEM-Khalil Ibrahim. This is an
improvement compared to the situation in which we
found ourselves last year at this time, when many
movements were fragmenting, unconvinced that a
political solution was the best way forward.

We must, however, be aware that the movements
are continuously repositioning themselves. Unification
and coordination efforts continue but remain fraught
with difficulties, not least related to unresolved
leadership issues. The movements have still to prepare
for discussions on substantive matters for the talks.
Thus, prospects for quick agreements on common
positions and a negotiation team appear dim.

To facilitate the movements' preparations for the
negotiations, the idea has been proposed of hosting
what we call an Arusha-style preparatory meeting with
the movements, in close coordination with our regional
partners, in order for them to coordinate their
positions. Such a meeting could be followed by
workshops to finalize preparations for the talks.

However, holding such a meeting would not meet
its objective without the presence of what I would call
a critical mass of movement representatives. To
determine the movements' readiness, Mr. Salim, I and
our team have been out in the field and have consulted
extensively with the leaders of the movements during
December and January through missions to Darfur,
Juba and locations outside the Sudan.

Out of the five main groupings, two groups - the
SLA-Unity and the URF - have expressed their
willingness to join the political process and participate
in a preparatory meeting, in workshops and, of course,
in the substantive talks. They should be commended
for their commitment to the search for a political
solution. Furthermore, both groups continue to be
engaged in coordination discussions with each other
and with other movements. A third grouping,
SLA-Abdul Shafi, now based in Juba, has requested to
go to Darfur to consult with its constituency and has
also expressed reservations on the format and venue of
the talks.

SLA-Abdul Wahid and Abdul Wahid's
representatives in the field have recently engaged in
dialogue with the mediation and the UNAMID Force
Commander, General Agwai. I personally had a lengthy
3
and constructive discussion with Abdul Wahid in Paris
last week. However, he and his movement are still not
ready to engage in negotiations until certain
preconditions are met, primarily related to security for
the people of Darfur.

The fifth grouping, JEM-Khalil Ibrahim, has
stated that it is committed to the political process,
provided that, inter alia, there be only two movements
at the talks, the JEM. and the Sudan Liberation
Movement (SLM). However, it is also clear that this
movement is engaged in military activities.

Some of the movements have requested
additional time to achieve unification. Mr. Salim and I
have long cautioned against the more ambitious
objective of full unification as a condition for talks to
begin. This may take a long time. Instead, we have
encouraged the movements to speed up the unfinished
work of preparing common positions and a common
negotiation team.

In short, Mr. Salim and I believe that the
convening of a preparatory meeting during the coming
weeks would be premature, due to the movements'
internal preparations and efforts to reach a critical mass
of participation. To this must be added the fragile
security situation and the tense Chad-Sudan
relationship and its effects on the region and on the
political process in Darfur.

Against this background, the mediation is
strengthening its efforts to assist the movements'
preparations. Our team will have consultations with the
movements on various substantive issues during the
next few weeks. Of course, it will also engage the
Government on these matters. In addition, together
with UNAMID and the Darfur-Darfur dialogue, we are
increasing our work to incorporate into the peace
process the views and concerns of civil society,
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and traditional
leaders through the establishment of what we call
advisory forums. These forums will serve as
mechanisms for the selection of observers from civil
society for the talks and as information channels to and
from the people of Darfur.

Too often in history, efforts to resolve conflicts
and build peace have been limited to those who have
taken up arms. In Darfur, ordinary citizens and the
IDPs have carried the burden and paid a huge price for
the conflict. It is essential that we establish effective
communications with the people of Darfur about
expectations, progress and, in due time, results of the
talks. Many of them will be responsible for the
implementation of a future agreement, and they will
hold the parties accountable for their commitments.

After one year of engagement with the parties, I
would like to attempt to give the Council a realistic
assessment of where we find ourselves in the search for
peace in Darfur. The parties have no doubt made
progress in their preparations. But they are still, to a
great degree, not ready to engage in substantive talks.
As stated, the movements still lack consolidated
positions and have not yet formed a joint team. We
commend the governing parties, the National Congress
Party (NCP) and the SPLM, for resolving their
differences and resuming cooperation within the
Government of National Unity of the Sudan. But there
is still need for a common strategy incorporating the
positions of the NCP, SPLM. and Minni Minawi - a
signatory of the Darfur Peace Agreement, as members
know - on how to resolve the crisis in Darfur. Much
more also needs to be done by all parties to improve
safety and humanitarian conditions on the ground. Of
course, the Government has the primary responsibility
for upholding security, justice and respect for
international law.

The experience of the last months demonstrates
more than ever that resolution of the Darfur crisis
requires an environment conducive to peace. While the
people of Darfur cannot wait forever, we will have to
accept that the steps towards an eventual peace
agreement will be incremental and will take longer
than we had initially hoped.

While continuing our efforts on the political
track, we should thus also concentrate on the issues of
immediate concern to the population. The most
pressing matter at the moment is security. We have
been repeatedly urging the parties to exercise restraint,
refrain from military activities on the ground and
accept that a political solution is the only path to
resolution of the conflict.

As Council members will recall, establishing a
strengthened ceasefire was the third component of the
Addis Ababa conclusions of November 2006, together
with the peacekeeping and political tracks. An
agreement on a cessation of hostilities and a credible
monitoring mechanism for such an agreement are a
necessary step on the path towards peace. As a
demonstration of their commitment to the political
process, the parties should now unilaterally declare and
respect a cessation of hostilities, as well as cooperate
in the efforts to reform the existing ceasefire
mechanisms. We will continue our discussions with
UNAMID on how best to bring this issue forward.
Jean-Marie Guehenno and I are working closely
together on this matter.

At the same time, Mr. Salim and I are
re-evaluating the staffing needs for the mediation.
Following a year of preparations for the talks, we
believe it is necessary to have a full-time joint African
Union-United Nations chief mediator in the Sudan
engaging with the parties on a continuous basis and
leading the daily work of the Joint Mediation Support
Team (JMST). We are restructuring the mediation
support team to also reflect the new realities of the
joint African Union-United Nations presence in Darfur
since the beginning of the year.

To conclude, allow me to reiterate that we must
remain steadily engaged and build on the progress
made so far with a view to initiating substantive talks.
However, the deterioration of the situation on the
ground in Darfur and in the region most recently now
also warrants intensified efforts by the international
community to reduce prevailing tensions. Without a
relationship of trust and cooperation between Chad and
the Sudan, peace will be elusive for the people of
Darfur. The absence of such a relationship is also
damaging the cohesion and cooperation among our
regional partners in the search for peace.

A sense of security and calm must finally take
root in Darfur through a combination of the
deployment of an effective peacekeeping force and
credible commitments by all parties to a cessation of
hostilities. In such a way, a climate conducive to
productive peace talks could be created. Mr. Salim and
I are committed to facilitating that process. To that end,
we will work closely with UNAMID and all concerned
to ensure greater synergy between the political,
peacekeeping and humanitarian components. In that
endeavour, we will continue to need the support of the
international community and, in particular, this
Council.

Ultimately, however, we must remember that
progress will be made only when the parties
themselves demonstrate the necessary political will and
their commitment to peace. It is now time for them to
08-23190
get on with the serious work of achieving peace and a
life of dignity for the people of Darfur.

