The President (spoke in French): I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Belgium. Yesterday's strike against the Turkish contingent in Idlib, in which dozens of Turkish soldiers lost their lives, represents a dramatic turning point in the already alarming situation in Idlib. We strongly condemn this attack and convey our condolences to the Government of Turkey and the families of the victims. We are following with great concern these new developments, which pose a major threat to international peace and security. The parties must weigh the implications. As we know, Turkey is present in Idlib on the basis of the 2017 Astana agreement and the 2018 Sochi memorandum of understanding, which created a de-escalation zone around Idlib. Syria and Russia have on numerous occasions violated those ceasefire agreements. Each time those violations contributed to the humanitarian disaster on which we met just yesterday, under the presidency of our Deputy Prime Minister (S/PV.8734. I wish to reiterate that humanitarian access must absolutely be respected. The Secretary-General described the situation in Idlib as a man-made disaster, and we could not agree more. The situation, with a million people living in appalling conditions, could have been completely avoided if the parties had respected their own commitments. The situation will only get worse if Syria, supported by Russia, does not stop its offensive immediately, otherwise it will once again be the Syrian people who pay the price.We therefore once again call on Syria and Russia to put an end to the military escalation. Without urgent action, the threat of an even greater escalation is increasing by the hour. We support the efforts of the Secretary-General and encourage him to continue to spare no effort to achieve an immediate and lasting ceasefire. Finally, the political commitment of the Syrian authorities is vital in order for the cycle of violence and instability to finally stop in the region. The only path towards stability is a credible and inclusive political solution facilitated by the United Nations, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
