Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I regret having to take the floor again.
However, this afternoon the Council heard unfounded
lies, through which the Israeli representative tried to
divert our attention from the reason for which the
Council met: the Israeli violation of the air space of
Syria and Lebanon and the acts of aggression
committed against the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of a State member of the Security Council and
of the United Nations. Is there an insolence that can
exceed what we have already witnessed? This Israeli
style of prevarication is not new to us. We know about
Israel's unfounded lies, and we know about Israeli
attempts to distort facts and realities. That is the
pattern we have come to expect from Israel, from 1948
to this very moment.

I will not respond to the unfounded lies
perpetrated and promoted by the representative of the
Israeli war Government, because the statements that
were included in his statement simply deserve to be
thrown into the Council's wastepaper basket. The logic
promoted by the Israeli representative is the logic and
the reasoning of a gang, not that of a responsible party.
What is even more arrogant in what we have heard
today is that he came here to preach to us about Israel's
history of respecting international legitimacy, despite
the fact that each and every of us here knows very well
that that history is not exactly honourable. We would
have greatly preferred to have him tell us the reasons
for the Israeli failure to implement the scores - or
even more than scores - of resolutions adopted by the
United Nations, including by the Security Council,
with regard to Israel ever since the State of Israel was
established.
That representative chose to ignore the main
reason behind the catastrophes and disasters which our
region faces. He chose to ignore the blood-letting - by
that I mean Israel's insistence on occupying Arab
territories, its daily acts of aggression against the
Palestinian civilians and its acts of aggression against
Arab States, the last of which we have witnessed this
morning. The Israeli continued occupation is the reason
for the presence of hundreds of thousands, if not say
millions of Palestinians in Syria and in other Arab
lands. It is also needless to recall that the presence of
those refugees was supposed to be temporary until the
circumstances allowed them to go back to their country
from which they were expelled by Israel and whereby
they were replaced by illegitimate settlers and
illegitimate settlements, things that this Council has
rejected more than once.

The Palestinian field leadership is in the
Palestinian territories. Its just logical to say that for
tactical and geographic reasons the Palestinians who
reside in Syria cannot plan for operations that take
place on Palestinian territories. Therefore, accusing
Syria with what the Israeli representative chose to term
as giving refuge to terrorist organizations is only a
desperate attempt to get out of the dead-end that Israel
finds itself in and, as I say, an attempt by Israel to
export its internal crises beyond its borders.

Nothing hurts international action against
terrorism more than Israeli acts of aggression and the
killing of Palestinians under the pretext of combating
terrorism. Israel chooses to ignore the fact that it -
and only it - was the first to introduce the concept of
terrorism into our region through crimes committed by
the Stern and the Haganah: gangs that were in fact the
nucleus of the Israeli army. Some of their members are
still wanted in Great Britain to this very day because of
the acts of terror they committed. They became Prime
Ministers and other high officials in Israel. Do
members remember the assassination by those gangs of
Count Bernadotte, the international mediator; do
members remember the carnage and the massacres of
Deir Yassin and Qana; do members remember the
massacres of Sabra and Shatila; do members
remember the role of General Sharon, the current
Israeli Prime Minister in those massacres? We marked
the anniversary of these massacres just a few days ago.

In combating terrorism, Syria stands side by side
with all the other countries of the world. We frankly
believe that this is what we should really do, that this is
the correct course of action. Has not Syria cooperated
with all with all the other countries of the world,
including the United States in combating terrorism?
Has not Syria saved lives, as recognized by United
States Administration officials? Were we in fact on the
wrong side when we cooperated in that field? We do
not believe that this is the case. The responsibility of
one permanent member in the Security Council and a
co-sponsor of the peace process makes it incumbent on
that party to adopt balanced positions that do not
encourage acts of aggression and that do not accept any
such acts, but that would deter the commission of such
acts.

I would like to refer briefly to the comments that
the representative of Israel made about democracy and
respect for human rights, among other issues. The
Israeli record with regard to democratic practices is
very well known to all of us. Israel demonstrates its
respect for the rights of the Palestinian people at
checkpoints, in the building of the fence and in the
demolition of the houses of civilians while their
inhabitants are still inside. Such actions provide
evidence of the Israeli attitude to the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and other instruments of
international humanitarian law, which we are all
seeking to respect.

Is that truly respect for human rights? Do States
members of the Council believe in Israel's unique way
of showing respect for human rights? I say to Israel
that the members of the Council would not accept such
notions.

In conclusion, I would like to thank those who
condemned the Israeli act of aggression against my
country. In doing so they expressed their support for
the Charter and for international legitimacy. That is the
right course of action to take in the interests of the
maintenance of international peace and security.

