Mr. Coelho (Portugal) (spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate you, President Sleiman, for
the conduct of the Lebanese presidency of the Security
Council and especially for the organization of this
debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his excellent report (S/201l/552), which
provides us with concrete avenues of action through
which to make the preventive work of the Security
Council more efficient.

We are considering a very timely theme today. A
broad consensus exists as to the merits and utility of a
culture of prevention that allows us to identify crises
9

before they transform into conflicts, with all the human
and material costs that such conflicts always levy. It is
therefore time to transform that consensus into
concrete actions that ensure, moving forward, that the
Security Council uses the preventive instruments at its
disposal in a better, more systematic manner.

The international community faces new obstacles
to peaceful coexistence among peoples that challenge
the stability of whole regions. As Portugal recognizes
the central role played by the Security Council in this
area, we inscribed on the agenda of our presidency of
the Council, this November, a meeting on new
challenges to international peace and security. We
intend to promote an integrated vision that mirrors the
many challenges we face in the twenty-first century.

Today, no one questions the interlinkages among
those challenges. Security is now also related to
sustainable development, climate, energy, epidemics,
food security and access to water and basic
commodities. Indeed, what we used to characterize as
the roots of a conflict are very much at the surface
today, with a more direct and proportional impact on
our security and well-being. It is also important to
mention positive experiences in the field of shared
natural resources. Portugal has such a positive
experience in what regards the management of shared
water resources with our neighbour, Spain.

The United Nations represents a forum of
excellence for the debate on the broader concept of
security. We therefore see our discussions here today as
a value-added contribution to our meeting in
November. Preventive diplomacy is a central principle
of Portugal's foreign policy. We have actively
supported Security Council initiatives that seek to
promote a better understanding of the causes of
conflict and that seek to discuss options to overcome
those obstacles, as was the case, for example, in the
tensions between Ethiopia and Eritrea.

We have sought for those initiatives also to
reflect the priority that we accord to the promotion and
protection of human rights, humanitarian issues and the
protection of civilians. Moreover, we want to do so
while also promoting a closer collaboration with non-
governmental organizations and a better coordination
of efforts among the United Nations missions, the
European Union and the African Union. It is that
integrated vision of security - based on
complementarity, synergy and cooperation - that
should be encouraged, so as to strengthen the cohesion
of the international system.

We greatly appreciate, Mr. President, the most
useful concept paper presented by your delegation
(S/2011/570, annex), in which the key issues of this
debate are encapsulated, including the importance of
identifying the factors leading to tension, be they
political, cultural, socio-economic or environmental in
nature.

The United Nations has at its disposal the means
to promote timely detection and early warning of
conflicts, thereby avoiding the unnecessary
degeneration of tensions into open conflict. I think it is
necessary to refine the relationship between the many
relevant organs and organizations, thereby promoting a
culture of prevention that allows for the maintenance
and consolidation of peace in an integrated - rather
than sequential - manner.

Preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are a complementary triumvirate that
together guarantee the emergence of sustainable peace.
It is not enough to make peace; it is also necessary to
help it take root and grow. That is certainly a more
difficult task, especially as it is intimately linked to the
rule of law and socio-economic development. Security
and development are, however, two sides of the same
com.

I would like, in this context, to highlight the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission, in whose founding
Portugal was proud to participate. During the 2010
review process of the Peacebuilding Commission, its
preventive role was clearly underlined. The
Peacebuilding Commission has played a central role in
linking peace and security with economic and social
development and with humanitarian efforts. The
country-specific configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission for West Africa, of which Portugal is a
part, are concrete examples of that function in action.

We believe that peacekeeping operations can and
should assume functions of early peacebuilding, in the
areas of security-sector reform, justice and the
correctional system, as well as in processes of
disarmament, demining and reintegration. Those
fundamental actions complement and reinforce the
socio-economic reconstruction undertaken by other
actors. I think that the positive experiences in the
Balkans and in Timor-Leste are clear in this respect,
inspiring also possible solutions that are appropriate
for Libya.

For these reasons, Portugal has sought to
maintain an active participation in peacekeeping
operations, a principle that we will continue to honour
to the greatest extent possible.

I have highlighted the importance of an integrated
vision of security, in an international framework of
complementarity, cooperation and synergy. It is
essential that the links between the United Nations and
other regional and international organizations be
strengthened, consolidating or even institutionalizing
the lines of dialogue and communication. The actions
of one or another are always strengthened when
influential actors collaborate. Knowledge of the
situation and the actors on the ground is irreplaceable,
and for that reason Portugal has continuously defended
the participation of regional organizations such as the
African Union or the Arab League as part of a more
robust preventive diplomacy.

Allow me also to highlight here the efforts that
we have made in the context of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries to strengthen the
preventive element and support those of us that are in
situations of fragility.

The European Union, naturally, also has a role to
play in this context. The panoply of instruments that
the Union has at its disposal can and should be used to
complement the actions of the United Nations, thereby
mutually supporting their respective efforts for
preventive diplomacy.

The work of regional and international
organizations in conflict prevention cannot in any way
be seen as a substitute for the principle of national
ownership. National capabilities and capacities and the
support given to their consolidation must serve as the
foundation for preventive diplomacy, thereby
catalysing national strategies for the promotion of
peace.

Ultimately, the responsibility to prevent conflict
must lie with national institutions; otherwise, there is a
risk that the solutions that are found may not be
consistent or sustainable in the long run. Conflict
prevention should also be based on an inclusive
approach in which new civil society actors must also
participate. It is important to catalyse partnerships
between all relevant actors: civil society, parliaments,

academic institutions and women's and youth
organizations, as well as the labour and business
community.

Their presence on the ground and their very
nature and objectives make them particularly useful
and appropriate agents to warn of possible nascent
conflicts and to help find mutually acceptable
solutions. Their involvement is the best guarantee of
the success of preventive diplomacy, and this, in our
opinion, is the concept of security that should prevail
in this era of globalization and interdependence.

Today we have a much clearer perception of the
challenges facing international peace and security than
we did a decade ago. We also have a better
understanding of the instruments necessary to meet
these challenges.

The Arab world is undergoing an unprecedented
transformation that will have many geopolitical
consequences that are not yet fully understood or
defined but that certainly transcend the regional
dimension. The response of the international
community to that transformation is, and will continue
to be, crucial to ensure the success of political
transitions as well as international peace, stability and
security.

I am particularly heartened to highlight
democratic and inclusive pluralism, efforts to
strengthen civil society, the opening of society and the
economy, respect for the rule of law and human rights
as essential elements of this transformation.

Preventive diplomacy is certainly part of this
process, and its relevance is indisputable. For that
reason, it gives me great pride to participate in a debate
where we celebrate this fact.

Allow me to conclude by renewing and
strengthening Portugal's commitment to the promotion
of peace and security and to continuing to strengthen
preventive diplomacy.

