Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I congratulate the
delegation of Sweden for organizing this open debate
on children and armed conflict. I thank His Excellency
Stefan Lofven, Prime Minister of Sweden, for being
personally present today and presiding over this debate,
which underlines the importance of the theme and
highlights the role of child protection in the prevention
of conflicts and building peaceful societies.

We express our warm appreciation to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Virginia
Gamba and to UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta
Fore for their comprehensive briefings. We commend
the team of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, UNICEF and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations for their coordinated and relentless
efforts to put an end to the grave violations against
children. We also thank Ms. Yenny Londofio, who is
here representing civil society, for her insights on
integrating child protection issues in the peace process
in Colombia. We pay tribute to the non-governmental
organization community, which makes a sterling
contribution as defenders of children's rights.

I will begin by expressing deep concern over the
significant increase in the scale, complexity and severity
of grave violations affecting children in armed conflict,
as outlined in the Secretary-General's annual report
(S/2018/465). In the past year alone, tens of thousands
of children were killed, maimed, sexually abused or
recruited by armed groups and Government forces.

At the same time, the overall reduction in the number
of incidents of child recruitment and the military use of
schools indicates that positive change is achievable. We
wholeheartedly endorse the adoption of resolution 2427
(2018), which covers a range ofkey issues ofthe children-
and-armed conflict agenda, which was drafted by the
delegation of Sweden as Chair of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. The unanimous adoption
of that document and its large number of co-sponsors
proved that there is a strong consensus among Member
States on the importance of the issue. We must use
that unity to safeguard children - our most precious
resource - through collective and comprehensive
measures. In that regard, Kazakhstan would like to
propose the following recommendations.

First, we must promote full compliance with
international law and strengthen accountability for
grave violations against children. It is Vital that all
Member States ratify and strictly implement the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and other relevant treaties, as Kazakhstan
did. We also encourage Governments to endorse
the international tools related to the protection of
children in armed conflict, such as the Paris Princ
iples, thVancouver Principles and the Safe Schools
Declaration, and include child protection provisions
in peace and negotiating processes, especially with
non-State armed groups. Enhancing the capacity of
United Nations missions to monitor and report grave
violations is equally important to ensure accountability.

Secondly, we need to prioritize preventive measures
and efforts aimed at confidence- and capacity-building.
We support the efforts of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Gamba focused on preventive
actions, including through enhanced engagement with
parties to conflict, field visits and the signing of action
plans, as well as strengthened cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations.

Children who lack future prospects and education
and live in severe poverty are more vulnerable to
recruiters and perpetrators. Therefore, investments in
development, providing better living conditions and
meeting socioeconomic needs of children are also
critical to preventing recruitment and grave violations
against children. Equally important is support for
capacity-building at regional and local levels through
training programmes and providing interreligious and
inter-ethnic education to promote tolerance.

Thirdly, we must increase support for reintegration
and rehabilitation programmes for children formerly
associated with armed groups. Adequate, predictable
and sustainable funding must be provided to ensure
access for children to education, vocational training,
health care, basic services and trauma counselling on
an immediate basis. In addition, we must rethink our
approaches to reintegration and establish long-term
multi-year programmes that will help children more
effectively reintegrate into society and succeed in
their communities.

In conclusion, I once again reiterate Kazakhstan's
commitment to all collective and comprehensive
measures to ensure the safety and welfare of children,
who become the most vulnerable group in times of
armed conflict.

