Mr. Braun (Germany): I would like to join other
speakers in thanking the Government of Rwanda for
organizing this timely open debate.

The regional dimension of peacekeeping is indeed
a key aspect of effective international peace and
stability. The sequential or parallel deployment of
peace operations by the United Nations and regional
organizations, especially the European Union (EU) and
the African Union (AU), has become the norm rather
than an exception. That is particularly the case in
Africa, where operations by the AU, African regional
organizations and the EU, for example, in Mali, the
Central African Republic and Somalia, come to mind
in addition to the long-standing missions deployed
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. They all
demonstrate that the European Union has become a
key partner of the United Nations in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.

Germany is honoured to contribute to that joint
endeavour with personnel, capabilities and financial
resources both to the United Nations and within the
European framework. That is in addition to German
support provided to our African partners and the
African Union in strengthening their peacekeeping
capabilities. It is in our common interest to further
improve our cooperation with the AU and African
subregional organizations in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions.

Today's debate comes at a particularly opportune
time. There is a growing sense that peacekeeping
needs to be made more effective to meet the multiple
challenges it faces. In that context, we welcome the
review of United Nations peacekeeping efforts recently
announced by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. We
stand ready to contribute to the findings and look
forward to the Secretary-General's recommendations.

One of the critical aspects that the review should
address is the partnership between the United Nations
and regional organizations. With more parallel
deployments on the ground, more lessons can be learned
on what works in that partnership and what needs to
be improved. It is clear that improved synergies are
required, not least given the increasingly strained
resources.

Against that background, Germany is delighted to
collaborate with the Italian presidency of the European
Union in a project aimed at improving cooperation
on the ground between peace operations deployed by
the European Union and the United Nations. As part
of the project, we will organize a seminar in Berlin
in November 2014 which will concentrate on how to
improve coherence in mandates, mission planning and
coordination on the ground, as well as how to improve
EU-United Nations cooperation in policing, security
sector reform and judicial reform.

Many of the questions we seek to address at
that seminar mirror those raised in the concept note
prepared by the Rwandan delegation for today's debate
(S/2014/478, annex), namely, what are the comparative
advantages of both organizations and how can we
capitalize on them to achieve our common goal? How
can we ensure that efforts by both the United Nations
and the European Union complement one another
rather than develop in parallel? How do we make sure
not to overstretch the absorption capacities of host
countries? And what are the requirements for improved
cooperation, including operational, legal and resource
aspects?

We look forward to sharing the findings of the
seminar with all interested parties and we will feed the
outcome into the review process not only here in New
York, but also into policy discussions in Brussels and
Addis Ababa.
