Mr. Mustafa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The Sudan is honoured to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of Arab States as Chair of the Group, under the agenda item "The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question". As the United Nations celebrates the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter of the United Nations in 2020, the Palestinian question remains unchanged. While it is the most significant challenge facing the world, no progress was achieved in 2019 on the implementation of United Nations resolutions on the Palestinian question or on resolving the Middle East conflict. The conflict poses a serious threat to world peace and security. As such, its settlement would be the linchpin in achieving stability throughout the region, while a failure to address it would have grave repercussions on the entire Middle East region, which is already engulfed in turmoil. The situation in the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories deteriorated over the past year. In Gaza alone, 44 Palestinians were killed, including nine children and three women, by the Israeli occupation authorities as a result of air strikes, protests, clashes, security operations and other sporadic incidents. Approximately 2,490 Palestinians were injured, including dozens of children. In the West Bank, another four civilians were killed, including one woman, while 1,064 were injured, including 23 children. The Israeli occupation authorities demolished or confiscated 617 houses and buildings in the occupied West Bank in 2019, including in East Jerusalem, and forcibly evicted 898 Palestinians. Also worrisome is the fact that incidents of attacks, harassment and incitement by Israeli settlers have also increased, especially as we approach the olive harvest season and in the city of Hebron. The Arab Group is closely following the deteriorating situation and takes this opportunity to stress its steadfast solidarity with the Palestinian people and its continuous commitment to their inalienable rights, including the right to self-determination. We are committed to ending the tragedy of the Palestinian people through a just and lasting solution to the Palestinian question in all its aspects. That solution is well known and must be based on international law, the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Charter of the United Nations and the two-State solution. That remains the only viable solution, as the international community, including the Security Council, will not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 border, in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions, which must be implemented, especially resolution 2334 (2016), and in respect of the principle of peace, the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the principle of land for peace. The Arab Group calls for the effective implementation of all of that. The Security Council is responsible for maintaining international peace and security. That is why it must uphold the principles of the Charter, especially during its seventy-fifth anniversary. The Council's relevant resolutions on the matter do not only reflect the spirit and text of the Charter but are also legally binding for all the States Members of the United Nations. We are gravely concerned that the Council has long been unable to fulfil its mandate in that regard. Our region is awash in a complicated situation as a result of regional and international crises. That is why Israel, the occupying Power, must be compelled to implement the relevant United Nations resolutions. It must be held accountable for all violations against Palestinian and Arab peoples, who have been suffering under the yoke of occupation for centuries. The absence of justice enhances impunity, and thereby exacerbates the situation on the ground and diminishes the prospects for peace. The States of the Arab Group are appalled by the Israeli intransigence and the illegal policies that undermine the peaceful settlement of the Palestinian- Israeli conflict. We reiterate our deep concern about the continuing deterioration of the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, and especially in the Gaza Strip, which has been suffering from a severe illegal Israeli blockade.The humanitarian situation in Gaza is truly dire, and the economic and social situations there are deplorable. We need a sustainable solution to the human suffering in the Gaza Strip, which requires lifting the illegal Israeli blockade once and for all and the speedy delivery of humanitarian aid to all the besieged people in Gaza. Israel, the occupying Power, must be compelled to stop its expansionist activities, demolition of houses and property, forced displacement of Palestinian citizens and practices of violence, provocations and incitement, in addition to other violations of human rights that amount to war crimes against Palestinians living in the occupied territories, including East Jerusalem. Israel must uphold all its responsibilities and commitments under international law. It must also refrain immediately from pursuing policies aimed at changing the demographic character of the occupied territories. It must respect the identity and legal status of the occupied territories and the historic status of the holy sites in occupied East Jerusalem, especially the Al-Aqsa Mosque. The Group of Arab States supports the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, which is responsible for managing and safeguarding the Muslim and Christian sites in Jerusalem, including the Al-Aqsa Mosque. The Group also supports the Hashemite guardianship of those sites represented by King Abdullah II Bin Al-Hussein. The Group further welcomes the 30 March 2019 signing in Rabat of the appeal for Jerusalem by His Majesty King Mohammed VI and His Holiness Pope Francis. The appeal emphasizes the important role of Jerusalem as a city of tolerance and mutual respect among the followers of the three heavenly religions. We must preserve its characteristics and features as a city of peaceful coexistence. The Arab Group reaffirms that Israel must abide by resolution 497 (1981), and fully withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan to the 1967 borders, in accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). The Arab Group condemns and rejects any unilateral action involving the occupied Syrian Golan. We call on the Security Council to shoulder its responsibility by explicitly condemning such provocative and illegal unilateral actions. The Arab Group reiterates its repeated calls for sustaining humanitarian and socioeconomic aid to the Palestinian people and refugees. We highly value the important work and support of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), and we welcome the extension of the Agency's mandate to 30 June 2023. We thank and appreciate all the contributing countries to UNRWA and the Palestinian people, especially Arab countries. In conclusion, the States of the Arab Group reaffirm their firm solidarity with the Palestinian people and their continuous support for the just Palestinian question. We are seriously committed to strengthening and coordinating international efforts to reach a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the Palestinian question in all its aspects, including Palestinian refugees, in line with the United Nations resolutions. We hope that this year will see tangible progress towards realizing the legitimate national goals and aspirations of the Palestinian people to enjoy their fair rights, especially the right to self-determination, freedom and an independent sovereign Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Finally, I congratulate Viet Nam on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of January. We thank the United States for its presidency in December 2019, and we congratulate Tunisia, the Niger, Estonia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines as newly elected members to the Council. We wish them every success.
