Mr. Serbini (Brunei Darussalam): Mr. President,
it is an honour for us to have you preside over this
Council meeting. We believe that, under your guidance,
we will have fruitful and successful deliberations.

This is a happy day for us, and more so for the
people of the Democratic Republic of East Timor. On
behalf of the Government and people of Brunei
Darussalam, I would like to convey our warmest
congratulations to the Government and people of East
Timor on their independence. On this historic day, I am
pleased to inform the Council that the Governments of
Brunei Darussalam and the Democratic Republic of
East Timor have agreed to establish diplomatic
relations. On the same note, we look forward to
welcoming East Timor as a new member of this
community of nations.

Contributions by the United Nations and by
Member States have been commendable and crucial to
bringing us and East Timor to the point we have
reached now. We are pleased with the way the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) discharged its mandate and its contribution
to peace and stability in East Timor. We are seeing
continued progress, which has been reflected in the
Secretary-General's reports. We commend Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello and his team for their outstanding
work.

Brunei Darussalam welcomes the Council's
approval last Friday of the establishment of a United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). At this juncture, let me also congratulate
Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma on his appointment as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
East Timor, and we are confident that he will continue
building on the success of his predecessor.

Finally, we believe that the new mission will
continue the consolidation of what has already been
invested in East Timor by UNTAET, as well as by
previous missions. It confirms that the continued
international presence in East Timor is crucial for its
rehabilitation and development. UNMISET's mandate
and practical exit strategy will enhance East Timor's
capacity for self-government and its ability to become
a viable State within the international community.

