Mr. Chambas: I would like to join previous

speakers in congratulating you, Mr. Minister, and your
country on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. We have every confidence that, under
Mexico's presidency, the Council will continue to play
a central role in the maintenance of international peace
and security in a troubled world. I also congratulate
your predecessor on having presided over the Council
with such dignity during a tumultuous month.

In addition, I should like to express our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for the opportunity
granted the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) to participate in this all-important
high-level meeting of the Security Council. We find the
topic of this meeting, "The Security Council and
regional organizations: facing the new challenges to
international peace and security", to be most
appropriate, for we believe that the Security Council
should be collaborating more and more closely with
regional organizations in facing certain new challenges
to international peace and security. Certainly, in the
West African subregion, we very much welcome such a
collaborative working relationship with the Security
Council and, if I might say so, with other organs of the
United Nations. It is for this reason that we were
pleased with the establishment last year in Dakar,
Senegal, of the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for West Africa.

A major challenge facing the West African
subregion in the last decade or so has been the spate of
conflicts. These conflicts have weakened already
fragile State institutions, causing the deterioration of
human capacity and the erosion of previous
developmental gains. A notable common denominator
in conflict-prone situations is the increasing
marginalization of a large part of the population -
predominantly youthful, largely uneducated and
unemployed people, who then become readily available
as recruits by unscrupulous warlords or factional
leaders in a subregion with an excessive supply of
small arms.

ECOWAS has responded to the spate of conflicts
in our subregion - the Mano River Union countries,
Guinea-Bissau and now, regrettably, C6te d'Ivoire,
which had hitherto been one of the more stable and
prosperous countries in Africa - within the context of
the ECOWAS Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management, Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security,
adopted by member States in December 1999.

The Mechanism provides for preventive measures
such as observation bureaux to provide early-warning
signals, a Council of Elders to engage in preventive
diplomatic missions, and the monitoring of elections,
which, when poorly or fraudulently managed, often
lead to crisis. ECOWAS has also adopted a Protocol on
Democracy and Good Governance to encourage
member States to build up a culture of democracy,
respect for human rights, the rule of law and
transparent governance as the basis for a stable polity.

It is in the area of conflict resolution and
management that there is a clear and pressing need for
collaboration between ECOWAS and the United
Nations, particularly the Security Council. The cases of
Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia are illustrative in this regard.

Since the outbreak of the crisis in Cote d'lvoire,
ECOWAS and its member States have been actively
engaged in seeking and supporting a peaceful
resolution to this potent threat to the peace and stability
of our subregion. ECOWAS diplomatic efforts resulted
in ceasefire agreements between the Government of
Cote d'Ivoire and the three rebel movements - the
Mouvement Patriotique de la C6te d'lvoire, the
Mouvement Populaire Ivoirien du Grand Quest and the
Mouvement pour la Justice et la Paix - and paved the
way for the Linas-Marcoussis Round Table
negotiations and the resulting agreement. The Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement was subsequently endorsed by
ECOWAS heads of State, providing the framework for
returning Cote d'Ivoire to durable peace and stability,
as well as by this body in its resolution 1464 (2003) of
4 February 2003.

To supplement and support ECOWAS diplomatic
efforts, the heads of State also agreed to deploy to Cote
d'Ivoire a force of military observers to supervise the
ceasefire and assist the peace process as required.
Resolution 1464 (2003) also endorsed the ECOWAS
force and authorized its mission, in accordance with
both Chapter VI and Chapter VII of the Charter. By
mid-March 2003, the ECOWAS force was fully
deployed at a strength of 1,288. That force is working
very closely in Cote d'Ivoire with French troops, who
have been a stabilizing factor since the outbreak of the
cr1s1s.

The formation of the Government of National
Reconciliation, with additional personal security
requirements for its members, the imperative of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and of
border patrols with neighbouring countries to interdict
the flow of arms, now mean that there is a need to
expand the ECOWAS force to 3,209.

Belgium, France, the Netherlands, the United
Kingdom and the United States have provided essential
material, logistical, transportation and financial
assistance to support the deployment of the ECOWAS
force. However, the pressing concern now is the fact
that the force will run out of funding - even for its
present composition and mission - by the end of April
2003.
Indeed, this pressing and rather threatening issue
was the primary concern of the tenth meeting of the
ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council, held on 7
April 2003 in Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire. That Council of
foreign ministers decided at that meeting to send a
delegation of five ministers, from Cote d'Ivoire,
Ghana, Guinea, Nigeria and Senegal, to United Nations
Headquarters to take this matter up with the Security
Council and the Secretary-General.

ECOWAS would like to work with the Security
Council to maintain the force in place so as to enable it
support the peace process in Cote d'Ivoire, which is
evolving satisfactorily albeit slowly.

ECOWAS member States will be unable to keep
their troops in Cote d'Ivoire at their own expense,
given the precarious financial situation in contributing
countries. Should States retain their troops in Cote
d'Ivoire without adequate financial provision, there
will be high risk of problems being fomented as a
result of a botched peacekeeping operation, which has
happened in a number of African countries in the past.

The ECOWAS peace mission has so far
demonstrated that it can consolidate the peace already
achieved on the political front and help return Cote
d'Ivoire to its well-deserved position of stability and
prosperity. A stable and prosperous Cote d'Ivoire has
always been a catalyst for peace, stability and
prosperity for all of West Africa.

The Security Council, working closely with
ECOWAS, can and should provide the necessary
support to sustain the operations of the ECOWAS
mission in Cote d'Ivoire and thereby avoid the
otherwise imminent collapse of the mission, which
would have dire consequences for the peace and
security of the entire subregion.

Regarding Liberia, we would like simply to state
that continuing instability in that country poses a threat
to the neighbouring countries of the Mano River
Union, in particular Sierra Leone, as well as to Cote
d'Ivoire, as events in the western part of that country
now demonstrate.

ECOWAS, working with the International
Contact Group on Liberia, has embarked on a new
initiative to bring the Government of Liberia and the
rebel Liberians United for Reconciliation and
Democracy (LURD) into direct talks for a ceasefire. At
their meeting of April 7 in Abidjan, ECOWAS
ministers for foreign affairs also called for the
immediate convening of an all-Liberian round table
involving the Government of Liberia, LURD and all
registered political parties, to agree on a
comprehensive framework for durable peace and to
create conditions for credible, free and fair elections,
due later this year. ECOWAS would like the Security
Council to consider an appropriate monitoring
mechanism for the ceasefire. The sad saga of Liberia
should now be brought to a close.

I trust that the Council will help us to avoid a sad
end to an otherwise happy story of subregional efforts
to maintain peace and security in both Cote d'Ivoire
and Liberia.

