Mr. Corr (Ireland): First, I wish to thank you,
Sir, for convening this open meeting on Kosovo. I also
wish to thank the Secretary-General for his detailed
report on the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), and
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his
comprehensive briefing about recent developments in
the province.

Ireland fully endorses the statement which the
Ambassador of Denmark will deliver on behalf of the
European Union. I will therefore comment briefly in
my national capacity.

We congratulate the people of Kosovo, UNMIK
and all others concerned for having organized and held
municipal elections on 26 October 2002, which were
largely in line with international standards.

We condemn the three killings, including that of
the President of the Municipal Assembly, which marred
what would otherwise have been a relatively safe and
secure process. The low turnout no doubt bears
witness, in part, to the overriding interest of voters in
improving their standard of living rather than focusing
on issues of final status. It is also due, as Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno said, to confusing
political signals, as well as uncertainty on likely
tangible benefits from participation in the elections.

The Council issued a statement prior to the
elections which called on all Kosovo Serbs to facilitate
progress towards building a democratic society by
ensuring that their interests were properly represented.
We particularly regret, therefore, the low turnout in
certain areas by Kosovo Serbs. Nonetheless,
democracy is democracy, and all elections bear their
own messages.

The main message from this election is, more
than ever, that the building of a democratic and multi-
ethnic society in Kosovo represents the only possible
way forward.

Ireland continues to support Special
Representative Steiner's policy of "Standards before
Status", and we welcome the development of
mechanisms within UNMIK and the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government to track progress
towards achieving the benchmarks. The Provisional
Institutions should demonstrate their readiness to
assume governmental functions by working to achieve
a culture based on the rule of law, to tackle crime and
violence and to ensure economic progress.

It is clear that ethnic tensions continue to cause
enormous problems in Kosovo. Despite improvements
in the security situation and the pace return of refugee
and internally displaced persons, there continue to be
difficulties with the integration of minorities. Too
many still live in conditions that are incompatible with
basic standards of human rights. We support UNMIK's
efforts to increase sustainable refugee returns and
stress the need for even closer cooperation with
Belgrade on this vital issue so that returnees can live in
normal, secure conditions.

The donors conference on Kosovo, co-hosted in
Brussels yesterday by the European Commission and
the World Bank, provided a valuable opportunity to
take stock of the positive developments since the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).
However, much more needs to be achieved if Kosovo is
to become a multi-ethnic, democratic entity with a
fully functioning economy. While progress has been
made towards the goal of economic sustainability, there
remains a risk of undue aid-dependency. UNMIK and
the Provisional Institutions must guard against that
risk.

However, donors must not use the risk of aid-
dependency as an excuse to reduce assistance to
Kosovo too prematurely. Yesterday's conference
demonstrated donor awareness of the need to
consolidate the gains made so far and to create
conditions whereby economic interaction helps to
break down the ethnic barriers which, unfortunately,
still pertain in Kosovo. It was important also to hear
Prime Minister Rexhepi at the conference commit his
Government to building a viable, multi-ethnic Kosovo
in which all citizens would have access to public
services and which supported the return of internally
displaced persons and refugees.

Of course, the existence of parallel structures
continues to pose obstacles to progress. It is essential
that all judges, prosecutors and security forces work
within legitimate structures and contribute to upholding
the rule of law in Kosovo. We welcome efforts by
UNMIK to change the political dynamic so as to
provide an incentive to dismantle those structures and
to encourage all communities to participate in the joint
institutions. We support the concept of decentralization
and ongoing efforts to draw up plans on a wide
consultative basis.

My delegation continues to work to support
political stability in the region as a whole on the basis
of economic reform, democracy and respect for human
rights. We support the efforts of Special Representative
Steiner and UNMIK to implement resolution 1244
(1999). We support, as Ambassador Cunningham said
earlier, a Security Council mission to Kosovo in the
near future. Along with our partners in the European
Union, we will continue to promote integration and
regional cooperation through the Stability Pact and the
stabilization and association process, as well as in our
bilateral engagement with the region. It is now
essential that political leaders in Kosovo play their part
in ensuring progress towards European integration,
including through the promotion of reconciliation and
dialogue.

