Ms. Alvear Valenzuela (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would like, first of all, to thank the Spanish
presidency for its initiative in inviting us to reflect on
the civilian aspects of conflict management. This
provides an opportunity for us to consider a key issue
that relates to the ongoing efforts of the Security
Council to improve peacekeeping and peace-building
instruments.

In order to tackle a crisis, we must first examine
its root causes. A multi-dimensional approach must be
adopted to conflict resolution. Once minimum security
conditions have been restored, public order must be
effectively strengthened and the groundwork laid for
social, political and economic reconstruction. People
need help to start a new life, to regain confidence and
to participate in building the future of their
communities. For that reason, it is essential for
initiatives to focus on restoring the rights and hopes of
men and women and on ensuring that their children can
grow up as children.

A study of the civilian aspects of crisis
management highlights the need for effective
coordination between civilian and military actors.
Successful civilian action is without doubt a
precondition for guaranteeing the effective
rehabilitation of a country in crisis, and depends, first
of all, upon the existence of an adequate level of
security to promote respect for the rule of law. It also
requires an effective police force, judicial system and
prison system. In that regard, an efficient civilian
police force is particularly important. Those elements
are the basis for the comprehensive post-conflict
rehabilitation of individuals, a process that is
necessarily linked to a strategy of long-term economic
and social development.

We must consider effective coordination between
crisis management mechanisms and the mechanisms
for reconstruction and long-term development. The
success of such initiatives will depend on our ability to
develop a lasting commitment on the part of the
international community to United Nations action.

The wide range of actors and agencies that
increasingly participate in preventive diplomacy
creates a special opportunity for civilians to contribute
to crisis resolution. That involves action by
Governments, regional organizations and non-
governmental organizations. Preventive diplomacy
today is not the exclusive preserve of the United
Nations system. We must promote the effective
engagement of the various actors and the development
of flexible contacts among them and with the military
elements, in order to create a pattern of mutual
awareness and cooperation.

In that context, there is a need to recognize the
experience of regional organizations in crisis
management. The Security Council has shown interest
in making use of the capabilities of regional
organizations in conflict management, which certainly
includes a civilian dimension.

Working to promote good governance on the
continent of the Americas is an aspiration on which the
Governments of the region have agreed. Within the
framework of the Organization of American States
(OAS) the advances made in the Inter-American
Democratic Charter of 2001 and in the Santiago
Declaration on Democracy and Citizen Confidence of
2003 demonstrate a clear political will to strengthen
democracy as an essential element of the hemisphere's
identity and the basis for coexistence in peace and
security. That endeavour in the field of democratic
governance could be taken into account in the design
of the multidimensional mandates of peacekeeping
operations.

The crisis in Haiti marks a new challenge for the
United Nations system and the international
community to continue developing their capacities to
manage the civilian aspects of conflicts. The United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
has been designed to rehabilitate a nation in political,
economic and social terms, in order to achieve lasting
peace and security. The operation's multidimensional
mandate encompasses the essential elements of a
strategy for managing the civilian aspects of the crisis.
It is a matter of priority to restore the capacities of the
Haitian national police and the rule of law.

I express my solidarity and sympathy with the
victims of the recent natural disaster in Haiti, which
has further compounded the difficulties facing the
Haitian people. The action of MINUSTAH is
associated with a political transition towards a system
of full democracy. That approach requires the effective
presence of the OAS, which can contribute its
experience in the field of electoral assistance and the
rebuilding of institutions. The United Nations would
thus incorporate regional actors into the operation,
while permitting the use of mechanisms established by
the OAS in achieving a common objective.

We believe that an appropriate interrelationship
between the regional and global spheres is an issue that
cannot be ignored in a reform process that includes the
various actors and approaches that contribute to
conflict prevention and to post-conflict activities.

We believe that the United Nations has improved
its conflict management capacity, both in theory and in
practice, but we think it is necessary to develop a
doctrine that would enable us to make the multilateral
system more active and efficient in the comprehensive
management of conflicts.

To that end, we propose a number of concrete
measures. First, Member States should develop their
capabilities in the areas of the police, strengthening the
rule of law, civil administration and promoting national
reconciliation with a view to their possible use within
the framework of the peacekeeping operations of
United Nations or regional organizations. The idea is to
establish a national register of the human and material
resources that may be called upon in case of need,
taking into account the gender perspective.

Secondly, we believe it is important to promote
cooperation among the United Nations, its agencies
and programmes, regional organizations and Member
States in order to increase the availability of human
and material resources for the management of the
civilian aspects of peacekeeping operations.

Thirdly, we think it is important to promote the
active participation of civil society - a key element
that, on some occasions, would serve to supplement the
actions of State actors.

Fourthly, consideration should be given to the
establishment of a focal point within the Department
for Peacekeeping Operations in order to design,
coordinate and monitor the implementation of a
multidimensional approach that would blend the
civilian and military aspects of crisis management.

Lastly, the Secretariat should prepare a matrix of
the elements to be considered for improving civilian-
military coordination in the design of the mandates of
peacekeeping operations.
We live in a world beset by a wide range of
conflicts that demand increasing United Nations
involvement. The response of the United Nations must
focus, first of all, on promoting all the preventive
mechanisms necessary to forestall crises. But, at the
same time, as we renew our political commitment to
United Nations action in crisis management and post-
conflict situations, we need to work further in this area.
What is at stake here is the effectiveness of a
multilateral system, which is essential for maintaining
order in a globalized world.

We are hopeful that the Council will succeed in
structuring approaches that take account of both the
civilian and the military dimensions. We must ensure
that peacekeeping operations make it possible to truly
restore stability based upon the principles of the United
Nations Charter, by creating conditions for restoring
community life and the essential value of human
dignity.

