Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing today's open debate. I would like to thank
the Under-Secretary-General and High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Nakamitsu, Mr. Ballard
and you, Mr. President, for the very comprehensive and
informative briefings this morning.

Sweden aligns itself with the statements that
will be made later by the observer of the European
Union, by the representative of Spain, on behalf of the
Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004), and by
the representative of Norway on behalf of the Nordic
countries.

Today's discussion on resolution 1540 (2004) and
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
particularly with regard to non-State actors, is very
timely. As we have seen from recent terrorist attacks,
the aim of the perpetrators is to indiscriminately injure
and kill as many innocent people as possible. Therefore,
we must be alert to the fact that there is a real threat of
non-State actors seeking to procure and use weapons of
mass destruction.

Sweden remains strongly committed to the
strengthening of the multilateral disarmament and
non-proliferation regimes, not least in the field of
nuclear disarmament. Resolution 1540 (2004) is an
important complement to those regimes. The use of
chemical weapons by Da'esh and the enduring ability
of some States with weapons of mass destruction
aspirations to contravene export controls bear witness
to the continuing and growing relevance of resolution
1540 (2004).

As we heard from your own briefing this morning,
Mr. President, progress has been achieved in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004); however,
much work remains to be done to ensure its application
globally. Sweden is committed to supporting that work.
We recently made a special financial contribution
to the Office for Disarmament Affairs for the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In addition,
we are contributing to global efforts in support of the
resolution's objectives through the nuclear security
cooperation programme of the Swedish Radiation
Safety Authority, and our engagement in the Group
of Seven Global Partnership programme, where we
currently co-chair the biosecurity sub-working group.

However, we should not limit our attention to
items and materials alone; knowledge and information
also represent important factors in the attainment
of weapons of mass destruction. It is important to
highlight the risks associated with intangible transfers
of technology, whereby sensitive know-how might be
transferred through research, industry or social media.
This is an issue that we raised repeatedly during last
year's comprehensive review. As Vice-Chair of the
1540 Committee, we are currently considering ways
of highlighting this issue, including through outreach
events.

Finally, we would like to congratulate Spain once
more for the proactive and committed way in which it
led the comprehensive review last year, and to commend
Bolivia for the continuation of those efforts under its
leadership. It is essential that we continue to take into
consideration the evolving proliferation threats as we
move forward towards the global implementation of
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016).

The threat that the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction poses to international peace and security
continues to grow. It is only through States working
together in full support for the multilateral institutions
we have put in place that this threat can be managed.
