I would like to thank Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for having convened today's meeting. I also would like to thank the briefers for their interesting insights and their work. I want to pay tribute to the police commissioners at today's meeting and to all police officers in the line of duty for the United Nations for their dedication, skills and commitment. As of today, a total of 8,890 police officers are serving in 12 peacekeeping and special political missions in different regions of the world. Among them, there are German police officers in Kosovo, Mali, Somalia and, in future, once again in the Sudan. Those officers are not the first to serve the United Nations, and it is certain that they will not be the last. Germany has been deploying police officers since 1989. Two German contingents were part of the United Nations Transitional Assistance Group in Namibia - one formed by officers from the western part of Germany, and the other by officers from the former East German Democratic Republic. Those officers witnessed on television and on the radio how thousands of people crossed the inner German border and danced on the Berlin wall 31 years ago, on 9 November 1989. For them, the beginning of the reunification took place far away from home, while serving for the United Nations. There is only one Germany now, and Germany today deploys police officers from its Federal Police as well as from its State Police Services. This week, we are commemorating the sixtieth anniversary of the creation of the United Nations police (UNPOL). The success story of UNPOL started in 1960, when the first police officers were deployed to the United Nations Operation in the Congo. The importance and the role of the United Nations police have grown significantly since then. This can be witnessed by looking at the numbers of deployed officers, namely, from around 1,700 in 1994, to the peak of almost 15,000 officers in 2010, and now, as already mentioned, almost 9,000 officers. But even more, it can be witnessed by looking at the mandates UNPOL is implementing in field missions. UNPOL protects civilians, including the groups most vulnerable in conflict, such as internally displaced persons, women and children; UNPOL trains police officers of host States, in order for them to be able to deliver professional policing services to the people; UNPOL advises senior leadership of host State police services as well as Ministries of Internal Security, in order for them to build professional police organizations in accordance with internationally recognized standards; UNPOL advises host States on how to better integrate women into their organizations and how to tackle crime that mainly affects women as victims, such as sexual and gender-based violence, with a view to strengthening the women and peace and security agenda in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000) and all subsequent resolutions on women, peace and security; and UNPOL provides policing assistance through its standing capacity to countries where no missions are deployed in order for them to further professionalize their police. Sustainable peace can be achieved only when governance is based on the rule of law and on human rights - and when the rights of all people living in the country are respected and protected equally. Security and democratic policing are two of the most important services that a State has to provide. Without security provided by people-oriented police, other objectives such as education, participation, development and prosperity are almost impossible to achieve. This is why United Nations police officers are key to delivering on our joint commitment to sustaining peace and the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Challenged by the complexity of today's conflicts and exposed to increasingly complex mandates, it is essential that United Nations police are resourced, staffed and trained in accordance with the needs on the ground. This request for resources goes to multiple partners. First, to the members of the Security Council, whose responsibility it is to adopt responsive and realistic mandates as well as sufficient ceilings on police deployments in order to implement those mandates. In our term on the Council, we have worked very hard to steer mandates in this direction. This request goes to the members of the Fifth Committee, whose responsibility it is to provide appropriate resources to missions, including on programmatic funding. This request goes to police-contributing countries (PCCs), whose responsibility it is to provide only fully trained and properly vetted police officers, as well as the necessary equipment. And this request also goes to the Secretariat, including its field missions, whose responsibility it is to provide the conceptual and strategic framework for United Nations policing. Accordingly, the exchange of personnel and knowledge between Member States and the Secretariat through seconded personnel and constant dialogue is essential. Policing is subject to permanent changes and new developments. Strategies, policies and standard operating procedures have to be adapted to those new realities. In addition, recruitment processes, in particular for professional posts, are still taking way too long and are not sufficiently transparent for the candidates and the respective PCCs. We stand ready to provide our support, with personnel, financial resources and substantive advice through Member State consultation processes. We support the reform of the UNPOL training architecture because we believe that more focused and specialized training is key to better performance by United Nations police. We stand ready to make trainings by our police-training institutions available to PCCs and missions utilizing the light coordination mechanism. On the substantive side, I am asking the Secretariat and the field missions to include more input on United Nations policing in the reports of the Secretary- General. Unfortunately, very often, there is not much more than just one paragraph on what UNPOL has been doing during the reporting period. The Security Council has to be optimally informed about the substantive work of UNPOL in order to make informed decisions when considering the mandates of field missions. UNPOL was important for the success of missions in the past; it is important for success right now; and it will become even more important in the future, including through an increased role in conflict prevention. We encourage all actors, the PCCs, the Security Council, the General Assembly, the Secretariat and host States to support the work of the United Nations police. In conclusion, allow me to address a question to our briefer on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). What additional role of support can UNPOL/MINUSMA play in the implementation of the ambitious transitional charter, especially with regard to security sector reform, the rule of law and the restoration of State services and authority? I look forward to a constructive and informative discussion here at the Security Council. Let us hope that the improvements and the positive developments of recent years will maintain their momentum and that the United Nations police will be able to continue to serve the people who need this support the most.
