Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): I would like to thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for his comprehensive briefing.

For more than two decades, the Middle East
peace process has been mediated diligently by the
international community. Undoubtedly, the process has
been characterized by rigorous negotiations, hints of
progress and compromise, followed by seemingly
intractable political stalemates. With the failure of the
parties to resume direct negotiations, we are witnessing
another moment of uncertainty. The parties must now
demonstrate their undivided commitment to peace and
remove all impediments to the resumption of direct
negotiations to resolve the outstanding permanent
status issues.

While it is regrettable that the meeting of the
Quartet scheduled for this month failed to take place,
we welcome the prospect of new proposals by the
United States and Israeli authorities to re-open the
stalled talks. We believe, however, that the Quartet
Road Map offers a viable pathway to peace and
progress. The parties should embrace it as a basis for
substantive engagement towards the creation of an
independent Palestinian State living in peace and
security alongside Israel by the end of this year. This
goal will be difficult to achieve if the vicious cycle of
violence, attacks and reprisals continues in the region.

However, there are a number of specific actions
that are certain to foster mutual respect and
compromise, build confidence, and pave the way for
the realization of the two-State solution. In this regard,
we encourage Israel to take concrete steps to freeze all
settlement-related activities in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. The planned construction of new settler
homes will provide fodder for resentment and
increased violence. In the same vein, military
incursions into Gaza and retaliation for militant attacks
are unhelpful to the peace process.

Palestinian leaders must signal their readiness to
return to the negotiating table by making enhanced
efforts to forge unity and deal with militancy and other
internal security challenges. It is beyond doubt that
neither military might nor militancy will resolve the
protracted conflict. We therefore reiterate our
condemnation of recent rocket attacks on southern
Israel by Palestinian militants in the Gaza Strip, and
call for maximum restraint from both sides.

A prisoner-exchange programme between the two
sides at this point in time would no doubt ease tensions
and build trust, as would the unconditional release of
Gilad Shalit after more than five years in detention.

The key lesson we must draw from the tragic
events of 31 May 2010 is that confrontation must be
avoided in the future delivery of humanitarian aid to
Gaza. While we commend Israel for further easing the
blockade on Gaza, we stress its obligation to provide
unhindered access for humanitarian and other goods
into Gaza. At the same time, we urge the people of
Gaza to utilize only legitimate channels to transport
persons, goods and materials out of the territory in
order to address Israel's legitimate security concerns.
In this regard, we note the positive role the Palestinian
Authority is playing in addressing Israel's security
concerns.

The fragile security situations in North Africa and
parts of the Middle East present challenges and fresh
opportunities that demand renewed vigilance and
commitment to peace by all stakeholders. It is in that
regard that we welcome the proposal by the Russian
delegation for a visit to the Middle East at an
appropriate time and believe that this will further
strengthen our collective resolve for peace in the
Middle East, even as we are optimistic that, with our
collective engagement, the vision of statehood can be
achieved before the end of the year.

With regard to Lebanon, we support its
sovereignty and territorial integrity and urge the new
Government to remain steadfast in the implementation
of its international obligations, including resolution
1701 (2006). In that connection, we welcome the
Government's pledge to assist the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and restore regional peace
and security in line with that resolution. We urge Israel
to halt further incursions into Lebanese territory to
avoid an escalation of violence. We also stress the
importance of maintaining calm along the Blue Line.

On the Golan Heights, we encourage Israel and
Syria to seek a mutually acceptable solution. We
underscore the need for all parties to engage in fruitful
dialogue and longer-term political reconciliation, even
in the face of provocations.
Finally, by acting together to build confidence,
the search for peace will be significantly enhanced. In
words and deeds, the parties should demonstrate a
strong desire to re-engage in a negotiated settlement of
all the core issues of the conflict.

