Mr. Kaul (Germany): Let me begin by saying that
Germany fully supports the statement made by the
representative of Italy on behalf of the European Union and
the States that have again associated themselves with
another important statement of the European Union.

Today's meeting of the Security Council provides an
important opportunity to take stock of what has been
achieved by the efforts of the parties to the conflict, and
those of this Council, the Secretary-General and his Special
Representatives, and other States and entities involved. The
result is that there is still intensive fighting in the Tavildara
area, the humanitarian situation is very serious, and the
prospects for progress in the inter-Tajik talks are bleak. The
Tehran Agreement of 17 September 1994, which constitutes
the basis for a negotiated political settlement, has at best
been partially implemented.

The armed Islamist opposition seems to be about to
take control of a large and strategically important part of
Tajikistan. The region of Leninabad and other areas are
gradually slipping from Government control. There are even
some signs of disunity within the Kulyabi-dominated
Government. We therefore see a concrete danger of an
"Afghanization" of the conflict, with serious consequences
for regional stability.

Both parties bear a heavy load of responsibility for
this development. We see, however, a major obstacle to
a settlement in the Government's failure to open itself up
to the participation of other regional and political groups
in Tajikistan. A Viable political compromise cannot
consist only in power-sharing between the parties to the
conflict, but must aim at establishing genuine democratic
decision-making processes. Without a readiness by the
Government to genuinely share power, however, a
compromise cannot be reached.

Germany supports the draft resolution, which
provides for an extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) for
another six months. We attribute, however, great
importance to the intention expressed in both the
Secretary-General's report and the draft resolution to
seriously review the future of the United Nations
commitment in Tajikistan after these six months, if there
is no meaningful progress in the peace process.

In this context, what is needed first and foremost is
an immediate cessation of hostilities by both sides. If both
parties continue to play the military card and drag their
feet on a continuation of the inter-Tajik talks, the result
will be only pain and more misery for the people of
Tajikistan. We call upon the parties to seek a peaceful,
negotiated settlement; if this call is not heard and if the
obligations undertaken by the parties are not respected,
the Council will eventually be forced to draw its
conclusions.

If UNMOT is to effectively fulfil its mandate, all
restrictions on its freedom of movement must be lifted,
especially by the Government of Tajikistan. Verbal
assurances that this will happen are not sufficient.
Furthermore, it is imperative that the Joint Commission
established to monitor cease-fire violations resume its
work, after the walkout by the opposition, which was
prompted by the kidnapping of the opposition Co-
Chairrnan of the Commission on 24 February 1996. It is
regrettable that there has been no news from the
Government of Tajikistan on the results of its
investigation of this incident. On the other hand, we have
noted that the Government has obviously now given the
written security guarantees asked for by the opposition,

 

and we encourage the opposition to accept them in good
faith.

The parties to the conflict, both the Government of
Tajikistan and the opposition, should now understand the
stern warning message given to them in today's draft
resolution. The Council is giving the parties another, and
probably a last, six-month chance, to actually demonstrate
their commitment to an effective cease-fire and to national
reconciliation, to be achieved with the assistance of the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, UNMOT
and the Commonwealth of Independent States peace-
keepers.

Germany is pleased that it was able to make a
voluntary contribution of DM. 1 million to UNMOT in
order to provide it with an air transport capacity.

Finally, I would like to pay tribute to, and thank, the
members of UNMOT for carrying out their mission under
what are now very difficult circumstances.

