Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this public meeting. The fact that we have brought
together here most of the players involved in Guinea-
Bissau strikes me as particularly timely, given that it is
clear that a comprehensive approach to the problems of
the country is necessary to confront them.

I would like next to thank the Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. David Stephen, for
introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2003/621) and for his very thorough briefing on the
situation in Guinea-Bissau.

Unfortunately, there is no reason to celebrate the
facts that we have just been presented. The situation in
Guinea-Bissau is indeed cause for concern. Since our
consultations last March, it has hardly improved. This
is true above all of the political situation, which
remains unstable. The date for legislative elections has
just been postponed once again. The voter registration
process, which is indispensable for fair and transparent
elections, has not yet begun. The political climate is
marked by extreme aggression and violence. Financing
for the elections and for political parties is not
guaranteed.

France wishes to express here its commitment to
ensuring that the Guinea-Bissau authorities,
particularly President Kumba Yala, do what is
necessary for elections to take place at the
earliest possible date, and that they be free, fair and
transparent - in a word, democratic. France also
endorses the European position that no longer than
three months after the end of the elections the President
and Vice-President of the Supreme Court should finally
be elected. The holding of elections followed by those
Supreme Court elections would be concrete proof that
the Government of Guinea-Bissau is embarking on a
course towards the rule of law.

It goes without saying that the involvement of the
international community will also be necessary to
guarantee the smooth and democratic conduct of these
elections and to stabilize the political situation. Donors
must mobilize themselves to provide the necessary
financing, and arrangements should be made for
sending observers for the elections.

The human rights situation is hardly better. In this
regard, the Secretary-General's report speaks of the
persistent attacks on freedom of expression and arrests
of opposition figures and protesters. France condemns
such human rights violations in the strongest terms and
appeals to the Government to shoulder its
responsibility to put an end to that situation.

The same can be said of the country's economy,
which is having trouble finding a way towards growth
and development. The responsibility falls above all to
the Government of Guinea-Bissau. The country's
authorities must opt for a constructive dialogue and
become full partners with the international community,
as advocated by the Economic and Social Council Ad
Hoc Working Group. They must make significant
efforts in the area of good governance and make clear
commitments to restore the trust of the international
community, particularly the Bretton Woods institutions.
It is only on this condition that the donor community
can bring its full weight to bear on the reconstruction
of the country.

I believe that the joint Security Council and
Economic and Social Council mission that will be led
by the representative of Mexico will show the
Council's interest in resolving the many problems that
the country must face today. The recent Council
mission to Central African has shown the impact that
such a mission can have when there is agreement by all
on a limited number of strong messages to send to our
negotiating partners and when the Council speaks with
one voice.

I see that that is the case today. It is in this spirit
that, at the expert level, we have prepared a draft
presidential statement, which will be adopted shortly.

