Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me start
by warmly welcoming Prime Minister Bellerive. We
appreciate his excellent statement and are particularly
grateful for his Government's views on the appropriate
role of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) going forward. I would also like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Edmond Mulet for his comprehensive briefing, and
above all for his extraordinary service in leading
United Nations efforts in Haiti since the tragic
earthquake of 12 January. We want to thank him and all
the personnel of MINUSTAH for their dedication and
selfless sacrifice.
First Lady Michelle Obama visited Haiti a few
weeks ago, three months following the earthquake.
There, she reiterated the United States deepest

condolences to the Haitian people for the immense
losses they have suffered. She carried a clear message
from President Obama that the United States would
continue to stand shoulder to shoulder with the people
of Haiti. The First Lady also had the opportunity to
visit the United Nations compound during her trip, to
thank Mr. Mulet and the entire United Nations family
for their unwavering support to the people of Haiti, to
praise their heroism in the face of the greatest single
loss of life that the United Nations has ever suffered,
and to underscore the importance of a truly
international effort to help Haiti recover and rebuild.
America's gratitude for the contributions of troops,
police and financial assistance made by the many
countries represented here today is deep and abiding.
We are proud to be working together as a unified
international community in support of the Government
and people of Haiti.

At the donors' conference on 31 March, the
international community came together to pledge almost
$10 billion in support for Haiti, of which $5 billion was
pledged for 2010 and 2011. For our part, the United
States will contribute $1.15 billion to Haiti's recovery
and reconstruction. That money will support the
Government of Haiti's plans to strengthen the areas of
agriculture, energy, health, security and governance.

Today, the Security Council is meeting to forge
consensus on the future of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, which of course faces a
very different situation in the aftermath of the
earthquake's devastation. We share the Secretary-
General's assessment that the next 12 to 18 months will
be a period of high risk in which we will need to
pursue simultaneously political, security, protection
and recovery objectives. We also agree that, during that
period, the role of the United Nations and its Member
States should be to support Haiti's Government and
institutions in delivering on their responsibilities, while
respecting their authority, sovereignty and
prerogatives.

We are largely in agreement with the future role
for MINUSTAH that the Secretary-General proposes in
his latest report (8/2010/200). I would like to highlight
our perspective on six recommendations in particular.

First, we support MINUSTAH's taking a lead
role, specifically in technical assistance during the
electoral process, in order to ensure efficiency and
avoid duplication. We also encourage electoral support

from key regional organizations, such as the
Organization of American States, operating within the
coordination framework of MINUSTAH.

Secondly, we fully agree that the Special
Representative must continue to oversee the activities
of the whole United Nations system in Haiti and that
MINUSTAH's military, police and logistics
components should provide, within their means and
capabilities, full support to humanitarian and recovery
efforts.

Thirdly, the internally displaced persons (IDPs)
continue to require assistance, in particular regarding
their relocation to safer, less flood-prone areas.
Although extraordinary work has been done to protect
IDPs and to maintain a safe environment for them,
MINUSTAH must now work with the Government of
Haiti and its other partners to reach a more permanent
solution and move towards a more community-based
approach.

Fourthly, we agree with the Secretary-General
that there is a need to enhance MINUSTAH's support
for the Haitian National Police, especially to ensure a
more sustainable and visible police presence
throughout areas affected by the earthquake, including
protecting citizens in IDP camps. My Government is
prepared to support a further increase of 680 police
officers for MINUSTAH on the understanding that the
Secretariat will provide us with a detailed police-to-
task analysis of how this figure was reached. We would
also appreciate additional information on the revised
concept of operations for MINUSTAH'S police
component, including the underlying assumptions
about how long the increased police capacity will be
needed. We want to ensure that MINUSTAH has
enough police to take on critical tasks in its mandate,
but we also hope to ensure that all authorized police
personnel are being used as effectively as possible.

Of course, the Secretariat depends on Member
States to provide the additional police authorized by
this Council, including well-trained and well-equipped
formed police units. We commend the countries that
have already deployed such formed police units, and
we encourage others that can contribute them to
MINUSTAH to do so as soon as possible.
Fifthly, we applaud the instinct of the United
Nations to reject a business-as-usual approach in these
dire circumstances. We understand that it can put a
strain on MINUSTAH staff and put staff in an awkward

situation when they have functioning offices,
computers and vehicles that their local Haitian
counterparts may lack. We therefore entirely
understand the desire of the Mission leadership to
provide direct logistical support to the Haitian
institutions they are mandated to assist, and we
understand that special representatives in many other
missions have had similar impulses and faced similar
frustrations when not allowed to do so.

That said, we must ask how the Secretariat will
propose to handle maintenance costs and legal liability
in cases when United Nations equipment and vehicles
are loaned to Haitian officials. We wonder whether it
might be more cost-effective and sustainable for other
actors in the development community to purchase the
equipment and vehicles through voluntary
contributions and donate them directly. Since these
proposals are presumably stop-gap measures, pending
longer-term assistance coming on line, how would the
functionality of the Mission be affected if it depleted
its logistical capacity for this purpose, even in the short
term? We hope the Secretariat and MINUSTAH will
address such issues before proceeding down the
proposed path.

We fully share the Secretary-General's
assessment of the need to invest in building State
capacity and human capital. In that context, we see the
value of imbedding MINUSTAH advisers in Haitian
institutions and offices where requested by the
Government of Haiti. Such a step certainly makes
sense where MINUSTAH is already provided
considerable advice and assistance, consistent with its
existing mandate, such as in the rule of law sector.

At the same time, as MINUSTAH considers
branching into other areas of governance support
where it has not been working to date, we would
welcome a better appreciation of the rationale for
doing so via MINUSTAH rather than turning to the
United Nations Development Programme, relevant
international financial institutions or other bilateral and
multilateral actors.

Finally, the Secretary-General has provided us
with a series of proposals to enable MINUSTAH to
provide the best possible support to the Government of
Haiti in this ongoing time of dire need. We will
continue to support the people and Government of
Haiti and work together with other partners in this
crucial cause. Accordingly, the United States remains
open to considering appropriate adjustments to
MINUSTAH's mandated strength and approach.

