Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): As our briefers made
clear, and as we all know, international humanitarian law
consists of a comprehensive and universal framework
to which all Member States are not only committed
but bound. It is important, of course, that we enhance
that framework whenever we see an opportunity to do
so - and our briefers today mentioned resolution 2462
(2019), adopted just last week at the initiative of the
French delegation, on the issue of terrorist financing,
which includes important provisions on humanitarian
action; as well as resolution 2417 (2018), on starving
civilians as a weapon of war. But we do not lack law, we
lack enforcement and accountability. Sadly, we are too
regularly used to hearing terrible humanitarian stories
around this table. Time and time again, from Syria to
South Sudan to Yemen and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo - in fact, in every conflict situation on
the Council's agenda - we witness the human cost
of the lack of respect for humanitarian principles and
international humanitarian law.

The most appalling incidents become notorious and
are brought not only to our attention by those agencies
and operators on the ground, but also often brought to
our peoples on their television screens - for example,
attacks on aid workers or the bombing of hospitals.
But we hear much less about the routine and insidious
actions that nevertheless have a human cost in the end.
I am talking about such things as the denial of visas
for humanitarian staff, the removal of medical items
from aid convoys, lengthy procurement and transport
processes, the looting and diversion of pre-positioned
goods by armed actors or the authorities, taxes and
fines on goods and people, the closure of crossings,
and the denial of registration to non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). There is a long list.

The human coast is clear. People starve, they
suffer and they die when the humanitarian space is not
respected. And we lose development gains that have
taken years to achieve. To give one example from South
Sudan, which we have talked a lot about in the Council,
an international NGO with an in-country staff of fewer
than 200 people estimates that it spends approximately
$350,000 per year in South Sudan on administrative
taxes and fees. Those financial costs are primarily paid
to official or quasi-official entities. That is all money
that should be going to protecting the people that those
officials are in place to serve.
As well as documenting attacks on humanitarian
personnel or other egregious crimes, we need to gather
data on the bureaucratic impediments and the actions
that hamper humanitarian access. In that respect, let me
commend the work that the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs is doing to map out how
access constraints relate to the severity of needs and
the humanitarian assistance received. Let me also say
that the United Kingdom is supporting research to
ensure that the nature, frequency, scale and impact of
attacks on health care in conflict is better understood
to improve data collection analysis, as called for in
resolution 2286 (2016). All of that data should be
brought to the attention of the Security Council and its
subsidiary bodies.

For its part, the United Kingdom is always looking
for any innovative ways to promote compliance
with international humanitarian law. On 11 March,
we published our first voluntary report on the
implementation of international humanitarian law at
the domestic level. Publishing specific examples of
our practice to implement international humanitarian
law is intended to help improve understanding of it
and encourage informed dialogue on these issues, both
at home and abroad. We hope it will encourage other
States to publish details of their activities to implement
international humanitarian law at the domestic level so
as to identify best practices and improve implementation
and compliance.

Of course, more can be done by State actors. Mark
Lowcock talked about the importance of increasing
the understanding and training of some countries'
armed forces. But he also spoke about the need to do
so with non-State actors - a point made also by Peter
Maurer. I think this is an area to which the Security
Council could give greater focus. We could look both at
education and training and ensuring that commanders
are aware of their liabilities under international law,
whether those are State or non-State actors, and look at
tackling actions of non-State actors through sanctions
in particular.

I had not intended to talk today about Syria,
which the Council regularly discusses. But the
Russian representative today chose to continue his
Government's misinformation campaign against the
White Helmets. The Russian Government does so to try
to deflect attention away from the appalling war crimes
committed by the Syrian regime - its attacks on its
own people, including by its use of chemical weapons.
Therefore, let us not have our attention deflected from
the fact that Physicians for Human Rights corroborated
553 attacks on medical facilities in Syria in 2018, of
which 498 were committed by the Syrian regime and
its allies.

It is very welcome, Mr. President, that you
organized this briefing today. All here have reaffirmed
their commitments. Good ideas have been shared by
our briefers and by colleagues. However, I am struck
by the contrast between our willingness to stake out a
clear position in the abstract while at the same time not
tackling humanitarian violations in country-specific
conversations. In addition to today's meeting, I think
that we need to do the following.

First, we must ask for, gather and then discuss
data about not just the most egregious violations of
international humanitarian law but also the bureaucratic
impediments and interference with humanitarian
assistance, which kill so many of those in most
desperate need.

Secondly, we must ensure that the United
Nations system is able to support States in spreading
understanding of international humanitarian law
and training armed forces, and Government officials
more broadly.

Thirdly, we should consider how such understanding
and training could be expanded to non-State actors and
ensure they also are held to account.

Fourthly, we could call out consistently violations
of international humanitarian law by all actors
in our regular business and our country-specific
conversations - whether on South Sudan, Syria,
Myanmar or elsewhere.

Fifthly, we could put greater attention on
humanitarian violations when designing and
implementing sanctions regimes.

And, sixthly, we should push consistently for an
accountability mechanism where States cannot, or will
not, act.

As Mr. Maurer said, upholding international
humanitarian law depends on our common acceptance
that there are limits to war. We all, therefore, have
a stake in upholding and strengthening it for our
common humanity.

