Mr. Galbavy (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on Poland's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also want to thank you for organizing
this useful debate. We strongly believe that the Security
Council has an important responsibility to promote
justice and the rule of law in its efforts to maintain
international peace and security. I would also like to
thank Ms. Viotti, Judge Owada and Judge Meron for
their insightful briefings.

My delegation associates itself with the statement to
be delivered later by the observer of the European Union.

I would like to highlight a few points that we
believe to be especially relevant in the context of our
debate today.

The international order conceived after the Second
World War is a global rules-based system in which
States are required to develop friendly relations and
settle their disputes in peaceful ways. The work of
the International Court of Justice is fundamental to
the settlement of disputes between States. Slovakia
encourages all States Members of the United Nations to
join the 73 States, including my own, that have accepted
the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice. The adjudication of legal disputes by an
impartial and independent judicial body is essential to
promoting the rule of law in international relations.

The rule of law, and justice in general, would
be an illusion if we did not ensure accountability.
We are convinced that bringing the perpetrators of
international crimes to justice is a basic requirement
for the resolution of any conflict and for subsequent
reconciliation efforts. In that regard, the most
prominent place belongs to the International Criminal
Court (ICC), which will celebrate the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of its founding instrument,
the Rome Statute, later this year. We call on Member
States to join the 123 States parties to the Statute in
fighting impunity. The Security Council has a special
relationship with the ICC, and Slovakia encourages
referrals by the Council to the Court in cases where war
crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide are being
committed and where the national authorities bearing
the primary responsibility for prosecuting those crimes
are not in a position to do so. It is equally important that
the Security Council follow up on its referrals so that
the required cooperation of Member States is ensured.

Prevention has been gaining prominence on the
agenda of the United Nations, and my country fully
supports that approach. In the area of law, the preventive
role of the various human rights monitoring bodies
is indispensable. Slovakia is also closely following
the current negotiations in Geneva on a compliance
mechanism for international humanitarian law and
hopes to see the creation of a meaningful mechanism
that will strengthen respect for the rules of international
humanitarian law, thereby contributing to the alleviation
of human suffering during armed conflict.

In conclusion, I wish only to say that the
international community is facing unprecedented
challenges to global peace and security. We must make
sure that such challenges are resolved peacefully and
always within the framework of international law.

