Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation is especially pleased that you, Madam,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Spain, are presiding
over the Security Council for this important meeting.

My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
his report to the Security Council and for his opening
statement at this meeting. We wish in particular to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for the important
briefing, information and views he has shared with us
in order to enable the Security Council to appraise the
role of the United Nations and the current situation in
Iraq.

My delegation also welcomes Mr. Adnan
Pachachi, Mr. Ahmad Chalabi and Ms. Aqeela al-
Hashemi.

My Government has taken due note of the
formation of the interim Governing Council of Iraq. We
listened attentively to Mr. Pachachi's statement
concerning the objectives and purposes of that Council
in the immediate future. We sincerely wish them every
success in their task of such far-reaching importance to
the political reconstruction of Iraq.

The aim expressed by the Secretary-General
concerning the Organization's presence in Iraq is fully
shared by the Mexican Government. We agree that the
immediate goal is to put an end to the military
occupation as soon as possible, within the framework
of the establishment of an Iraqi administration that is
genuinely representative and capable of restoring and
exercising Iraq's full sovereignty, in keeping with a
constitutional order designed by Iraqis for Iraqis.

In this regard, my delegation fully endorses the
principles outlined here by the Permanent
Representative of Pakistan, which are principles that
we have championed with respect to the situation in
Iraq and which are undoubtedly those that inspire the
activities of the United Nations. We hope that the
timetable referred to in the Secretary-General's report
will lead expeditiously and successfully to the full
restoration of Iraq's sovereignty.

The raison d'etre of the United Nations presence
in Iraq and the mandate that this Council has given it is
to assist and support the people of Iraq, strengthen its
capacity to recover its sovereignty, address the
humanitarian problems it faces, establish conditions for
the full exercise of human rights and foster the creation
of institutions that will lead to economic, political and
social development for the Iraqi people. The people of
Iraq is the focus of the United Nations and the only
objective that the Organization is pursuing in Iraq. In
keeping with this, we welcome the fact that, through
dialogue and communication with all sectors of Iraqi
society, the United Nations has been able to re-
establish its presence in Iraq and to draw up a
programme of work, set its priorities and define its
positions.

The Security Council can also thereby gain a
clearer idea of what Iraqis want. As Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello has said, regardless of the sector, faith or race
of members of Iraqi society, there are very clear needs,
demands, purposes and objectives being pursued by the
Iraqi people as a whole. These have been described to
us today by Mr. Vieira de Mello.

The first of these, of course, is the full restoration
of peace, order and security. Here, we need to stress the
fact that the primary responsibility lies, in accordance
with international humanitarian law, with the Authority
set up by the occupying forces. That responsibility
cannot be replaced by anyone, but the international
community can assist in carrying out the task of fully
restoring security and order in Iraq.

In that regard, my delegation is grateful for the
reports shared with the Security Council earlier by
representatives of the coalition. We look forward to the
report that Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock has said
will be forthcoming in accordance with the provisions
of resolution 1483 (2003) regarding the information
that the coalition and the Authority must share with the
Security Council, so that we may evaluate the action
the Council can take to strengthen the role of the
United Nations and more actively assist in fully
restoring peace and security.

Peace and security, which we wish to see in Iraq,
essentially depend not only on police and military
arrangements; peace and security will ultimately hinge
upon the political arrangement that Iraqis achieve -
by addressing humanitarian needs, creating robust
institutions upon which to base the rule of law and
establishing adequate conditions for economic and
social development - to provide the foundations for
peace and security in the country, as well as by seeking
agreement with regard to the establishment of new
representative institutions that leave behind the past of
brutal repression experienced by the Iraqi people. My
Government therefore expresses the hope that the
process of internal political consolidation will quickly
lead to the onset of peace and security, which will have
a positive effect upon the entire region.

What role should the United Nations therefore
play? That has already been outlined clearly by Mr.
Vieira de Mello and the Secretary-General. However,
allow me to add a few points in this regard.

There is a need to accelerate and expand the
deployment of humanitarian assistance to tackle the
difficult conditions being suffered by various parts of
Iraqi society. That must be done by converting the oil-
for-food programme into domestic mechanisms and
programmes that have the support of the international
community. However, as the Secretary-General's report
indicates, and as Mr. Vieira de Mello has underscored
in his briefing, security conditions greatly impede the
achievement of those tasks. We therefore make a very
special appeal to the Coalition Provisional Authority to
redouble its ongoing efforts to ensure that humanitarian
agencies of the United Nations, those of the
international community and of Iraq, as well as non-
governmental organizations, may have the requisite
security to carry out their work in support of the Iraqi
civilian population.

In the current circumstances, the protection of
humanitarian workers must be a priority. That is a
collective responsibility of all States, and a particular
responsibility of those currently wielding authority in
Iraq. In that regard, we lament the tragic news we
heard this morning from Mr. Vieira de Mello of the
death of a representative of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.

We also believe that the United Nations can share
its disarmament and demobilization experience. In that
connection, we believe that certain skills should not,
and must not, be wasted in providing assistance in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process,
which is a fundamental component of creating a new
order in Iraq.

We concur with the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative that one of the most immediate
and important tasks in rebuilding Iraq is to protect
human rights. First and foremost, we must ensure that
basic respect for human rights and freedoms is re-
established, not only in the current circumstances but
also with regard to the very important and key task of
requiring that responsibility be accepted by the
perpetrators of the unspeakable violations we
increasingly hear about as new evidence is uncovered.
That is essential to re-establishing peace and the rule of
law, as well as in assigning responsibility. But so too
must human rights and the existence of a just legal
order be re-established.

In that regard, there will be a need to support the
efforts to be made by the Iraqi people and their
representatives to identify ways and means of carrying
out trials and meting out punishment to those guilty of
atrocities.

It will also be a fundamental task of the United
Nations to promote the active participation of women
in the process of change. In that connection, we align
ourselves with the statements we heard this morning
from various representatives. It is necessary that we
support the Iraqi people's economic recovery and
development.

The Iraqi people's oil patrimony will be an
essential tool in the country's economic recovery and
development. In the current exceptional circumstances,
it is necessary to ensure that oil is used solely to
benefit the people of Iraq. To that end, we must make
an effort to clarify the role and task entrusted to the
International Advisory and Monitoring Board by
Security Council resolution. The Board must have
specific monitoring and advisory functions that make
the use of oil resources transparent. Like other
delegations, we express the hope that an agreement will
be reached to give the Board the scope and nature
specifically spelled out in resolution 1483 (2003).

In that regard, we believe that no commitments
should be made vis-a-vis Iraqi oil that do not stem from
the specific will of the Iraqi people. For the time being,
therefore, the management of the oil industry should be
merely provisional. Once established, it should be up to
Iraq's constitutional order to define the terms under
which the Iraqi people will exercise sovereignty over
their oil, as well as the structure of the industry and the
way in which resources derived from oil are to be used
to benefit the people.

All the efforts made by the international
community through the United Nations should go hand
in hand with the very active participation of States in
the provision of humanitarian assistance and support
for reconstruction activities in Iraq. It should be the
United Nations that serves as the fundamental channel
through which the international community can make
its support felt in the reconstruction process.

In conclusion, allow me to say that my delegation
has every confidence in the work being done by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, as
well as in the programme of work and the structure for
the Office that has been established. We hope that the
work to be done by Mr. Vieira de Mello and the
Secretariat will lead to the restoration of Iraq's
sovereignty as soon as possible.

