Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): As this
is the first time that my delegation is addressing the
Security Council during the Chad's presidency, I wish
you, Mr. President, and your delegation much success.
We appreciate the convening of this open debate and
the preparation of the concept note (see S/2014/869, annex) to guide our discussions, as well as the briefings
given this morning.

The Security Council has been progressively
addressing the many manifestations of transnational
organized crime and, on this occasion, its relationship
with terrorism, highlighting the complexity of a topic
that does not permit out-of-context generalizations.
While we must recognize the potential of transnational
organized crime to undermine the stability and security
of States, it is equally important to underscore that its
manifestations and reach are not uniform everywhere in
the world. All States are affected in one way or another
by those criminal activities.

However, it is not in all circumstances that those
activities constitute a threat to international peace and
security and thus come under the Security Council's
competence. Along those lines, the Council should avoid
simplifying a topic that because of its nature should
be addressed on a case-by-case basis, and eschew an
approach or the adoption of generalized measures that
do not fit specific contexts and do not take into account
the diversity of factors that make a situation a threat to
international peace and security.

As has been recognized on numerous occasions,
the criminal activities that we are referring to go
beyond the dimension of cross-border trafficking.
For that reason, eradicating them requires integrated,
comprehensive and balanced focuses and measures that
tackle all the links of those illicit activities, recognize
the sovereign rights and responsibilities of States,
and are in accordance with international obligations
accepted by States, including those related to respect
for human rights, the management and exploitation of
natural resources, border controls, or links between
terrorism and kidnapping for ransom.

Transnational organized crime and terrorism
are in some cases specifically linked. However, they
are different criminal activities, and the measures to
address them are regulated by specialized international
treaties that make up a broad legislative framework
and offer the legal tools to combat those matters.
Furthermore, the agreements reached in the General
Assembly bring together comprehensive concepts
that are widely accepted in the United Nations. They
facilitate the development of inclusive and balanced
strategies. The Organization as a whole should
concentrate its efforts on providing assistance that
States might need with the goal of achieving the
integral application of the obligations arising from
those agreements, strengthening capacities and
national institutions, bolstering effective cooperation
mechanisms, and augmenting the provision of technical
and financial resources, as well as the timely exchange
of information.

Those are some ofthe reasons that lead to deepening
the cooperation of the Security Council with other organs
of the United Nations system on a matter that, because
of its nature and global reach, requires concerted and
coordinated action by the different organs and entities
of the United Nations system, pursuant to the principles
of the Charter, in a framework of and respect for their
respective responsibilities and mandates, and with a
clear and objective division of labour.
