Mr. Holliday (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Mufioz for his very thorough briefing on
the work of the 1267 Committee and the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team. We also
commend and thank him for his strong leadership of
the Committee, and we congratulate him on his
successful and productive trip earlier this month.

The United States Government welcomes the
plans and the focus of the new Monitoring Team. Its
preliminary efforts reflect a high degree of
professionalism and purpose in achieving the
objectives established by the Council in resolution
1526 (2004). We ascribe great importance to the
Team's work in support of the Committee, and we will
continue to closely monitor its efforts. We encourage
the Team to continue coordinating with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee.
The United States Government is committed to
shutting down all funding sources for Al Qaeda and the
Taliban, as well as limiting their movements and
preventing their access to weapons. We take this
opportunity to remind Member States of their
obligations under previous Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 1526 (2004), to fully
implement the sanctions measures against Al Qaeda,
the Taliban and associated entities and individuals. It is
especially important that Member States adhere to their
reporting requirements mandated in resolution 1455
(2003) to inform the Committee of efforts taken to
enforce those sanctions measures. Those reports are the
lifeblood of the Committee's efforts against Al Qaeda.

The United States remains ready to assist States
that lack capacity and that need assistance to
implement the sanctions measures imposed in
resolution 1455 (2003) and other relevant Council
resolutions. We stand ready to bring pressure to bear on
those Member States that are able but unwilling, in
order to ensure that a coordinated effort to defeat Al
Qaeda proves successful.

As recent events have sadly demonstrated, no
State is immune to the threat posed by Al Qaeda and
Taliban terrorism. It remain imperative that all 191
Member States act in concert to eliminate the threat to
international peace and security posed by the Al Qaeda
and Taliban terrorists.

