Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today the Security Council is preparing
for the last time to discuss the report (S/2017/662) on
the International Tribunal of the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), which will finally terminate its activities on
31 December after numerous delays.

The Council's establishment of the Tribunal in
1993 was a very daring step on its part. At the time, we
all assumed that a body established under the Council's
auspices would play a role as an impartial instrument
of justice and would contribute both to the process of
reconciliation in the region and to the development of
international criminal law as a whole. Today, 24 years
later, we are compelled to state definitively that the
Tribunal has unfortunately not been up to its tasks.

The ICTY has been a glaring illustration of the
existence of double standards. The Tribunal has been
unable to become the impartial and independent body
that the interests of genuine rather than selective justice
demand. It is revealing that during the totality of its
existence, an absolute majority of those sentenced by
the ICTY were Serbs - more than 60 per cent, who
between them were sentenced to more than 1,000 years
in prison.

The Tribunal's adoption of a basically one-sided
anti-Serbian approach to the tragic events of the
1990s in the former Yugoslavia not only did not
encourage implementation of the basic principle of
the inevitability of punishment for war crimes, it also
undermined the process of re-establishing mutual
trust in the Balkans. Ratko Mladie's recent sentence
was a continuation of this biased, politicized attitude.
The other side of this issue is the series of acquittals
of defendants from among the representatives of other
parties to the conflict. Among others, former Kosovo
Liberation Army commanders went unpunished. The
scandalousness of the proceedings is a well-known
fact. It was the first time in the history of international
justice that witnesses were subjected to barefaced
blackmail and intimidation on such a scale. Not to
mention that these actions took place in an atmosphere
of complete impunity and with the connivance of the
international presences in Kosovo.

The ICTY consistently turned a blind eye to the
unlawful nature of the NATO military operations in
the Balkans. We should remind the Council that that
resulted in civilian deaths and general large-scale
destruction. Nobody was held responsible for those
barbarities. The Tribunal fell far short of generally
accepted standards for ensuring an appropriate judicial
timetable and the fundamental right to life, health care
and a fair trial of the accused. For example, the ICTY
will go down in history as the court that had to keep
Vojislav Seselj in pre-trial detention for more than
11 years in order to finally sentence him. The number
of defendants who died while under the Tribunal's
jurisdiction speaks to the level of medical care given
to prisoners. The death of Slobodan Milosevic in The
Hague was truly shocking, and unfortunately not the
only example. Astonishingly, despite being unable to
provide adequate care and treatment for the accused,
the Tribunal repeatedly denied the defence's petitions
for their temporary release for medical treatment in
Russia, despite our provision of thorough guarantees.
Ratko Mladie's recent petition was no exception. His
lawyers also sent an appeal to the Secretary-General
in that regard, which we hope will be very carefully
considered. The final stage of the Tribunal's work
did not conclude without tragedy. Slobodan Praljak
committed suicide in the courtroom itself, raising
serious questions about security and the conditions
for detainees.

The Tribunal twice failed to meet the deadlines set
by the Security Council. In its resolutions, the Council
not only repeatedly asked the Tribunal not delay its
proceedings but also to review the timetables for
considering cases with a View to shortening them. That
did not happen. In the past two years, the new leadership
of the Tribunal has managed to prevent any new delays
and cope with the consequences of staff departures,
showing that proper planning for legal proceedings
is possible in practice and that the explanations of
previous years were nothing more than excuses.

The work of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia will be analysed by historians and
criminal-law experts. For our part, we are convinced
that a great many of its decisions have discredited
the very notion of international justice. Many of the
ICTY's actions have created mutual mistrust among the
peoples of the former Yugoslavia. As a result, the hopes
that peace can be restored through the dispensing of
justice have been significantly undermined. We doubt
that it would be worthwhile for the Security Council
to repeat the experiment of creating similar tribunals
in the future. Our delegation shares the opinion of the
leadership of the ICTY on the lessons to be learned
from the activities of the Tribunal. For that reason,
we intend to closely monitor all the proceedings in
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, including during the Council's upcoming
review of its activities.

As we have frequently stated, based on resolution
1966 (2010), the Residual Mechanism is a provisional
structure with a strictly limited mandate, and not a
new international tribunal. That is why its official
title includes the word "residual". We also expect the
leadership and staff of the Residual Mechanism will
focus on the speedy completion of the matters assigned
to them following the closure of the ICTY, with
maximum effectiveness and strict adherence to judicial
standards, including where the timetable for legal
proceedings is concerned. The Council's review of the
Residual Mechanism in 2018 is extremely important,
and the extension of the Mechanism's work for the next
two years will depend on it. We urge the Council to
approach it very seriously. In general, we believe that
while the Mechanism is starting to review the relevant
appeals, it is also time that the Council thought about
approaches to ending its activities.

