Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank you, Sir, for
the opportunity to participate in today's debate on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). I also thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2016/218), Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Nicholas Haysom for his
briefing, and Ambassador Saikal of Afghanistan for
their briefings. Taken cumulatively, these portray the
ongoing saga of the trials and tribulations that the
Government and the brave people of Afghanistan face.

The distress signals are unremitting: a worsening
security situation, an increase in the tempo ofinsurgent
activities, a greater toll of civilian casualities, and a
deteriorating humanitarian situation. All point to the
need for the greater engagement of the international
community in support of the efforts of the Government
of Afghanistan. Just last week, during an interaction
in another part of this building, Chief Justice Abdul
Rasheed Rashid of Afghanistan explained that the
distressing circumstances confronting him were such
that for long he had not even been able to enjoy the
simple pleasures of life, such as going out for a walk,
which is something we all take for granted.

The Secretary-General's report confirms the
worrisome security situation. It is alarming that there
were more than 11,000 documented civilian causalities
in 2015. Another disturbing development is the
expansion of the Taliban's territorial reach. Also, the
efforts to incite ethnic violence and conflict are indeed
serious developments. We urge the Security Council to
look into the security situation and the means to contain
it with a sense of urgency.

Groups and individuals that perpetrate violence
against the people and Government of Afghanistan
cannot be allowed to exercise control or wield influence
over any part of Afghanistan's territory, as that would
pose serious threats to the gains of the past 15 years.
The effective implementation of the Security Council
sanctions regimes - including those under resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities; and those under resolution 1988 (2011)
concerning the Taliban - is a tangible measure that
will go a long way towards imposing restrictions on the
listed entities' and individuals' movements and assets
and strengthening the arms embargo.

As Afghanistan's friend and neighbour and a
country of the region, India is working to support
Afghanistan in accordance with its priorities and
national circumstances. The Prime Minister of
India, Shri Narendra Modi, visited Afghanistan
on 25 December 2015. During the visit, along with
President Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai, he jointly dedicated
to the Afghan nation the National Assembly building
constructed under India-Afghanistan development
cooperation. The Parliament complex is a symbol of
the resolve of Afghanistan to shape its future through
votes and debates and the belief that terror and violence
cannot be the instruments to shape Afghanistan's future
or dictate the choices which the people of Afghanistan
make. Following the visit, Chief Executive Abdullah
Abdullah visited India in January 2016. These visits
reflect the blossoming with a renewed vigour and
vitality of India's cooperation with Afghanistan. India
is also steadfast in its support for Afghanistan in
plurilateral and multilateral forums and will host the
next Ministerial Meeting of the Heart of Asia process
later this year.

While the brave Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces are doing their utmost in fighting the
forces of terrorism and extremism with courage and
resilience, India extends its full support to Afghanistan
in strengthening its defensive capabilities and preserving
Afghanistan's unity and territorial integrity. We stand
ready to collaborate with Afghanistan in expanding the
training opportunities for the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces in relevant Indian institutions,
based on the requirements of Afghanistan.

Afghanistan will be able to achieve its optimum
economic potential if it is allowed the freedom of
transit to major markets of South Asia. We are working
with Afghanistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran
to develop trilateral transit and participation in the
development of the Chabahar Port, which will augment
our connectivity with Afghanistan.

We support the Afghan Government-led reconciliation
process, which respects the red lines drawn by the
people of Afghanistan and the international community,
namely, that the groups and individuals to be reconciled
must renounce violence and abide by the Constitution
of Afghanistan.

We welcome the resolution extending UNAMA's
role in assisting Afghanistan's political and economic
reconstruction process (resolution 2274 (2016)), as
it is uniquely placed to coordinate the international
community's efforts in the country. For our part, India
will continue to steadfastly stand with Afghanistan
during its transformation decade and will do our
utmost to support the valiant efforts of the people
and the Government of Afghanistan towards peace
and stability.
