Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We thank Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura for his comprehensive briefing.
This is his last briefing. It is also our last statement on
the Syrian issue as a Council member. I would like to
express our deep appreciation to the Special Envoy for
his dedicated and highly professional diplomatic efforts
to facilitate a political solution to the Syrian conflict.
For more than four years, he has devoted his full
energy and his decades of experience and knowledge to
facilitating a peaceful end to the crisis. We are deeply
grateful for his determined efforts and for his continued
sense of optimism while dealing with what has been
one of the most difficult of diplomatic assignments.
His work will, we believe, make an excellent starting
point for his successor. Indeed, the honest assessment
and reflection so eloquently presented today will
be extremely useful for advancing the intra-Syrian
political talks under the auspices of the United Nations.

When Mr. De Mistura told the Council of his
decision to move on (see S/PV.8373), he also promised
to do all he could up until the last day of his mandate to
convene a constitutional committee - a stepping stone
towards the revitalization of the political process. That
is precisely what he has been doing, engaging with the
Syrian parties, the Astana guarantors, the members of
the small group and other stakeholders. He has been
advancing the possibility of creating a credible and
inclusive constitutional committee. However, as he
recently pointed out, there is an extra mile to go in that
marathon effort. We stress the importance of convening
a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned constitutional
committee, essential for reviving a comprehensive
political process, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015).

There are changes on the ground, and the relative
calm in Syria is encouraging. Nevertheless, it is clear that
there are also areas with very serious challenges relating
to ongoing hostilities. Millions remain in desperate
need of humanitarian aid; millions more are refugees
and internally displaced. The full implementation of
the demilitarization agreement on Idlib is critical if we
are to avoid any possible humanitarian catastrophe.

We have repeatedly stressed during our time on the
Council that the Syrian crisis can be effectively and
sustainably addressed only through a comprehensive
political dialogue facilitated by the United Nations.
That remains the case. There is no military solution.
The Syrian parties must engage constructively and in
good faith with the newly appointed Special Envoy,
Mr. Pedersen. We wish him every success in discharging
his responsibilities.

Equally important, other Member States with
influence over local actors must also support the
search for durable peace in Syria. Regrettably, forging
agreement on Syrian issues has been very difficult.
I do not have to remind members that the Security
Council is the body responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Its unity, particularly
agreement among the permanent members, is central
and critical to making progress in Syria. For the sake of
the Syrian people, who have endured so much over the
last eight years, we hope that all actors will finally work
together to find a common path to end that continuing
tragedy. Such action is very long overdue.

