Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to thank you for
having convened this meeting at the request of the
States of the Arab League and the member States of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

Given the worsening of the conflict between
Israelis and Palestinians, the succession of meetings of
the Security Council reflects the hope that the
international community places in our body. The
community hopes and expects of us that we quickly
and decisively contribute to halting the violence in
Israel and Palestine. The role of the Council should be
decisive in helping to promote the resumption of peace
negotiations between Israel and Palestine.

Allow me to convey a few words to the
international community as a whole and to you,
Ambassadors of Member States. It is quite natural that
the events of recent weeks elicit powerful feelings. I
am in a good position to know this. I am firmly
convinced that life that is lost is a tragedy and that the
life of any human being is of the same value as
anybody else's. My thoughts and my prayers go to the
families and to the communities that are suffering
today on either side. I want to see an end put to
violence and the peace process resumed.

This is how Secretary-General Kofi Annan
expressed himself when he reported back to the
General Assembly on 20 October 2000 on his mission
to the Middle East. His words haunt me, and while we
face this extremely tense situation, Cameroon is
speaking in the framework of this Council meeting,
which is of particularly decisive importance. I am
aware that more than ever before, words can stir up or
calm feelings, and that the return to calm and
tranquillity is a precondition for a climate that would
facilitate a resumption of the peace talks.
On 29 and 30 March of this year we had an
intense debate, which made it possible for us to tackle
head-on, as far as possible, the delicate and complex
situation prevailing in the Middle East, which verges
on being frozen, or even deadlocked. Thanks to the
effectiveness and the tact of your predecessor, Sir, we
managed to adopt resolution 1402 (2002), which is the
best road map towards a political, final solution
advocated in resolution 1397 (2002).

In that resolution, the Council puts its finger on
the problem. The Council has said that it was seriously
concerned because of the worsening situation in the
Middle East. This worsening of the situation has two
basic causes: the recent suicide bombings carried out in
Israel, and the military offensive conducted against the
headquarters of the President of the Palestinian
Authority. That is the crux of the matter, and that is
why the Council calls for an immediate ceasefire, the
withdrawal from the cities under siege and the
cessation of all violence and terror.

This resolution is crucial, and only compliance
with it can halt the escalation of violence and make it
possible to safeguard the peace dynamic. This
dynamic, re-launched by the adoption of resolution
1397 (2002) and recognizing the need for coexistence
in the region, side by side, of two States, Israel and
Palestine, within secure recognized borders, was
reinforced through the unequivocal expression by the
Arab countries of their willingness to live with Israel
and to recognize it, according to the Saudi Arabian
peace plan, which was approved at the most recent
Arab League Summit.

The parties must not hide behind semantics. The
question of a sequential implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolution 1402 (2002) should not be an
obstacle in the implementation of that resolution.

A little more than three months ago the United
Nations and its Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
received the Nobel Peace Prize. Today the Middle East
is a real challenge to peace, a problem for the United
Nations, particularly for the Security Council, which
since 29 March 2002 has been holding at least one
meeting a day on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.

The decisions that we take, as well as our
capacity and determination to implement them, are for
the international community, States, public opinion and
the media a decisive indicator of the credibility and the
capacity, for action of the United Nations in the
maintenance of peace. At this time all these observers
who welcomed with hope and enthusiasm resolution
1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002) are now wondering about
the tragic developments on the ground. Hence, the
Council must explore all avenues to lead the parties to
abide by these resolutions, to help the parties renounce
the logic of war and to return to the peace process. We
must salute the role played by the American, European,
Russian and United Nations envoys to try to reweave
the strands of dialogue.

The current situation, however, requires that we
do more than that, that we create an electric shock to
stop the escalation of violence so that Israelis and
Palestinians can quickly put an end to the current cycle
of violence and reprisals that plunge them into a
bottomless abyss. That was the thrust of the broad-
based, candid and in-depth dialogue that we had
yesterday with the representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine.

Is it not high time that the United Nations,
through the Security Council, go beyond that and really
engage directly in the peace process in the Middle
East? I believe in this regard that the Secretary-General
and a delegation of the Council, possibly at the
ministerial level, could very soon go to the region to
stop the spiral of violence and to re-launch the Israeli-
Palestinian dialogue. The context requires this. Indeed,
as of today the climate is explosive everywhere. The
risk of an uncontrollable situation is all too real. The
parties are deeply distrustful of each other. The
language they use unfortunately is the language of war.
Hence, the proposal to dispatch a mission is becoming
highly relevant now. Pending the dispatch of such a
mission, Cameroon is open to any strong, balanced
initiative that the Council might take right now.

It is clear that the success of our action is
possible only if we all speak with one voice in the
Council and if we are united and coordinated. Peace in
the Middle East will be the fruit of our solidarity,
solidarity that brings efforts and forces together. But
Cameroon has always supported this point, and we
restate it again today; the reign of peace will come in
the Middle East when the Israelis and the Palestinians
decide to be the builders and inventors. We have
always said this and we restate this point today. Peace
has to be invented first in the heart of man and in our
relations with each other. Inventing peace means
working for a just, fraternal, secure and peaceful
society.

Inhabitants of Palestine, Israelis and Palestinians,
become the inventors of peace, of your peace, of this
peace that you always call "Shalom/Salaam", which for
you precisely represents the state of people living in
harmony with each other and with nature.

