Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing and Mr. Ivica
Dacie, Prime Minister of Serbia, and Mr, Hashim
Thaci, Prime Minsiter of Kosovo, for their statements.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/68)
takes stock of the historic year of 2013. The 19 April
2013 Agreement between Serbia and Kosovo, concluded
under the auspices of the European Union and the
High Representative, is an unprecedented step in the
normalization of relations between those two countries.
I also congratulate the parties on their tireless pursuit
of dialogue since that time. The hopes kindled in the
spring have been borne out by reality.

Another landmark event in recent months was the
holding of the municipal elections throughout Kosovo.
For the first time, all voters in Kosovo went to the polls
in a unique constitutional context. The relatively high
turnout through the territory, while slightly lower north
of the Ibar River, shows the progressive ownership by
the Serb population of the Kosovo institutional system.
Such events reflect the launching of a momentum both
at the bottom and at the highest level of Kosovar society.

In his report, the Secretary-General of course
calls on us to look towards the year ahead. In a context
marked by elections, the positive trend must continue.
It is incumbent upon us to remain mindful of continued
dialogue and the political developments of the two
States.

In that regard, we will continue to focus on the
milestones of the implementation of the 19 April
2013 Agreement between Pristina and Belgrade. Two
aspects are rightly underscored in the report of the
Secretary-General, that is, the ongoing dismantling
of the Serb parallel structures in northern Kosovo and
their integration into Kosovar institutions, as well as
the establishment of an association/community of
Serb municipalities with genuine powers. Those two
processes are inseparable.

As stated in the Secretary-General's report, an
increasing number of former Serb police officers from
northern Kosovo are signing up to the Kosovo police.
That is a sign of the success ofthe dialogue between the
two parties on that issue.

In addition, we call on both parties to continue
discussing the establishment of the judicial structures,
which will also help to promote trust among the local
population in that new institutional framework.

Finally, we encourage the parties to promote
the protection of minorities on the ground. The low
number of refugees returning to Kosovo remains a
cause for concern. Restoring mutual trust between the
communities remains the only way for Kosovo and
Serbia to open together a new chapter in their history,
firmly focused on peace and regional cooperation.

The decision to open European Union accession
negotiations with Serbia, on the one hand, and to
authorize the European Commission to negotiate a
stabilization and association agreement with Kosovo,
on the other hand, should also start to be implemented
in 2014. Normalizing relations between Serbia and
Kosovo was set by the European Union as a common
criterion for their respective European integration. We
must now ensure that both parties remain constructively
committed in the long term to improving their relations.

The year 2014 will also be the year of the strategic
review of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo. That review should take into account
developments in the regional context on the one hand
and, on the other, the desire of the Kosovo authorities
to take on more responsibility in the context of the
rule of law. It will therefore be in a context of greater
partnership that the Union will seek to help Kosovo in
strengthening its institutions, which is vital on its path
to European integration.

All of those positive developments should be noted
by the international community. It is time for the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo to
adapt its presence to the situation on the ground, in
agreement with the Kosovar authorities and based on
their effective needs.
Finally, like others have said during this meeting,
we believe that the Security Council's follow-up on this
issue should reflect to a greater extent the reality of the
relations between the parties and that we should look
into reducing the frequency of debates on this issue.

