At the outset, I would like to thank the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Sergey Vershinin, and the Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation for convening today's important debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I would also like to thank the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenov, for his valuable briefing. His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa of the Kingdom of Bahrain said in his statement to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session that, in past decades, the United Nations had helped to consolidate international cooperation and preserve world peace for the good of all humankind. His Majesty emphasized that the Kingdom of Bahrain is committed to its international obligations related to maintaining the strength and stability of the international order and continuing to play its role in achieving universal peace. As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations and its goals of achieving peace, the Kingdom of Bahrain affirms its support for all international efforts to promote a culture of peace as an urgent need for humankind in order to foster the values of openness, moderation and tolerance. It is important for the international community to develop a comprehensive vision to address security, political, economic and health challenges. The improvement of the humanitarian situation starts with the establishment of peace and the conditions for security and stability for all. The Kingdom of Bahrain also stresses the importance of resolving disputes and differences through constructive dialogue and peaceful means based on the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, thereby helping to eliminate the causes of tension, which hinder development efforts worldwide. The international community must work on the basis of integrated policies and with more effectiveness in the fight against the challenges facing the region, particularly the ongoing efforts to address the coronavirus disease pandemic. To that end, solidarity, putting aside differences, strengthening areas of humanitarian assistance and improving future preparedness to prevent global crises are essential. In accordance with its consistent policy of promoting a culture of peace, coexistence, tolerance, understanding, acceptance of others and respect for neighbouring countries, the Kingdom of Bahrain signed a declaration of peace with Israel, under the auspices of the United States of America, in a historic step towards peace in the Middle East - a courageous and extraordinary move to improve security and stability in the region. The Kingdom of Bahrain also signed a joint communique with the State of Israel on the establishment of diplomatic relations, in addition to memorandums of understanding in a number of areas. In those memorandums, fruitful bilateral cooperation is established between the Kingdom of Bahrain and the State of Israel with a view to strengthening the foundations of peace in the region and moving the peace process in a more positive direction. We also affirm the long-standing position of the Kingdom of Bahrain regarding the need to intensify efforts to end the Palestinian-Israeli conflict in accordance with the two-State solution, which is the best way of achieving a just and comprehensive peace resulting in the establishment of an independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital, on the basis of the internationally recognized resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. We welcome the signing by the United Arab Emirates of a peace treaty with Israel, a treaty in which broad prospects for a comprehensive and just peace in the region are opened up. We also welcome the announcement of an agreement to establish relations between the Republic of the Sudan and the State of Israel under the auspices of the United States, as another historic step on the road to peace, stability and prosperity in the Middle East. The Middle East region faces profound and complex challenges that have the potential to change it for years to come, especially as some countries are pursuing hostile, destructive policies that jeopardize regional and international security and stability. In that connection, the Kingdom of Bahrain condemns the repeated attacks on vital installations in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia by Iranian-backed Houthi militias, and supports all the efforts and policies of Saudi Arabia to maintain its security, stability and territorial integrity. The Kingdom of Bahrain also supports all the tireless efforts of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to reach a lasting political solution that preserves the security and stability of the Republic of Yemen in accordance with the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and the related Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the Comprehensive National Dialogue and resolution 2216 (2015). The Kingdom of Bahrain fully supports the sincere efforts and continued strategic role of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in protecting the region's security and stability. The Kingdom of Bahrain welcomes the signing of a permanent ceasefire agreement throughout the State of Libya. The agreement, concluded at the United Nations Office at Geneva between the Government of National Accord and the Libyan National Army, is an important achievement and a necessary step that will contribute to the security and stability of the State of Libya. The Kingdom of Bahrain commends all the efforts that culminated in the agreement and hopes that all the States and parties involved will keep working to ensure the stability and territorial integrity of Libya and achieve the aspirations of its people for development, prosperity, the elimination of terrorist organizations and an end to foreign intervention in their affairs. In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain reiterates its long-standing position regarding the need to foster a culture of peace and preventive diplomacy in order to prevent conflict and promote the values of tolerance and coexistence so as to achieve security and prosperity for the peoples of the world.
