Mr. Acharya (Nepal): On behalf of the
delegation of Nepal, I appreciate the opportunity to
discuss the protection of civilians in armed conflict in
the open debate of the Security Council. We commend
the comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on
that subject and thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs for his presentation this morning.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict
poses a huge humanitarian challenge to and imposes a
moral responsibility on the international community
and the States Members of the United Nations. We
appreciate the increasing engagement of the Security
Council on that important issue. We think that
resolution 1674 (2006) provides a strong basis for an
agreed framework for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, and that process needs to be augmented
through periodic debate such as today's. The Council's
resolutions 1612 (2005) regarding children and armed
conflict and 1325 (2000) on the role of women in peace
and security are welcome developments with regard to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We support the inclusion of a requirement of
compliance with human rights and international
humanitarian norms in all peacekeeping missions. We
welcome the incorporation of protection of civilian
provisions in the mandates of peacekeeping missions,
especially in Darfur and Chad.

We fully agree that the primary responsibility of
protecting civilians in armed conflict lies with Member
States, but the international community, humanitarian
actors and the Security Council can play meaningful
roles when Member States are either incapable or
unwilling to do so. It is essential that the principle of
national sovereignty and the norms of international
law, particularly humanitarian law, be fully adhered to
in the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

My own country, Nepal, has seen the suffering of
innocent civilians during the armed conflict that lasted
for more than 10 years. The Comprehensive Peace
Agreement signed between the Government of Nepal
and the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) in
November 2006 provides for the protection of innocent
civilians affected by the conflict. It has provisions for
the return of internally displaced peoples to their
homes, the return of their land and property, and the
rehabilitation of the victims of the conflict, including
women and children. The peace agreement has special
provisions for the protection of children affected by the
conflict, mainly by way of separating them from armed
cadres if found recruited and reintegrating them into
society and their families. It also has provisions for the
destruction of mines and other explosive devices
deployed during the conflict, which pose a threat to
innocent civilians.

In that regard, we appreciate the role of the
United Nations Mission in Nepal for its support in the
requested areas of the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Accord, mainly in monitoring
arms and armed personnel and electoral assistance. The
Government of Nepal is seriously engaged in dialogue
to resolve the remaining political differences, mainly
on holding the elections to the Constituent Assembly as
soon as possible. We hope that those and other
developments in the peace process will pave the way
for a better environment for the protection of civilians
from the impact of armed conflict.

Nepal is committed to ending the environment of
impunity that existed during the armed conflict. The
Interim Legislature-Parliament is considering stringent
legislation against disappearances. We are also in the
process of establishing a national truth and
reconciliation commission, which we believe will help
heal our past and prevent a recurrence of similar
suffering among innocent civilians.

Nepal fully adheres to the principle that all
human rights, international humanitarian laws and
norms must be adhered to by all parties to protect
civilians in armed conflict in all situations. We support
the creation of a Security Council working group to
deal with the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts, but it should not overburden the
Council and Member States with reporting obligations
and other tasks. We cannot ask other missions,
particularly special political missions, which are not
mandated for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, to report on this subject, as suggested in the
report.

We deplore attacks against humanitarian workers
and peacekeepers in various field missions of the
United Nations who are deployed to carry out tasks
that include the protection of civilians. We call for
even more comprehensive safety and security for the
humanitarian, development and peacekeeping
personnel of the United Nations in all situations.

We think that a more comprehensive framework
is required, especially for a rapid response mechanism
to protect civilians in armed conflict before it is too
late, as we have often experienced. In that context, we
think that the Council should engage the concerned
Member States, non-State actors and the humanitarian
agencies more proactively, and focus equally on taking
measures in time through a better analysis of risks and
preventive political and diplomatic action. The use of
measures by the Council, including the deployment of
peacekeepers or the authorization of force, should be
used only as a last resort, taking into account the
proportionality of the threat to innocent civilians and
respecting the national sovereignty of Member States.

In conclusion, we pledge to work with the
Member States to advance the work of the Security
Council in the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts.

