Mr. Kusljugic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Thank
you for the opportunity to participate in today's
discussion on the occasion of the twenty-first report by
the High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.

The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
welcomes the report and considers that today's session
of the Security Council has a particular importance, not
only for the peace-building process in my country, but
also for stability in general in the region of South-
Eastern Europe. We expect that the planned follow-on
mission to the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) will mark a new, European
phase in the peace implementation process and will
open European Union perspectives for Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

I thank the Secretary-General for his presence
and introductory statement and the High
Representative, Wolfgang Petritsch, for his address. I
also thank the Special Representative, Jacques Paul
Klein, and the High Representative, Javier Solana, for
the comprehensive updates and comments in their
briefings.

Bosnia and Herzegovina became a full member of
the United Nations on 22 May 10 years ago. In May
this year, when the final positive decision concerning
its membership is expected, Bosnia and Herzegovina
will be ready to become a full member of the Council
of Europe. This time gap clearly indicates that for
almost a decade, my country was a major global and
regional problem. It is now obvious that the ideology
of exclusive ethnic territories was at the core of the
conflict.

During the last year, substantial progress was
recorded in the peace implementation process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This progress was achieved
both as a result of more focused and coherent activities
of the international community and because, for the
first time since 1992, a democratic, multi-ethnic
Government, committed to work in partnership with
the international community in building a functioning,
democratic, multi-ethnic, European-oriented Bosnian
State, was finally established. The role of UNMIBH
has been substantial in achieving progress in the rule-
of-law sector, and the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina considers UNMIBH to have been
successfully implemented. We thank Mr. Klein for his
leadership and commitment.

We especially emphasize the assistance and very
constructive role of UNMIBH in supporting the
activities concerning the fight against terrorism
initiated after the terrorist attacks on 11 September.
The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina has shown
by its deeds a commitment to contribute to
antiterrorism activities. In this regard, we have really
proved to be a part of the solution to this global
problem.

We clearly recognize UNMIBH's activities as an
integral part of the international community's
assistance to the institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina within a recently developed partnership
concept. We also acknowledge the efforts and
contributions of the other United Nations agencies,
especially concerning refugee returns. However, we
consider the progress achieved in the last year to be
only the first step in the process of building a
sustainable country. In this process, the current
priorities of the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina are those of institution-building,
improvement in the rule of law sector and
implementation of economic reforms.

Considering the long-term orientation of
UNMIBH towards the self-sustainability of local
institutions, we emphasize the need for further
assistance from the international community, since the
progress achieved so far is still fragile. In this context,
we expect that the transition from the present
UNMIBH mission to the European Union Police
Mission (EUPM) will be both smooth and efficient. We
would like to thank the European Union for accepting
the challenge of working together with the local
institutions in this important sector of the peace
process implementation. The commitment and
determination of Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions
in this matter was confirmed in a letter to the Peace
Implementation Council (PIC) and to the European
Union, signed by the President of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Government and the Presidents of both
entities, in which the EUPM. is very welcome.

The European Union experience in the
Europeanization process concerning the necessary
structural reforms to be made in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in accordance with European standards,
is of utmost importance. We expect that EUPM
assistance will be focused on the further education of
police and judiciary officials, as well as on the
monitoring of the process of restructuring institutions
and reform in the rule of law sector. In this regard, we
welcome the proposed strategy for judicial reform in
2002-2003 and emphasize the need for more decisive
and firmer measures to be taken by the international
community for its implementation.

I would like to use this opportunity to stress the
most important current issues in the process of political
stabilization in my country.

First, it is expected that by the end of this month
the implementation process of the Constitutional Court
decision regarding equal rights of all constituent
peoples on the whole territory of Bosnia and
Herzegovina should be finalized. The implementation
of the Court's decision will prove that the ideology of
exclusive ethnic territories has been defeated. The
outcome of this process will have a decisive impact on
the results of the forthcoming general elections, too.

Secondly, the activities of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
especially the trial against Slobodan Milosevic,
substantially influence the current political situation in
my country. We expect the trial against Milosevic to
prove his individual responsibility for the wars in the
last decade and thus contribute to inter-ethnic
reconciliation in the region.

However, we emphasize that a viable
reconciliation process is not possible while indicted
war criminals remain at large and while political
leaders in the region refuse to cooperate fully with the
Tribunal. Real reconciliation can be based only upon
truth and justice. Six years after the signing of the
Dayton Peace Agreement, the failure to apprehend
indicted war criminals - above all Radovan Karadzic
and Ratko Mladic, who are the symbols of suffering,
pain and humiliation of the civilian population -
prevents the beginning of a sincere inter-ethnic
reconciliation and sustainable peace-building process.
We want to emphasize that the leading role of the
international community regarding arrest of the already
indicted war criminals is of crucial importance and at
the same time a test of its credibility in the region. Its
readiness to give utmost priority to making their arrests
happen will be proof of its commitment to support the
work of the ICTY and to the establishment of a system
of international justice.

I would like to welcome the decision of the Peace
Implementation Council and the proposed resolution of
the Security Council regarding the appointment of Lord
Paddy Ashdown as the new High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I also want to thank Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch for his commitment and leadership
demonstrated during his mandate. I know that
sometimes the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
looks very complicated and confusing for
representatives of the international community. But, for
the Bosnians, some activities of the representatives of
the international community also look misleading and
confusing.

Therefore, we expect that the mandate of the new
High Representative will be based on a clear vision,
strategy and concept of how to support the process of
building a sustainable multi-ethnic Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We also expect a more coherent policy
and more coordinated work of the international
institutions, and we welcome the proposed model to
streamline their operations.

The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina is
also committed to working towards increasing the
efficiency and effectiveness of the local institutions.
We expect to work together with representatives of the
international community to find new models of
institutional structures, especially at the level of State
institutions, in order to achieve objectives that have
been set.

Because the termination of UNMIBH's mandate
by the end of this year is now certain, we think that the
United Nations should prepare a comprehensive
evaluation of its involvement in the Dayton/Paris Peace
Agreement implementation. This evaluation could
serve as a basis for further evolution of the peace
process and guidance for an upgrade and update
process of the current Bosnia and Herzegovina Dayton
constitutional structure, in accordance with European
human rights standards.

