Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to thank the Secretary-General for his
report and statement, and Under-Secretary-General
John Holmes for his very relevant comments on the
subject of our debate today.

Belgium aligns itself with the statement to be
made by our Portuguese colleague on behalf of the
European Union.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
key element of international humanitarian law. The
sixth report on the protection of civilians submitted by
the Secretary-General reveals the extent of the
challenge before us and in that context suggests a
series of actions that warrant not only thorough
discussion on the part of the Council, but also a
strengthened follow-up by the Security Council.

At the United Nations World Summit in the
autumn of 2005, we all acknowledged and accepted the
principle of the responsibility to protect, which the
Secretary-General has just recalled in all of its
importance. As we all know, the principle reaffirms
States' obligation to protect their own population
against such grave crimes as genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing. If States
refuse to accept that responsibility or are unable to
fulfil it, it falls to the international community. In that
context, the Security Council must assume its role and
ensure the implementation of the principles agreed by
all Member States.

In that respect, we are pleased by the special
attention that the Secretary-General has devoted to that
problem, as demonstrated in his recent appointment of
Mr. Francis Deng. Belgium hopes that the pending
issues related to his mandate will soon be resolved.

I will focus my statement on a few dimensions of
the situation under discussion today: the question of
humanitarian access, the scourge of sexual violence as
a weapon of war, and the matter of cluster munitions.

In conflict zones, access to the people affected is
not always guaranteed. Such access is a prerequisite to
any humanitarian action, as are the safety of
humanitarian and United Nations personnel on the
ground. The nature of the obstacles differs from
conflict to conflict. In that regard, the speedy
identification of those obstacles is critical, as it can
help to save lives. We must therefore consider how best
to further involve the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

Last month, during the Security Council's open
debate on strengthening the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, we noted the growing scourge of sexual
violence, in particular in situations of armed conflict.
The situation that prevails, inter alia, in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is most
disturbing, as confirmed by the Secretary-General's
report. It is not only the extent of the phenomenon that
is shocking, but also the barbarity of such actions and
the methods employed. That practice is particularly
repugnant when used as a weapon of war.

It is clear that the convening of a Security
Council debate is not enough to end that scourge. The
Council must pay more systematic attention to the
phenomenon and address it head on. In that context,
Belgium welcomes the efforts made by the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and by the recent creation of an
internal task force devoted to issues of sexual violence
against women in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

More generally, it is crucial to recall and to stress,
as does resolution 1674 (2006), States' responsibility to
end impunity and to bring to justice the perpetrators of
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
other flagrant violations of international humanitarian
law. We have several instruments at our disposal,
including the International Criminal Court and
mechanisms of transitional justice. In the case of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, an important
contribution to that goal could be made by the mapping

exercise currently being carried out by the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights with respect to
serious human rights violations committed from 1993
to 2003.

The use of cluster munitions wreaks unacceptable
harm on civilian populations, even after a ceasefire or
the cessation of hostilities is declared. Belgium is
therefore working for the adoption, following an open
and inclusive process, of a legally-binding instrument
to ban cluster munitions. Such an instrument, we feel,
should entail commitments with respect to the
destruction of stockpiles, provide for assistance to
victims and include provisions on international
cooperation.

To that end, on 30 October, we hosted in Brussels
a European Regional Conference on Cluster Munitions.
The principle statements and the conclusions of the
rapporteurs highlighted positive developments in the
positions that were expressed, identified certain areas
of agreement, and stressed something that I feel to be
just as important: specific issues to be addressed with a
view to the negotiation of a future treaty. The
international momentum of which the Brussels
conference was part will, of course, continue in the
context of the Oslo process.

In conclusion, Belgium believes that the
humanitarian dimension of a conflict should be better
integrated into the Council's work. We therefore
support any effort to provide more systematic
consideration of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict by the Security Council.

