Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): My first words must be to
congratulate President Omer Hassan Al-Bashir, First
Vice-President Salva Kiir and others leaders of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) for steadfastly
steering the tortuous process that led to the recently
concluded referendum in Southern Sudan. I should also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haile Menkerios and President Benjamin Mkapa, Chair
of the Secretary-General's Panel on the Referenda in
the Sudan, for their comprehensive briefings today.

To say that the referendum represents a significant
milestone for the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
would be a gross understatement. Regardless of its
outcome, the fact that it was conducted without rancor
has opened up a new vista for the Sudan, the subregion
and Africa as a whole. Nigeria sent a team of observers
that joined its counterparts from other countries and
organizations, including the United Nations, to witness
the conduct of this historic exercise. We are satisfied
with the reports, and particularly gratified, that the vote
took place in a relatively peaceful, orderly and
transparent atmosphere in spite of initial uncertainties
and apprehension. By living up to their obligations, the
parties to the CPA - the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement and the National Congress Party - have
contributed significantly to this landmark achievement.
We therefore commend them, as well as the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission and the Southern
Sudan Referendum Bureau, for overcoming the
daunting challenges of conducting a credible vote. We
also commend the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) for providing the technical and logistical
support that greatly facilitated the vote.

In that regard, I want to note the complaint of
Mr. Menkerios regarding the freedom of movement of
UNMIS, as we often do with regard to that of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). May I also acknowledge that,
through the appointment of President Mkapa and his
team, the United Nations has enhanced its role in the
referendum process.
I would be remiss not to acknowledge the critical
role that the Security Council has played, not only
through its mission to the Sudan but also by remaining
united and keeping the subject high on its agenda.

As we await the final result of the voting, we call
on the parties not only to remain calm but especially to
continue to respect their obligations and refrain from
any acts capable of undermining the process. Nigeria is
pleased that the parties have unequivocally restated
their commitment to accept the outcome of the
referendum in good faith. It is our hope that the
successful conclusion of the referendum will help to
promote very positive post-referendum relations
between the North and the South.

Both parties should draw the inspiration to work
tirelessly between now and July - the interim period -
to complete the key outstanding tasks under the CPA.
More especially, they should spare no efforts in reaching
workable compromises on the Abyei question, the
North-South border, popular consultations in the states
of Blue Nile and South Kordofan and security
arrangements between the North and the South.
Mutually satisfactory agreement is also required on the
issues of citizenship, oil, water resources, assets and
liabilities, currency and economic cooperation.

We commend the African Union's High-Level
Implementation Panel on the Sudan, led by President
Thabo Mbeki, for facilitating the negotiations towards
a framework agreement between the parties. The
Panel's role in fostering a stable relationship between
the North and the South in the long run cannot be
overemphasized. We therefore urge the Panel to
intensify its efforts in the interim period.

The Council and the international community
should not be lulled into ignoring the enormity of the
challenges that still exist in Southern Sudan by the
euphoria of the referendum. While attaining
independence is an inalienable aspiration, the real
business of State-building will become even more
acute in the South with rising expectations of
economic, political and social transformation.
Adequate attention must therefore be given to
managing people's great expectations through good
governance and the sound management of scarce
resources and opportunities. Nigeria recognizes that
Southern Sudanese leaders cannot achieve these things
acting alone. Now more than ever, the Council and the
international community must stand in solidarity with
Southern Sudan. Indeed, our solidarity will be put to
the test in the type of assistance that we give to
Southern Sudan.

More than ever, greater political engagement
between the North and the South and increased
external assistance and pressure will be required to
solve their outstanding issues. The Council's role will
be more meaningful if it remains as united, resolute
and committed as it has been in the past. We urge the
African Union (AU), the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, neighbouring countries and bilateral
partners to also remain engaged. We do hope that the
forthcoming high-level meeting on the Sudan on the
margins of the AU Summit in Addis Ababa will
reinforce the message of peace, solidarity and stability
in the Sudan and in the region.

On Darfur, Nigeria remains gravely concerned
about the increase in violence and insecurity and
condemns in the strongest terms the kidnapping of
three members of the United Nations Humanitarian Air
Service. We commend the work of UNAMID under
Ibrahim Gambari. We regret that a comprehensive
peace agreement has yet to be finalized, despite the
concerted and rigorous efforts of Djibrill Bassole, the
Joint Chief Negotiator. We call for the cessation of
hostilities and the immediate release of the three
members of the United Nations Humanitarian Air
Service. We reiterate our call on the Government of the
Sudan, the Justice and Equality Movement and other
factions to resume the Doha talks without
preconditions. We have an obligation to ensure that the
Doha process does not lose credibility.

