Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We listened carefully to the briefings by
Under-Secretaries-General Rosemary DiCarlo and
Mark Lowcock. However, we would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the humanitarian troika for
convening today's Council meeting on the situation
in north-western Syria. To be frank, we were also
planning to organize a meeting on the subject, since
a conversation about the developments in the situation
in Syria, including in the Idlib de-escalation zone, is
long overdue. Some of our partners continue to send
messages to the international community that either
have nothing to do with the real situation in Syria or
distort the situation on the ground.

We are frankly baffled that no one has even once
proposed that we discuss the situation in Baghouz
and Hajin when Western forces, operating illegally
on Syrian territory, wiped out these towns, with
considerable losses of civilian infrastructure, including
hospitals and schools, as well as civilian deaths. Is there
really any difference between civilians in Idlib and Deir
ez-Zor governorates? Why were the dead in Hajin not
considered worthy of discussion in the Council? When
Raqqa and the other towns beyond the Euphrates were
being razed to the ground, why did no one, including
our humanitarian activists, even bother to mention
the hospitals and schools or ask the kinds of searching
questions that we heard today?

We believe that what is at issue is not the
humanitarian disaster that would inevitably result
if a major military campaign began in the Idlib
de-escalation zone. We have frequently heard the
same thing regarding the pacification of other parts of
Syria. The issue is the desire to keep territories out of
Damascus's control for as long as possible, whoever
is ruling them. It could even be the terrorists of Hayat
Tahrir al-Sham, who are actively trying to look as if
they could be a so-called political force. Regrettably,
despite public protestations, the anti-regime attitude
has not disappeared, and neither has the aim of creating
isolation and regime change in Damascus.

Today we once again heard talk about the need to
re-establish the ceasefire and reaffirm our commitment
to the Sochi memorandum of 17 September 2018. I
want to emphasize that the memorandum is being
fully implemented. Any military activity is dictated
exclusively by the need to respond to terrorist
provocations. I want to point out once again that the
Russian-Turkish memorandum does not prohibit the
fight against terrorism, it encourages it.

The Syrian Government has frequently announced
pauses in military action that the terrorists intentionally
undermine. On 12 June, we and our Turkish colleagues
agreed on measures to extend the ceasefire regime
across the entire de-escalation zone. However, the
Hayat Tahrir al-Sham terrorists, who control 99 per cent
of Idlib, once again continued shelling Syrian territory.
Since the beginning of May they have continued to
attack Syrian Government forces' positions, the Russian
airbase in Khmeimim, and towns and villages bordering
the de-escalation zone, using multiple launch rocket
systems, mortars and combat drones. In the past few
days alone they have attacked 12 villages in Latakia and
Hama. On 6 June, jihadists launched a rocket attack on a
hospital in Muhradah, seriously damaging its operating
and emergency rooms and in-patient centre. In the
same town on 16 June, several people were injured in a
rocket attack and serious damage was done to civilian
infrastructure. Yesterday fighters fired mortars on the
village of Al Wadihi in Aleppo governorate, leaving 11
people dead and 15 injured, with children among the
casualties. Mr. Lowcock mentioned that incident today
but forgot to mention at whose hands those people died.

The towns of Al-Suqaylabiyah and Muhradah,
whose populations are predominantly Christian, are
also being regularly attacked with mortars and rockets,
and civilians, including women and children, are
suffering as a result, while considerable damage is being
done to civilian infrastructure, including schools and
hospitals. We heard not a word about that today either
from our Western colleagues or the United Nations
representatives. Do they really not know that terrorists
are carrying out those attacks? There are many more
examples we could give. More detailed information
can be found in the information bulletins of Russia's
Ministry of Defence on the de-escalation zones, which
we regularly distribute to Council members.

Despite the militias' provocations and aggressive
incursions, Russia remains committed to its agreements
with Turkey on stabilizing Idlib. Our military is
in constant contact with the Turkish military and
coordinates their efforts to prevent the escalation of
violence and destabilization. However, neither Russia
nor Turkey will turn a blind eye to the dangerous
provocations of the terrorists who are threatening
Turkish territory, the Russian airbase in Khmeimim
and Syrian military personnel and civilians. And
there should be no attempts to pit the Astana process
participants against one another, as has been implicitly
suggested here. The Astana format remains one of
the viable mechanisms - if not the only one - for
stabilizing the situation in Syria.

We want to emphasize once again that the Syrian
armed forces and the Russian Aerospace Forces
direct strikes only at facilities confirmed as terrorist
by intelligence. We are getting a feeling of deja vu
today. There has been more breast-beating about
the destruction of hospitals, including those whose
coordinates were known. As I have said - and I mean
in our previous discussions and our discussions last
year in this Chamber, not just today 4 if we believed
the statistics we are presented with, the total number
of hospitals that have now been destroyed in Syria is
larger than the actual number that existed there before
the conflict started. But it is no secret to anyone
that militants use civilian infrastructure, hospitals
and schools for military purposes, and people as
human shields. We firmly reject any accusations of
indiscriminate strikes. We are not attacking civilians.

We ask that all of our colleagues, including the
Secretariat and the specialized United Nations agencies,
use only verified information in their assessments. We
have had major questions for a long time about some
information sources, including those used by various
United Nations entities, among them the World Health
Organization. I would like that request to be conveyed
to Mr. Lowcock and Ms. DiCarlo, who are no longer
present here, since they themselves have never visited
the areas where the alleged strikes on hospitals have
occurred. It appears that most of their information is
actually derived from telephone conversations with so-
called reliable sources whom no one has verified and
whose identity they have refused to disclose.

Today there was also talk about chemical weapons.
I would like to point out that the White Helmets who
are working with the Al-Nusra Front, and whom some
members are so fond of, are preparing acts ofprovocation
using chemicals. We urge the international community
to take seriously the possibility that there will be
new fake stagings of the use of chemical weapons, of
which we have given repeated warnings. According to
information received, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham has even
formed a separate entity for those purposes, and yet the
warnings from the Syrian Government about terrorists'
preparations for chemical attacks have essentially been
ignored by the relevant international agencies.

Against the backdrop of the revival of alarmist
announcements about Idlib, the Security Council
should not lose sight of the worrying and unstable
situation on the eastern bank of the Euphrates, which
is not controlled by the Syrian Government. Tension
is rising in that part of Syria. The local population is
resisting the demographic engineering that is being
imposed on it with the support of the Western coalition.
The potential for protests is growing and could boil over
into armed confrontation. We believe it will be possible
to avoid a major escalation and create a sustainable
national reconciliation process only when the illegal
international occupation led by the United States ends
and a dialogue between representatives of local ethnic
groups and the Syrian authorities is established.

There should be serious attention paid to the
situations in Raqqa, Hajin, Baghouz and all the towns
in north-eastern Syria that are still in ruins and close
to uninhabitable for civilians. The Council should pay
special attention to the Al-Hol camp for internally
displaced persons (IDPs), which in an area in Hasaka
governorate that is not controlled by the Syrian
authorities and where the situation is verging on disaster.
The camp is overcrowded, with more than 74,000
inhabitants, of whom more than 47,000 are minors.
The adult population of the camp consists of radical
fighters, so radical that even humanitarian personnel
are not safe there. There is an acute shortage of food
and water, medical personnel, medicines and medical
equipment, and infectious diseases are spreading. For
our part, we are continuing our efforts in coordination
with the Syrian authorities to evacuate Syrians from the
Rukban camp in the illegal American occupation zone.
Its residents' active departure from the camp to areas
controlled by the Syrian Government has resumed in
the past few days, despite the obstacles created by the
illegal armed groups who have taken refuge in that part
of the country. So far about 14,000 people have left
the camp. The situations in Rukban and Al-Hol lead
one to conclude that there is a certain pattern to the
Syrian conflict. The fact is that the problematic refugee
and IDP camps are only in areas illegally occupied by
foreign forces, and it is there that we are seeing flagrant
violations of human rights.

To go back to the situation in Idlib, we should
point out that like other territories of the Syrian Arab
Republic, it will ultimately have to return to Syrian
Government control, and the terrorist hotbeds there
will have to be eliminated. It will be crucial not to
let the terrorists in Idlib expand from Idlib into other
parts of Syria and further into the region. Militias who
fought in the Syrian Arab Republic have already begun
moving to Afghanistan and Libya and may very well
also return to their countries of origin in Europe or Asia.
It is much more important to fight the spread of that
threat than to artificially incite problems and escalation
in the Persian Gulf. Russia will continue its efforts to
combat terrorism in Syria and establish a sustainable
political process there in its national capacity, as an
Astana format participant and a permanent member
of the Security Council. We are ready to cooperate
with all constructively minded Member States that are
genuinely interested in restoring peace in Syria.

