Mr. Konare (spoke in French): Thank you very
much, Mr. President, for inviting us, the African Union.
Thank you for this important acknowledgment, which
confirms the similar acknowledgment made by
numerous countries who have accredited their
ambassadors in Addis Ababa to our organization; by
the United States of America, which today has hired a
special messenger to the African Union in Addis Ababa
and has given diplomatic status to our Ambassador in
Washington, DC; and the European Union, which is
preparing to appoint a special representative for Addis
Ababa. Those are important acts that acknowledge the
fact of integration.

There are regional organizations, and the African
Union is one of them. But it is more than that: there is
the African Union, then there are the other regional
organizations, because Africa's agenda will
increasingly be defined by the African Union.

Thank you very much, Sir, for having convened
this highly significant debate, but as you yourself said,
we hope to move beyond words, to move beyond
promises because too many promises have already
been made to Africa. I am convinced that this meeting
will provide added value because there will be follow-
up. You heard for yourself, Sir, in the comments made
by each Head of State and Government around the
table, a call for peace on the continent. How can it be
otherwise, when we consider the individual dramas of
men and women, the number of displaced persons, the
number of refugees, the number of civilians who have
been slaughtered, when we have seen on our continent
the tragedy of the genocide perpetrated in Rwanda,
from which, unfortunately, we have not yet learned all
the lessons.

How could one not join in such a debate, when
one is familiar with the tragedies that are unfolding in
Africa, such as the terrible situation in Darfur and in
Somalia? What I would like to say concerning Darfur
is that, on 21 September, together with the United
Nations, we organized a meeting here in New York.
Significant commitments were made, significant
commitments that must be met. The security of
populations must be ensured and we must ensure the
deployment of troops to Darfur as rapidly as possible.
The commitments that were made must be respected.

There is also the issue of political dialogue,
which must also reach completion. The Sudanese
President has announced a ceasefire. It is crucial that
this ceasefire be respected by all. A dialogue
conference is scheduled for 27 September in Tripoli,
and we must do everything in our power to ensure that
all the Sudanese parties are seated at the table. We
know that we can count on you, Sir, to ensure that that
is indeed the case.

When it comes to Darfur, we have told the
Sudanese to have faith, but not complacency. Faith, but
no complacency: this is a primarily African
responsibility. I have no doubt whatsoever that we will
implement the resolution adopted by the United
Nations.

Regarding Somalia, we need to be able to rapidly
deploy African troops in order to give political
dialogue a chance and to strengthen security. We have
heard testimonials about all the efforts deployed by
Africa to ensure peace and security. We have
established a continent-wide structure to that end that
is solid but that needs support. We need support in
training our troops, support in improving our
information and analysis services, but above all,
support to ensure that we have permanent and regular
financing.

Currently, operations are financed one by one.
That makes it impossible to deploy rapidly and often
means that interventions come too late. In addition,
countries that are emerging from crises see their
situation deteriorate, since they do not have solid
support. This is something that we should pay close
attention to. We should also not hesitate to review
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations in a
creative light, as was suggested a few months ago by
South Africa in this very Chamber.

The United Nations must take the regional
component into account and integrate it in all of its
actions. For this reason, the partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations must be
developed. The hybrid operation opens the way for
that, and I believe that that indeed is the path to take in
the future.

Around this table, everyone has recognized
Africa's responsibility. It is essential. The primary
responsibility, the responsibility to promote democracy,
good governance, respect for human rights, is ours,
because that is the primary foundation of security in
any country. It is for that reason that we must
condemn- and ensure zero tolerance for - those
who use child soldiers. We must ensure zero tolerance
for those who use child soldiers. There must be zero
tolerance for those who perpetrate acts of violence
against women. There must be zero tolerance when it
comes to the use of mercenaries in Africa.

With regard to the problems afflicting peace in
Africa, a number of lessons can be drawn. Even with
regard to military operations, we must ensure that the
political objectives are clear and that the democratic
component holds pride of place in the resolution of
conflicts. When commitments are made, they must be
respected, but I am convinced that the examples set by
the great democracies will also contribute to ensuring
the implementation of decisions taken at this table.
When States make commitments, they must honour
them. There is no room for a policy of double
standards. While dialogue is under way, rebel
movements, too, must be bound to respect the rules of
the game.

All of this has been said here before. You
yourself, Sir, referred to it, and it is reflected in the
paper that you distributed. Africa must be helped. The
primary responsibility for ensuring peace in Africa
belongs to Africans themselves. They must shoulder
that responsibility. Our partners must let Africans run
their own business. Financing is important, but it does
not justify unbridled intervention or conduct. I feel that
to be of extreme importance, because the vital interests
of the African peoples are involved.
You yourself, Sir, used the term "rupture". With
respect to relations with Africa today, that rupture is
apparent at every level, beyond the legacy of
colonization and the cold war. Africa is no longer a
private hunting ground; it is no longer anyone's
backyard; it is no longer a part of the Great Game; and
it is no longer anyone's sphere of influence. Those are
the few simple rules that will allow the continent to
shoulder its responsibility and to demonstrate inter-
African solidarity.

I should like to make the following three related
points. The dynamic of integration must result in the
reduction of foreign military bases currently operating
in Africa. That should in turn help build African
capacity to maintain a unified Africa. Africa's strength
lies in its unity and in its capacity to shoulder its own
responsibilities. To its own credit, Africa signed the
Treaty of Pelindaba declaring the continent nuclear-
weapon-free. That was an excellent undertaking, but
how do we protect Africa without a system of
collective security? What about Africa's need for
civilian nuclear energy?

You touched upon the critical issue, Sir, of small
arms and light weapons in Africa. Small arms and light
weapons are weapons of mass destruction in Africa.
We must move towards an international convention to
mark those weapons and to ensure that they do not fall
into illegitimate hands. In your paper, Sir, you point to
the new threats that have emerged: the drug mafias, the
tobacco mafias, the immigration mafias, the
multifarious mafias that seek to dominate the
commodities market in Africa today. I would add that a
there is another threat might perhaps be seen rather as
an opportunity: If Africa were to be completely bereft
of new information and communications technologies,
it would be able to turn that misfortune into a security
benefit.

With that in mind when he spoke earlier, the
President of the Congo noted the genuine threat posed
by poverty. Many commitments have been made that
have not been honoured. The Millennium Development
Goals will not be met if things continue as they are
because, if the rules do not change and if Africa does
not gain the capacity to produce its own food and to
process its own commodities and profit from their use,
then it will be sidelined. You said so yourself, Sir.

In 40 years, there will be 1.7 billion people in
Africa. That is equivalent to the population of the
United States of America, Canada, Mexico, all of South
America, Europe and Oceania combined. It is
unthinkable that we could have a secure world while
such grave poverty persists on a continent of such
wealth.
I thank you, Sir, for inviting me to speak. I hope
that in the not-too-distant future Africa will be
represented here in the Security Council by a
Permanent Representative to the United Nations. That,
too, is a hope that has already been expressed by
speakers here today.
18
