Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): My delegation
welcomes the opportunity to participate once again in
the Security Council debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. Allow
me to extend our congratulations to you, Mr. President,
for the able manner in which you have steered the
Council's work during this month. We also wish to
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs for his briefing today.

At the outset my delegation aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the Permanent Representative
of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

For over 60 years the question of Palestine has
been on the agenda of the Security Council. During
that period a number of important resolutions have
been passed and many peace processes initiated.
However, as reported here today and as evidenced by
the recent Israeli air strikes in Gaza, peace still eludes
the Middle East. My Government has noted with
concern the latest round of Israeli air strikes in the
Gaza Strip and has registered its condemnation in the
strongest possible terms. Those obstructionist actions
on the part of Israel are hostile to the concerted efforts
to achieve a negotiated solution to the conflict in the
Middle East. We therefore maintain that there can be
no military solution to the conflict.
Those actions are yet again proof of Israel's
disregard for international law, and they fuel the

growing international frustration. They also come in
the wake of the report of the United Nations Fact-
Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/l2/48)
and the subsequent resolutions adopted by the Human
Rights Council and the General Assembly that indicate
that impunity for violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
cannot and will not be tolerated. We therefore reiterate
our call on all parties concerned to implement the
recommendations of the Fact-Finding Mission.

These hostile activities and disproportionate use
of force pose a serious obstacle to achieving a peaceful
and negotiated settlement of the Palestinian question.
South Africa maintains that the creation of a viable and
independent Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, existing alongside the State of Israel within
secure and internationally recognized borders, as well
as the complete withdrawal of Israel from all occupied
Arab territories, including the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, are the only means of finding a just, lasting
and comprehensive solution to the Middle East
conflict. This is in line with international agreements,
including a number of Security Council resolutions, the
terms of reference of the Madrid conference, the Road
Map and the Arab Peace Initiative.

To realize this objective, the Governments and
peoples of Israel and Palestine have to refrain from
activities that could jeopardize or derail the peace
process. We are concerned about the continuing
impasse in negotiations between the Palestinian and
Israeli leadership, and therefore call on the parties to
create conditions conducive to the resumption of
negotiations.

The ongoing military occupation of the
Palestinian territory and Arab territories and the denial
of self-determination to the Palestinian people are the
primary sources of insecurity and instability in the
Middle East. South Africa reaffirms its support for
Palestine's right to self-determination and independence
and will continue to pledge our support for the
implementation of international initiatives, including
the Arab Peace Initiative, the relevant Security Council
resolutions and the principle of land for peace.

Is it not about time that this body, the Council, in
accordance with its mandate, consider concrete and
practical steps towards the resolution of the Middle
East situation, in particular the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict? Debates have been conducted, statements
made and resolutions adopted on the situation in the
Middle East, but no meaningful progress has been
made thus far.

South Africa condemns the continued illegal
Israeli settlement activities in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem and the facts being created on the ground,
which could prejudice the final status negotiations and
present an obstacle to the peace process. It is therefore
the view of South Africa that the continuing illegal
Israeli settlement activities in Gaza and East Jerusalem
do not help the situation insofar as the negotiations on
the final status are concerned.

To this end, the continued blockade imposed on
Gaza has dire humanitarian consequences for ordinary
Palestinians, their economic livelihood and the
reconstruction of Gaza. We call on Israel to
immediately lift this blockade and open the border
crossings to alleviate the humanitarian crisis.

With regard to the separation wall, we have
always been of the view that its existence does not
constitute a legitimate security measure, and we wish
to express our disappointment that the Government of
Israel has yet to comply with the findings of the
International Court of Justice on the legal consequences
of the construction of a wall in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Equally, the ongoing home
demolition programme constitutes a serious violation
of international law.

In conclusion, the international community, and
the Security Council in particular, have an obligation to
protect the weak, promote peace and seek a lasting
solution to this long-standing conflict. The absence of
long-lasting peace therefore demands that we redouble
our efforts to achieve this goal.

Likewise, the Palestinian and Israeli people and
Governments have the responsibility and duty to create
a climate conducive to resuming negotiations without
delay. It remains our view that the crisis in the Middle
East region cannot be resolved outside of the resolution
of the Palestinian question. Therefore, it is critical that
all efforts be geared towards a lasting solution to the
unwavering struggle of the Palestinian people for self-
determination, peace, human rights and prosperity.

For its part, South Africa will continue to support
all efforts of the concerned parties and the international
community. South Africa can only hope that, as we
begin the second decade of the twenty-first century, the

international community, including the Security
Council, will do its best to assist the people of
Palestine to achieve their long-held aspiration to self-
determination, independence and freedom.

