Mr. Licharz (Germany): Guinea-Bissau is a
country in transition. The two briefers presented a
mixed picture, and I would like to thank them for their
very valuable input. We see progress in some areas
on the one hand and challenges on the other hand.
That seems to be a constant pattern for countries in
transition. It is therefore important that the Security
Council closely monitor the situation in those countries,
at the same time that the United Nations as a whole
offers assistance and support.

With the Peacebuilding Commission, we have
a very strong tool to do exactly that. I would like to
commend Ambassador Mauro Vieira and the Guinea-
Bissau configuration ofthe Peacebuilding Commission.
We have the feeling that we have not yet tapped into
the full potential of the inter-linkage between the
work of the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission. Germany therefore very much supports
a regular exchange between the country configuration
Chairs and the Security Council.

With regard to the situation in Guinea-Bissau, as
other colleagues have done before me, we call upon
the Government to ensure credible, fair and free
presidential elections in November. We welcome the
efforts by the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau, the Economic Community of
West African States and the Group of Five international
partners represented in Guinea-Bissau to facilitate and
support the electoral process, as well as to mediate
between conflicting parties. We particularly commend
the inclusion of the gender perspective and support for
women's engagement in the democratic process. In that
context, it is very important for the Government and the
judiciary to end impunity for gender-based crimes and
human rights violations.
Transnational organized crime and drug trafficking
remain major challenges. Therefore, we express
support for the work of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime. It is important to empower national
law enforcement authorities to effectively prosecute
organized crime.

I would like to conclude with two points.

First, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his recent report (S/2019/664). We very much look
forward to being provided with more details on the
timeline for the transition process that is mentioned
in the report. We also welcome the appointment of the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Guinea-Bissau.

Secondly, as my colleague of South Africa has
mentioned, we call upon everyone to ensure that no
vacuum will follow the end of UNIOGBIS. We need
to avoid the possible destabilization of Guinea-Bissau.
The Security Council has a special responsibility for
countries in transition, in general, and for Guinea-
Bissau in particular, in line with resolution 2458 (2019).

