Mr. Misie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow me, at
the outset, to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council and to wish you
every success.

I should also like to congratulate your predecessor,
Mr. Graf zu Rantzau on his able performance during
Germany's presidency of the Council.
The international community finds itself once again
at yet another in the series of tragic turning points it has
come to since the beginning of the unabated aggression
against Bosnia and Herzegovina. In the previous cases,
the choice was to go neither to the left nor to the right,
and above all not to go forward. In this way, 1,177 days
after the beginning of the Serbian aggression against
Bosnia and Herzegovina, later disguised by the formation
of the Pale fifth column, we are faced with the debacle of
the international community's policy in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The failure of that policy is evinced by
these figures: 200,000 dead, more than 1,200,000 expelled
from their homes, and the incredibly effective "ethnic
cleansing" of 70 per cent of Bosnian territory. Today, the
final act of this "ethnic cleansing" is being played in
Srebrenica: the brutal elimination of more than 40,000
Bosnians from the territories where they have lived for
centuries, where they have been born and have died -
modestly, yet proudly, not destroying, not cultivating
hatred, but building and cherishing a friendly coexistence
among peoples.

As an introduction to this latest blow to the United
Nations mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
particularly to the safe area of Srebrenica, the strategists
of the Pale regime, as they had done already in Gorazde
last year, first staged an attack on an ostensibly Serbian
Village, and installed on this stage several actors who
played survivors terrorized by alleged Muslim special
forces. Naturally, the television crews and reporters were
on the spot immediately, almost as in the best-organized
tourist arrangements, to report it all: the ruins and the
smell of smoke from the burning houses. Of course, none
of the foreign press could know that this was a Bosnian
village which Karadzic's hordes had "ethnically cleansed"
at the beginning of the war. This method was used by
Goebbels in 1939 in the Polish border city of Gliwic as
a pretext for aggression on Poland. Karadzic and his new
Goebbels arranged a repeat performance, which was as
successful as their previous repeat performances of the
Nazi concentration camps, and the rape, pillage, murder
and extermination of non-Serbs in order to "cleanse" the
territory for the Milosevic and Karadzic Aryan tribes.

To those familiar with the Karadzic methods, it was
clear even then that Srebrenica had yet to experience its
moment of greatest despair, the final strike in the three-

 

year siege of humiliation, deprivation and sniper and
artillery terror by Karadzic's forces.

Karadzic's infamous scenario is being carried out to
the letter to this very moment. New hostages have been
taken, United Nations observation posts manned by brave
put poorly armed Dutch peace-keepers have been
stampeded over, dozens of civilians have been murdered
and hundreds have been wounded in the unprotected city,
some of them while they were actually in the hospital: the
inevitable and, as always, the favorite target of Karadzic's
artillery. An ultimatum was again issued to the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), and the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) was blackmailed. The
world has been brazenly mocked once again by those who
have continued to practise these abhorrent methods for the
past 40 months.

Despite all this, some even blame the Government of
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina for so-called
provocations and for Violation of United Nations
resolutions, thus providing a spurious semblance of an
excuse or justification for the brutalities, atrocities and
crimes that have paralysed the conscience of the world,
which unsuccessfully attempts to grasp why and how this
is still going on, how and why an internationally recognized
sovereign State has been deprived of the means to defend
itself, while at the same time the international community
refuses, under the pretext of neutrality and impartiality, to
defend it.

Has the moment come when the long and detrimental
retreat before Karadzic's hordes will finally cease?

Many a chance was missed in the past. This present
chance should not for any price be gambled away. The
United Nations must never again permit itself to be reduced
to a passive observer or, even worse, an obedient assistant
to the Pale regime in their final act of "ethnic cleansing".
We believe that the United Nations cannot afford any
further humiliation and degradation of its mission - for
which the world sent tens of thousands of its sons and
daughters under the United Nations flag and spent billions
of dollars for the establishment of just and lasting peace.
The United Nations should not allow any new hostages to
be taken as a blackmail device in the hands of Karadzic
and his terrorists. Today, the Security Council is deciding
not only whether Bosnia and Herzegovina will suffer yet
another blow and further heavy losses, but also whether this
body and the international community as a whole will take
the road of rehabilitation or agree to a new defeat, and by
no means the last one, a defeat that will for a long time to
come marginalize the world Organization in its most
important function: the maintenance of world peace and
security. Should this happen, the world Organization will
disappoint and embitter a large number of its Members,
which, in the fate of Bosnia and Herzegovina, can
recognize a dark possibility for their own plight,
abandonment and deprivation.
The United Nations should give up once and for all
the distorted concept of neutrality and impartiality in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Those who not only advocate
but brutally carry out the policy of "ethnic cleansing",
national and religious superiority and the physical
elimination of a people combined with the destruction of
the traces of their centuries-old existence and the
expropriation of their land and all other belongings, must
not be treated in the same way as those who fight for
religious equality, tolerance, coexistence, human rights
and freedom. The terrorist and the terrorized cannot be
treated in the same way. Such neutrality and impartiality
lead to the development of this perverse tendency to
blame the victim for the perversion and crimes of the
butcher.

This neutrality, as the difficulties of UNPROFOR in
Bosnia and Herzegovina have proved for three years and
are now proving again, this time in Srebrenica, makes the
murderer neither more noble nor more cooperative, and
guarantees nothing less than the triumph of evil.

This is the reality which the international community
must face, the turning point from which it must decide
when and where to move. The Government of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina prefers the full
rehabilitation of the mandate of UNPROFOR, and the
strengthening of UNPROFOR to the point where it will
become a respectable force which cannot be humiliated,
degraded and mocked by every gang of road bandits.
UNPROFOR must defend safe areas since this defence
has, among other things, been used as a basis for the
argument in favor of the maintenance of the arms
embargo against Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I would like to inform the Council of the following
statement made by the President of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Alija Izetbegovic, today in Sarajevo:

"First, we demand that the United Nations
and NATO re-establish by force the violated
safe zone of Srebenica within the borders it
occupied before the attack, namely, of May 1993.

 

"Secondly, if they cannot or do not want to do
this, we demand that this be publicly announced.

"Thirdly, we also request that, in any way
possible, including via air drops, in cooperation
with the UNHCR, tents, food and medicine be
provided for the expelled population in the
direction of the safe area and the wounded and
sick civilians be evacuated in the opposite
direction.

"Fourthly, if they cannot do this or do not
want to do this, we demand that this be publicly
announced."

The establishment and activation of the rapid reaction
forces naturally represent a circumstance that could make
a crucial contribution to the rehabilitation of the
UNPROFOR mandate and UNPROFOR'S capabilities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This, combined with NATO
activities, could help to reverse the situation in the
Republic.

If the choice turns out to be different, and if it would
lead to the surrender of UNPROFOR and to its retreating
from its obligation to protect the safe areas and to ensure
the delivery of humanitarian supplies to the population -
which Karadzic's terrorists had blocked throughout the
territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina - then my
Government will ask for a clear agreement specifying all
rights and obligations during the transition period, which
will enable us to alleviate the consequences of the
international community's failures in our country.

It is clear that the main goals of Karadzic's terrorists
are to disable UNPROFOR, to pre-empt the deployment of
the rapid reaction force and any action on its part to
consolidate the situation, and to once again provoke a crisis
within the institutions of the international community,
including the Contact Group for Bosnia.

By attacking Srebrenica and now threatening Zepa,
Karadzic's and Milosevic's favourite general for doing their
dirty work in other countries, Ratko Mladic, continues to
realize their main goal: the elimination of the Contact
Group plan and the strengthening of their own position with
the goal of the legalization of the fair accompli. The
international community has two options in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, though capitulation to terrorism is no real
choice for anyone who is responsible or dignified.

The Government of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina does not have the privilege of choice. This
must be taken into consideration when adopting today's
draft resolution and any future decisions on Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

