Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): France
deeply regrets the present situation. Intensive
negotiations were held this past week in the Security
Council and among our various capitals. Despite the
efforts made, no solution reconciling the various
interests was agreed.

The veto of the United States is a threat to the
existence of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH), a Mission remarkably led by
an American, Mr. Jacques-Paul Klein, and a Mission
whose impressive achievements in restoring law and
order and combating organized crime and terrorism
have just been noted by the Security Council and the
Secretary-General. The Mission was about to end in a
few months anyway, to be replaced by a police mission
under the auspices of the European Union.

The decision of the United States to oppose the
extension of UNMBIH is difficult to understand in
many respects. UNMIBH has existed for several years
now. It was set up - as was the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia - by a unanimous
Security Council resolution that had the full support of
the United States. At no point did the existence of that
Tribunal - before which, in principle, UNMIBH
participants could have been called - pose any
problems for the United States.

Tomorrow, 1 July 2002, the Statute of the
International Criminal Court will enter into force. The
United States chose not to ratify the Rome Statute. We
respect its position, even if we do not agree with it. In
the same spirit, we call on the United States to respect
the choice made by States that ratified the Rome
Statute or that intend to. That is the case particularly
with 15 member States of the European Union, which
have all not only ratified the Statute, but have also
committed themselves to promoting its universality.

Does the problem we face today not have a
solution? Obviously, the answer clearly is no.
Certainly, no Security Council member accepted the
solution proposed by the United States in paragraph 4
of its text. The American approach would in fact have
called into question the commitments made by States
that ratified the Rome Statute. I recall that many States,
including France, have made constitutional revisions in
order to take into account the provisions of the Statute,
including the one on immunity. The approach proposed
by the United States was therefore not practicable.

Are there any other solutions? The answer clearly
is yes. The simplest thing for the United States to do is
to withdraw the 46 United States police from the 1,586
that make up the UNMIBH international police
component, so that they could then be removed from
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court in
the very unlikely situation that one of those unarmed
American policemen commits genocide, a war crime or
a crime against humanity that falls within the
restrictive provisions of the Rome Statute. There is
simply no reason to kill UNMIBH in order to protect
the 46 policemen and other United States civilian
citizens.

However, there is another path, that of the law,
which would allow us to take into account the
American concern. Two legal solutions could be
considered. The first would be to use paragraph 2 of
article 98 of the Rome Statute, which would enable the
United States and any other State not a party to the
International Criminal Court to conclude with the host
country of a United Nations force a bilateral agreement
whereby the consent of the United States would be
required in the event that the Court required the
transfer of an American national member of that force.

The second solution would be, as France and the
United Kingdom proposed, to use article 16 of the
Rome Statute in order to enable the Security Council to
request the International Criminal Court on a case-by-
case basis, through a resolution, to not be seized for a
one-year renewable period, in the case of an ongoing
investigation on a member of a force who is a citizen
of a State that is not a party to the Rome Statute.

For France and several Council members, those
two options would make it possible to respond to a
great extent to the United States concern, in full
accordance with the letter of the Rome Statute. Those
two possibilities are still before us today.

Together with its partners in the Security Council,
France is willing, in coming days, to seek, through a
constructive dialogue, a sensible solution that is
acceptable to all. What is at stake, as the Secretary-
General has stressed, is the very capacity of the United
Nations to continue its peacekeeping operations -
operations that provide irreplaceable services to the
international community as a whole.

