The Secretary-General: Let me start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and your delegation,
for organizing this important session and by expressing
my pleasure to see you in the Chair.
While we all remain deeply preoccupied by
events in the Middle East, as you said earlier, I am
heartened that we have gathered here today for this
important discussion on peace consolidation in West
Africa. Let me extend a warm welcome to the ministers
who have joined us, as well as to the Executive
Secretary Ibn Chambas of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS).

Let me also welcome my Special Representative
for West Africa, Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah. I'm sure I
speak for all of us in expressing gratitude for his
important and tireless contribution so far.

Political stability and prosperity continue to elude
most West African countries. The region continues to
be plagued by grave and widespread shortcomings with
regard to governance. That prevents it from taking
advantage of its rich natural resources and fulfilling its
potential for social and economic development.

We know all too well the close connections
between different conflicts in West Africa, and we have
learned the hard way that we need a holistic approach
to them. Insecurity has no respect for national
boundaries. These conflicts often start in one country
and in no time spread to its neighbours and become a
regional problem.

Here, I think we need to congratulate the West
African leaders for their willingness to become
engaged in conflicts in the region, because there had
been a tendency to say we do not interfere; it is an
internal affair of this or that country. Unfortunately,
these problems, as I have said, do not remain internal
for long. They create refugees, they create instability in
the region, they scare away investors. So what starts as
a problem for one country invariably becomes a
regional problem, and I am happy that the countries are
engaging it.

I think it is extremely important that we focus on
ending the conflicts in the region so as to be able to
tackle the essential tasks of economic and social
development. For peace to prevail, and to last, we are
seeking to develop meaningful peacebuilding
initiatives, including reconciliation and confidence-
building processes, as well as mechanisms to
strengthen the rule of law. This is essential to support
fragile post-conflict countries such as Sierra Leone,
Liberia and Guinea-Bissau.
06-4607]
Too many times, in international responses to
post-conflict situations, we have suffered from the
same weaknesses - shortage of funds, lack of
international coordination and a tendency to leave too
soon. That can reverse hard-won results and undermine
attempts to build solid States and societies.

That is why Member States decided to create the
United Nations Peacebuilding Commission, which held
its first meeting in June. And it was for all those
reasons that the United Nations established an Office
for West Africa, based in Dakar, to develop a regional
strategy. That work involves continuing efforts to
prevent conflict, as demonstrated in the Organization's
support for Nigeria and Cameroon when they reached
agreement in June on ways to implement a settlement
of the four-decades-long dispute over Bakassi.

Through the presence of three United Nations
peacekeeping missions and one peacebuilding support
office in the subregion, the United Nations is
demonstrating its commitment to efforts to end the
cycle of violence that has destroyed so many lives and
so much infrastructure. We are committed to
continuing to work with members of the subregion on
the journey to sustainable peace - and you can count
on us.

