Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by reiterating the United Kingdom's continuing
support for the work of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in
combating impunity and bringing justice for victims in
the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda. I commend all
the judges and staff of the Tribunals for their important
contributions. I convey also my thanks to Presidents
Robinson and Khan and Prosecutors Brammertz and
Jallow for their briefings this morning, and offer my
congratulations to Judge Khan on her recent
appointment as President of the ICTR. I should like
also to express my Government's thanks to her
predecessor, Judge Byron, for his valuable contribution
to the Tribunal during his term as President.

Dealing first with the ICTY, I would like to
congratulate and commend the Serb authorities for the
arrest and transfer of Ratko Mladic'. I encourage them
not to lose momentum and to seek the apprehension of
Goran Hadiie in the same way. Mladie's transfer is
evidence of the Serb Government's commitment to
cooperation with the ICTY and another important
milestone for the Tribunal itself.

This development underlines the need for the
ICTY to organize its work more efficiently and conduct
trials fairly and expeditiously. The United Kingdom is
particularly concerned about judgements taking up to a
year and a half to be delivered after the conclusion of
closing arguments. I hope that the Tribunal and the
President will take all possible steps to ensure the
effective management and timely completion of all
trials and appeals.

The United Kingdom welcomes the assessment
made by Prosecutor Brammertz that Croatia continues
to respond to his requests and provide access to
witnesses and evidence as required. However, there
remain inconsistencies raised in connection with the
findings of the Croatian Government's task force on
Operation Storm which need to be followed up, despite
these having been raised by the Prosecutor in his last
report.

However, I am encouraged that Croatia has said
that it will continue its administrative investigation
into the missing military documents concerning
Operation Storm and hope that its continued efforts
will soon bring about a successful resolution to this
matter.

I should like to support the request made by
President Robinson to all suitable nations to consider
entering into sentence-enforcement agreements with
the Tribunal, as the United Kingdom has done, in order
to assist the Tribunal in delivering justice.

Moving now to the ICTR, I welcome the recent
news that one of the remaining fugitives, Bernard
Munyagishari, has been arrested in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Congratulations should be
passed to the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and I would encourage it to work with
the ICTR and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to transfer custody of the fugitive without
delay.

The mandate of the ICTR cannot be completed
until all the remaining fugitives have been arrested and
delivered into the custody of either the ICTR or the
Residual Mechanism. In that regard, I call on all States
Members of the United Nations to provide the ICTR
with full cooperation and ensure that the remaining
fugitives are brought to justice. As Prosecutor Jallow
has emphasized, both Kenya and Zimbabwe need to
take significant steps to cooperate with the ICTR in the
tracking of Felicien Kabuga and Protais Mpiranya, so
that they can be brought to justice.

In its report (S/2011/317), the ICTR has
highlighted the fact that there will be slippage into
2012 of some first-instance trials, with appeals to be
completed in 2014. The United Kingdom is concerned
that, at this very late stage in the Tribunal's completion
strategy, there should be no further delays. I would
encourage all parts of both Tribunals to continue to
look for innovative approaches and to share best
practices wherever possible, with a View to avoiding
further delays in completion. In that context, it is
commendable to note the Prosecution's creative
response to immediate access to materials through the
electronic disclosure suite.

The United Kingdom recognizes the difficulties
faced by both Tribunals as a result of staff losses.
Staffing matters, as President Robinson said, are not
directly within the competence of the Security Council,
but nevertheless I do want to take this opportunity to
express our support for action by the Secretariat and
the responsible organs of the United Nations, within
existing resources, in order to find practical solutions
to address these problems. The Tribunals need to
continue to be adequately staffed so that they can
complete their work.

