Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): I, too, would
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura, for his very
informative briefing today. I would also like to
commend his efforts towards the significant results that
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
is achieving in supporting the Government of Iraq, as
he described. I would ask him to please also pass on
our congratulations and best wishes for the
continuation of their important work in Iraq to all
UNAMI staff. UNAMI, as underlined by the Special
Representative, has an essential role in addressing a
number of very complex and significant questions.
Therefore, ensuring the safety of the United Nations
presence in Iraq remains a high priority for the United
Nations and the Security Council.

I would like to thank Ambassador Khalilzad for
his briefing on behalf of the Multinational Force in
Iraq (MNF-I) and Ambassador Al Bayati for his
statement. Let me also associate myself with the
statement delivered by Ambassador Ripert on behalf of
the European Union.

We share the Secretary-General's assessment of
the situation in Iraq in his latest report (S/2008/688).
The Government of Iraq has made substantial progress
in the security situation. The increasing autonomy of
the Iraqi Security Forces is also a positive
development. In that regard, I would like to note that

Italy remains committed to helping Iraq build its
security capacities through the NATO Training
Mission. At the same time, I agree with the Secretary-
General that this progress will remain fragile unless it
is backed up by a national reconciliation process. All
the Iraqi political forces should be encouraged to
continue the political dialogue in order to solve
outstanding issues and reach agreed solutions on such
fundamental questions as the structure of the Iraqi
institutions and the sharing of power and resources.
The ongoing constitutional review is of the utmost
importance.

The Iraqi political situation seems to be moving
in the right direction. I refer in particular to the
adoption of a new provincial electoral law, a major step
forward that shows once again the commitment of the
Iraqi political forces to democracy and dialogue. We
look forward to the holding of provincial elections,
another step in building a democratic Iraq that will
empower representative local leaders and give a chance
to all Iraqi political forces to remain engaged. The
elections must take place in a fair and transparent
manner, free of interference or intimidation from
armed groups.

I would like to welcome in particular the
adoption of a law that provides for reserved seats for
Iraqi minorities. The representation of minorities is a
key element, especially in a country as diverse and rich
in cultures and communities as Iraq. The affirmation of
such a principle is of great importance.

Another top priority is the issue of refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs). Their safe and
voluntary return home must be a priority. The
international community should support the Iraqi
Government's actions as well as that of the host
countries in that endeavour. There are encouraging
signs, with some refugees and IDPs starting to return
voluntarily. That progress must be consolidated.

A few days ago, my Government organized a
conference on the issue of militias, attended by
representatives of all the major Iraqi political forces.
The message from that meeting was clear: There is no
place for militias and armed groups in a democratic
society. The disbandment of those armed groups that
still exist in Iraq outside State control and the
integration of their members into Iraq's legitimate
security forces and civilian life are therefore essential
to the stabilization of the country.

The development of a viable private sector is not
only an economic priority but also a political one. It
would diversify the economy and provide the
alternative revenue sources needed to break the State
budget's dependency on fluctuations in the oil market.
The approval of a hydrocarbons law is thus a clear
priority. A vital private sector is a central element of a
democratic system and, in that regard, Italy is
committed to cooperating with Iraq within the
framework of the International Compact with Iraq and
of the bilateral friendship and cooperation agreement
signed in 2007.

My country has been at the side of the Iraqi
people and institutions in their efforts to build a
democratic State that is at peace with itself and with its
neighbours. I should like to conclude by affirming that
commitment.

