Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): As Sir Jeremy
Greenstock set out in detail in the Security Council debate
on 24 March, the international community has over the
past year made exhaustive efforts to resolve the crisis in
Kosovo through negotiation. Every means short of force
was used to try to avert the current situation. These
efforts have failed because President Milosevic has
flouted the demands of the international community,
including successive Security Council resolutions, allowed
his forces to continue their violent oppression of civilians
in Kosovo and ignored all appeals to negotiate a political

 

settlement. He has acted in defiance of the expressed will
of the Security Council.

As recognized in Security Council resolutions 1199
(1998) and 1203 (1998), it is Belgrade's policies with
regard to Kosovo that have caused the threat to peace and
security in the region, not the actions of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO). In the current circumstances,
military intervention is justified as an exceptional measure
to prevent an overwhelming humanitarian catastrophe.

Adoption of the draft resolution before us today would
simply have signalled to President Milosevic that there was
no check on his repressive action in Kosovo. It would have
done nothing to avert an imminent humanitarian
catastrophe. That is why the United Kingdom voted against
1t.

As I said earlier, our position was explained in great
detail in the Council's debate on 24 March. I do not,
therefore, want to go too far into the substance of the draft
resolution on which we have just voted in my statement
now. But I should refer to the suggestion in the Security
Council draft resolution, repeated today by the
representative of the Russian Federation, that NATO has
banned civil flights over a number of countries in the
Balkan region. This is incorrect; NATO has no power to do
this. What has actually happened is that NATO advised
Croatia, Albania, Macedonia and Bosnia that the NATO air
strikes could make their airspace unsafe for civil flights. In
the light of that advice, these countries decided to close
their airspace to such flights. There has therefore been no
breach either of the United Nations Charter or of the
Chicago Convention.

