I thank United Nations Special Envoy for Syria Pedersen for his briefing. I also wish the Deputy Special Envoy, Ms. Khawla Matar, a quick recovery. I also would like to welcome the new Permanent Representative of Belgium and wish him good luck. As the Syrian Constitutional Committee is set to reconvene next week in Geneva, this is a timely opportunity for Council members to appraise where we stand in the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) and exchange views on the way forward. The establishment of the Constitutional Committee a year ago was a significant development and a glimmer of hope, in that it was the first political agreement between Syrians - Government and opposition - to begin implementing a key aspect of resolution 2254 (2015), which is the setting of a schedule and a process for drafting a new constitution. This process has since been deadlocked by violence, terrorism and entrenched divisions, and subsequently delayed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). There is no panacea to the Syrian crisis. Only a just political solution within the terms of resolution 2254 (2015) that is formulated by and for the Syrians and facilitated by the United Nations would bring about lasting peace and restore Syrians' dignity and Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity. Without a negotiated settlement backed by multi-stakeholder cooperation and support, this conflict will only bring further loss, destruction, human suffering and social unrest, and fan regional instability. Without a conducive environment of enduring calm, sustained humanitarian relief, economic recovery and confidence- building, inclusive peace and development will remain elusive and terrorism, militias, corruption, crime and COVID-19 will fill the vacuum. It is therefore crucial for the Syrian parties to break the deadlock and rise to the critical moment Syria is going through today. We urge them to engage constructively and in good faith in the Constitutional Committee talks, seek common ground and put the good of their own people and their own country first. We express hope that this third round will identify in earnest concrete agreed steps for Syria's constitutional drafting, while we express support for Special Envoy Pedersen's facilitating efforts to this end. Tunisia expresses deep concern about the precarious security situation across Syria and the rise of the number of victims of violence among innocent civilians. Following overall improvement in recent months, there are presently foreboding signs of a relapse into large-scale violence, particularly in view of the repeated violations of the standing arrangements in northern Syria. Military reinforcements on the ground, tensions and military strikes registered in recent days highlight once again the fragility of a full and lasting stabilization of the de-escalation zone in Idlib. We reiterate our appeal for a stepped-up role of the Special Envoy in mustering ceasefire efforts and making full use of his mandated prerogatives to ensure an enduring cessation of hostilities. We further reiterate our call on all parties to respect international humanitarian law and take constant care to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure. The threat of terrorism and violent extremism has reached staggering levels in Syria. Tunisia is troubled by the growing resilience, sway and expansion, particularly of listed terrorist groups such as Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Al-Qaida and Hayat Tahrir al-Sham. We are equally troubled by the continuing provocations of terrorist groups and extremists in Idlib. We condemn the second attack carried out against the joint Turkish-Russian patrol along the M4 highway earlier this week. We recall the twenty-sixth report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team (see S/2020/717), dated 26 June, which details the critical terrorism reality in the levant as well as in Iraq, especially against the background of COVID-19. We stress once again the crucial importance of joint and resolved efforts in order to address effectively the issue of terrorist and extremist groups in Idlib and beyond and to stymie their plans to exploit, spoil or defeat the peace process.
