Ms. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): My delegation
would like to express its appreciation to the President
of the Security Council and Permanent Representative
of Belgium for this opportunity to engage in an open
discussion of the nature and operational effectiveness
of the Security Council and its cooperation with States
that are not members of the Council.

We are pleased to note that there has been some
progress in improving the Council's working methods.
The recent debate in the General Assembly of the
Security Council's annual report to the Assembly,
which was presented by the Permanent Representative
of Viet Nam, was an unprecedented and historic step in
improving the cooperation of the Council with
non-members of the Council.

We, the members of the international community,
continue to support the Security Council in carrying
out its major function of maintaining peace and
security, which has been assigned to it by the Charter.
We are entitled to expect greater effectiveness from the
Council in that area. However, the Security Council's
effectiveness problem continues to be in the world's
spotlight. Today, we are seeing how frequently the
Security Council fails to adequately react to serious
challenges that directly threaten international peace
and security. The Council has repeatedly shown itself
to be unable to agree on press statements, let alone on
the development of a common position on certain
topics of critical importance to the entire international
community. Against that backdrop, one gets the
impression that problems evidently exist within the
Security Council itself, as well as with its working
methods. The issue of drastic and prompt reform of the
Security Council is therefore a pressing one.

As long as the Council is unable to find common
ground in its approaches to certain debatable issues,
the world will continue to face military conflicts that
are followed by tragic humanitarian consequences. In
such cases we should perhaps consider strengthening
the cooperation mechanism between the General
Assembly and the Security Council. By definition, the
General Assembly is a more democratic body that
represents the interests of all Member States. In
particular, the most crucial disputes to have gone
unresolved in the Security Council could be discussed
in the General Assembly in order to at least clarify the
opinions and positions of the majority of the
international community on critical issues, so that
those views can be considered during the adoption of
Security Council resolutions.

We should acknowledge that the number of open
meeting of the Security Council has recently increased,
while the number of closed sessions has decreased. Yet
the transparency of such meetings leaves much to be
desired. For example, States that are not members of
the Security Council are forced to spend more time
searching for information in any way they can. As a
result, they learn either too late or not at all about
closed consultations. Every so often, information
becomes partially available from interviews of Security
Council members given to journalists who cover the
proceedings of the Council for the general public.

We non-member States of the Security Council
have the right to know first-hand what are the possible
decisions being discussed within the Council and what
are the positions of each Council member on current
issues, and should not have to find this out through the
prism of the mass media. Complete knowledge of the
nature of internal developments in the Council, which
are important for the entire international community,
are of critical importance for our Governments, which
depend upon objective information in adopting
decisions. As concerned members of the international
community, we believe that we have the right to be
informed. In that connection, regular analysis of
positions, especially those of the elected members of
the Security Council, will assist us in drawing
conclusions as regards providing future support only to
08-49242
States that are capable of being responsible for the
maintenance of peace and security.

We believe that that approach will strengthen the
authority of the Security Council, increase the public's
trust in it and contribute to the Council's effective
fulfilment of its major function of maintaining
international peace and security.

