Mr. Dauth (Australia): I had hoped to make the
shortest intervention this afternoon, but I am afraid that
not even I can match the superb succinctness of the
intervention of our American colleague. Nevertheless,
Australia very much welcomes the Secretary-General's
latest report on the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (S/2003/449). We are delighted to have
among us again today our friend and colleague
Ambassador Sharma. We thank him and his team
sincerely.

The international community continues to hold
high expectations of UNMISET. As the Secretary-
General's report shows, significant progress has been
made towards discharging the United Nations mandate
in East Timor. But it is equally clear that a good deal of
important work lies ahead. How the Mission achieves
its remaining goals will go a long way to defining the
success of the United Nations in the historic task of
supporting East Timor's emergence as a nation.

The Secretary-General's report is highly timely.
We have reached a critical stage in the life of the
United Nations Mission and in the United Nations role
in East Timor. Now more than ever, the United Nations
needs to focus on what the Mission will leave behind in
terms of solid and sustainable indigenous capacity in
civil administration, law and justice and defence and
security. We therefore strongly support the extension of
the mandate for a further 12 months. That additional
time will facilitate the Mission achieving its stated
objectives and intent.

In policing, a good deal of essential and basic
foundational work remains to be done. We have had
much discussion of this, but I think it requires further
comment today. Australia is pleased that the Mission is
redoubling its efforts to accelerate the development of
East Timor's institutions of law enforcement. It is
crucial that commitments made on paper are translated
into solid and lasting progress on the ground. The
Security Council's 4 April amendments to the
UNMISET drawdown plan should help provide a
secure backdrop for a renewed effort coordinated by
the United Nations in this crucial area, and Australia
stands ready to assist. A concerted effort in police force
development from now until the end of the Mission
will be essential to the ultimate success of the United
Nations in East Timor.

