The President: I shall now make a statement in my capacity as representative of Viet Nam. I thank Ms. Khawla Matar for her briefing and would like to make the following points. First, the conflict in Syria, currently in its ninth year, has brought about devastation to the Syrian people in the political, socioeconomic and cultural spheres. The humanitarian consequences, with millions of people in pressing need of aid, amount to a severe crisis that has for long plagued the region and the world. Secondly, the only way to address the conflict is through a comprehensive, long-term and balanced political solution, with full respect for the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of Syria in accordance with international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant Security Council resolutions. Thirdly, in that connection, we commend the progress made in facilitating dialogue among the parties concerned in Syria, including the formation and launching of the Constitutional Committee in September 2019. We support the role of the Committee and look forward to the continued engagement of various parties with the Committee with a view to achieving substantive progress in the months ahead. We urge the Syrian Government and other parties to build on recent progress and engage in dialogue and negotiations, with the broad participation of the relevant parties, in order to find a long-lasting political solution acceptable to the Syrian people. We are concerned about the lack of progress in the Constitutional Committee since last December, despite the tireless efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen, while hostilities in north-west Syria currently continue to devastate the lives of hundreds of thousands of civilians. Fourthly, we stress the importance of unity in the Council so as to find viable solutions to Syria- related issues, including the continued provision of humanitarian support for people in urgent need in Syria. The Council should continue to support all the parties concerned in Syria, as well as Special Envoy Pederson to facilitate further progress. Finally, we are of the view that all the parties concerned must exercise restraint and refrain from any action that could complicate the current situation. All parties must comply with and strictly implement their obligations under resolution 2254 (2015) and other related resolutions. Only through a viable political process can we hope for a sustainable road map for peace and progress in Syria. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
