Mr. Nambiar (India): Since this is the first time
we are making a statement in the Security Council in
the month of February, please allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency. I would
also like to thank you for providing the general
membership an opportunity to express itself on this
important issue. Your stewardship of the Security
Council comes at a time when the Council is required
to consider some of the most critical and complex
issues to arise before it in recent years. We wish you
the very best in coping with the challenging tasks that
lie ahead of you.

India participated in the last open debate of the
Security Council on the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait, held on 16 and 17 October 2002. Matters have
evolved considerably since that time. The landmark
resolution 1441 (2002) was adopted unanimously by
the Council on 8 November 2002. The resolution
facilitated the resumption of United Nations
inspections in Iraq after a gap of four years. It has now
been almost three months since the recommencement
of inspections.

The beads of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) have briefed the Council with regular
periodicity on the progress of inspections since their
recommencement. We have all had the benefit of
listening to the carefully worded, concise and thorough
briefings by them on 27 January and 14 February. Their
reports constitute the essential basis on which the
Council would be required to take decisions on a
matter of international peace and security. We wish to
convey our appreciation for the work of those two
bodies and their heads.

Resolution 1441 (2002) is the latest in a series of
Security Council resolutions on the disarmament of
Iraq and related subjects. Resolution 1441 (2002)
provides a stringent regime of inspections designed to
accomplish that very task. We call upon Iraq to
cooperate actively with the inspections process and to
comply fully with all relevant Security Council
resolutions.

As many of us understood it, the gist of
UNMOVIC Executive Chairman Mr. Hans Blix's
message at the briefing of 14 February was that Iraq
had been cooperating on process but had not done as
much on substance as it was required to do under
resolution 1441 (2002). While there is a widespread
feeling that inspections have to be given a chance,
there is also a feeling that the Council cannot be
expected to wait indefinitely to secure immediate,
active and unconditional cooperation. The recent
deliberations in the Security Council over how to deal
with the Iraq issue reflect serious differences in
approach on the subject within the Council itself. The

Council now needs to move forward with unity of
purpose.

India has consistently stood in favour of a
peaceful resolution of the Iraq issue. We believe that
the objective of the international community is to
facilitate the disarmament of Iraq, and that it is
necessary to pursue all available options provided for
under resolution 1441 (2002). Force should be resorted
to only as a last, unavoidable option.

India has also maintained the primacy of the
multilateral route in addressing the issue of Iraq. The
Prime Minister of India, in his address to the fifty-
seventh session of the General Assembly last year,
stated the following.

"A common destiny is at stake. The world
needs collective multilateralism. It needs the
United Nations, the coming together and working
together of all its nations in the development of a
common and collective perspective." (A/57/PV.4, p. I6)

That is why we applauded the announcement by
President Bush in that very forum to "work with the
Security Council to meet our common challenge"
(A/57/PV.2, p. 9). We continue to believe that the
resolution of this issue is best achieved through the
collective forum of States, represented by the United
Nations.

India is concerned about the difficult
humanitarian situation in Iraq. The Iraqi people have
suffered severe shortages and privations for more than
a decade. Sixty per cent of the Iraqi population
currently relies on the United Nations oil for food
programme. The programme, which has been run in an
exemplary manner by the United Nations, could be
jeopardized by military action in Iraq, leading to a
humanitarian situation that could leave, by some
accounts, as many as 10 million people dependent on
the outside world for food assistance. It is important
that the Council consider the alleviation of the situation
that the Iraqi people find themselves in while
considering the larger picture.

India is vitally interested in the peace and
security of the Gulf region, with which we have had
profound political, cultural, economic and religious ties
spread over centuries. Our special concerns with the
current crisis arise from the presence of millions of our
expatriates who live and work in the Gulf region, from
threats to the security of oil supplies and the volatility
of oil prices that could follow military action, and from
the build-up of public sentiments in the region.

In a related context, we note that, at the end of
last year, Iraq returned the first batch of documents
belonging to the Kuwaiti archives, and that, at the
beginning of this year, Iraq also handed over some
separate items of Kuwaiti properties. Most important is
the humanitarian issue involving the search for missing
Kuwaitis and other, third- country, nationals. We are
happy to note that it has been agreed to start
discussions on this issue under the auspices of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
within the context of the Tripartite Commission. We
understand that the second meeting of the newly
established Technical Subcommittee has just taken
place in Amman. We congratulate Ambassador
Vorontsov for his efforts in this direction and would
like to see him continue his good work.

At the same time, we would also like to see
implementation of provisions relating to the
repatriation of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals
and the return of all Kuwaiti property, as stipulated
under resolutions 686 (1991), 687 (1991) and section B
of resolution 1284 (1999). We hope that Iraq will act in
good faith.

We sense, and the world senses, that the Security
Council is coming close to making a decision between
war and peace. However, we would urge the Council,
before it makes a final determination on the question,
to seriously consider the numerous complex
ramifications that surround any step taken by it. These
include issues such as the dangers posed by the
development of weapons of mass destruction and risks
of their diversion to non-State actors; the credibility of
enforcement action under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter and the question of compliance; the
rationale and effectiveness of weapons inspections; and
the continuing pressure of sanctions.

Apart from the immediate consequences of
military action in a region that is already volatile, the
Council will need to take into account the impact of the
possible breakup of the concerned State on
neighbouring States, and its larger implications for
peace, stability and security in the region, as well as
the dangers of radicalization of public opinion around
the world. Yet another set of issues of a different order
of magnitude concern the potential massive internal
displacement of people and possible refugee flows, the
disruption of oil supplies and other such immediate
economic and social repercussions of a possible
outbreak of conflict.

We do not, as yet, have clear answers to these
questions. These are questions that do not have simple
answers, but they are questions that cannot be evaded.
As the multilateral organ of the United Nations charged
with safeguarding international peace and security, the
Security Council must give careful thought to these
questions and issues before it makes an irrevocable
move.

