Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): At a
time when the world is witnessing the deterioration
of several crises in various parts of the globe, there
is only one organ mandated under the Charter of
the United Nations to play a key role in preventing,
mediating or ending conflicts. That is the Security
Council. It sometimes lives up to its mandate and to the
expectations of the peoples concerned. It has thus been
able to make some decisions in the space of only a few
hours, including, for example, resolution 2076 (2012),
seeking a way to resolve the crisis in Goma. I hope that
the Council will pursue its efforts to stop the violence
and to find a framework for a political solution to the
cr1s1s.

That said, the Council has proved incapable of
reacting quickly to the crisis in Syria and the recent
events in Gaza. Similarly, it has shown no haste even in
dealing with more promising developments, such as the
ceasefire between Israel and Gaza. In Syria, civilians
are dying or being deprived of humanitarian assistance
while the Council debates procedural questions.

Six months ago, the group of five small nations
introduced draft resolution A/66/L.42/Rev.2 in the
General Assembly on the Security Council's working
methods. While the draft resolution was subsequently
withdrawn, the group nonetheless received very positive
reactions from the wider membership before, during
and after its introduction. Switzerland has repeatedly
stressed that change in the Security Council must first
come from within. We have always seen improvement
of its working methods as an ongoing process during
which we should maintain a sustained and constructive
dialogue with the Council, which derives its legitimacy
from the membership as a whole.

That is why I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having taken the initiative to convene this open
debate and for drafting a concept note that gives food
for thought (S/2012/853, annex). The note is a reminder
and an excellent review of the practical measures that
can be taken to improve the Council's transparency,
efficiency and interaction with the membership of the
United Nations as a whole. I take this opportunity to
thank another member of the Security Council, whose
term ends in a month. Portugal has done valuable
work as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, and I
would particularly like to thank Ambassador Moraes
Cabral for his personal commitment to that effort. We
hope that a new Council member will take up the torch
with the same enthusiasm and persistence.

That having been said, we became convinced
during the discussions in May with the permanent
members of the Security Council of draft resolution
A/66/L.42/Rev.2 that the Working Group could
make substantial progress. Like the representative of
Liechstenstein, we believe that the annex to the draft
resolution forms a basis for future discussion. While a
presidential note on conference resources was indeed
adopted (S/2012/402), the second part ofthat note, which
proposed establishing systematic horizon-scanning
meetings of the Council with the Department of
Political Affairs as a tool of preventive diplomacy, was
unfortunately not retained. A second note, on a more
transparent way of allocating the chairmanships of
subsidiary bodies and penholders within the Council,
has still not been adopted. Along with other delegations,
we therefore encourage the Council to return to the
tradition of regular horizon-scanning and make another
effort to finalize the note on subsidiary bodies and the
issue of penholders. We also hope that the allocation
of committee chairmanships will be more transparent,
enabling all members elected in 2013 to participate.

Another aspect that we would like to highlight here
is the potential for improving relations between the
Security Council and the International Criminal Court.
As many countries mentioned during the open debate
on the rule of law held on 17 October (S/PV.6849),
the Council should consider taking concrete steps to
strengthen the synergies between the two bodies. As
the representative of Liechtenstein remarked, it could,
for example, set up a subsidiary mechanism tasked with
addressing questions arising from their relationship.

Finally, the question of the veto must be addressed.
Switzerland has repeatedly suggested that member
States using the veto be obliged to explain their reasons
for doing so and to refrain from blocking action in cases
of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Such a practice would be perfectly in line with the spirit
of the veto, which was conceived as a mechanism to
protect vital national interests. We commend France for
its offer to take a step in that direction and encourage
other permanent members to follow that example.

Those are just some ideas on ways to continue
improving the working methods of the Security Council,
which we submit for the Council's consideration.
Members have certainly heard ideas from many other
delegations, and we hope that the members of the
Council will not simply listen patiently to our appeals
but will take them up in a constructive spirit. We are
aware that there are some encouraging signs, and we
applaud the efforts the Council has made to enhance
transparency and inclusiveness within the Council
itself and in its relations with the wider membership.

Switzerland attaches great importance to the
question of Security Council working methods and will
continue to engage in joint efforts aimed at improving
them. While considerable progress has been achieved
in a number of areas, much remains to be done in
others. We therefore intend to continue our engagement
in the former group of five small nations under a new
configuration, and we are currently holding promising
consultations to that end. We look forward to continuing
the dialogue on working methods in a constructive
spirit with all members of the Council.
It is said that imitation is the most sincere sort of
complement. We therefore hope that another presidency
will imitate yours, Sir, and hold a follow-up debate next
year.

