Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting on
peace and security challenges in the Middle East and
we welcome your participation, Mr. President, in this
debate. We thank Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chef
de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, for her briefing.
We also welcome to today's meeting Mr. Michael
Pompeo, Secretary of State of the United States, and
Mr. Andreas Michaelis, State Secretary of the Federal
Foreign Office of Germany.

The peace and security challenges facing the
countries of the Middle East have always garnered
the attention of the Council. The Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, the crises in Syria and Yemen and the
Iranian nuclear issue continue to make up a large part
of our work. The complexity of these issues and the
multifaceted threats they represent require the search
for innovative solutions through the concerted action of
the United Nations and regional organizations, as well
as enhanced regional cooperation.

A review of the situation in the Middle East
reveals a lack of prospects for political settlements,
a lack of democratic governance, deadlocked peace
processes, high geopolitical and religious tensions
and humanitarian tragedies. That bleak scenario, to
be generous, is compounded by the serious threat to
security and stability represented by the emergence of
peripheral non-State actors, including armed groups
and terrorist organizations such as Al-Qaida and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

In View of this seemingly hopeless situation in the
Middle East, Cote d'Ivoire calls for dialogue as the
best way to strengthen mutual understanding and build
the necessary trust for the comprehensive settlement
of these crises. We therefore urge all stakeholders
in Middle East conflicts to decisively commit to
constructive negotiations, with the support of regional,
subregional and multilateral actors, in order to build the
foundations for lasting peace.

We have a proverb that says that war will never
be rich enough to buy peace and that dialogue is the
weapon of the strong, not the weak. For negotiations
to be successful, they must be inclusive and take into
account all important regional issues - dialogue
among cultures and religions, minority rights and the
participation of women and young people in peace and
development processes.

With regard to the Iranian nuclear issue, Cote
d'Ivoire underscores that the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA), adopted on 14 July 2015, is a solid
guarantee for the implementation of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as well as for
regional and global peace and security. My country
therefore calls on all the parties concerned to promote
dialogue within the framework of the JCPOA in order
to ensure peace and stability in the Middle East. In
the same vein, my country remains convinced that the
recent regrettable situation in the Strait of Hormuz can
be resolved only through inclusive dialogue conducted
in good faith.

With regard to the Palestinian conflict, cote
d'Ivoire calls on all the parties to renounce violence and
unilateral actions, with a view to promoting a solution
of two States coexisting in peace and security, within
the framework of the pre-l967 borders and each with
Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with the relevant
Council resolutions.

As for the Syrian conflict, my delegation renews
its support for the efforts of Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, and calls on the
parties to promote political dialogue and work towards
the establishment of the constitutional committee, in
keeping with the relevant provisions of resolution 2254
(2015).

Finally, with regard to the situation in Yemen, Cote
d'Ivoire urges the parties to implement the December
2018 Stockholm agreements, to cease hostilities and to
resolutely pursue the political settlement endorsed by
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, as discussed in the Council this
morning (see S/PV.8598).

My delegation would like to note with regret the
lack of Council unity on these issues, which renders its
action ineffective, while civilian populations continue
to face humanitarian crises and violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law are a daily
reality in the region. cote d'Ivoire therefore calls for
the establishment of a strategic partnership between the
United Nations and regional organizations, including
the League of Arab States, for the prevention and
peaceful settlement of disputes in the Middle East.
