Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to welcome the presence of
His Excellency Mr. Nebojsa Radmanovie, Chairman of
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to
thank him for his important statement. I also thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, for introducing his report (see S/2010/575, annex). We share his views and support
his efforts for a strong and stable Bosnia and
Herzegovina, at home in Europe and in the world at
large.
The periodic review by the Security Council of
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is a crucial
opportunity to take stock of developments in the
political and security situation in the country and the
region. The report that has been presented to us
highlights several areas of progress, which Gabon
welcomes.

First of all, on the political front, general
elections were held on 3 October. The successful
holding of the elections attests to the political maturity
of all parties involved and to their willingness to build
the country on a foundation of peace. The elections
should encourage all parties to move forward by
rejecting the ethnic rhetoric that has long undermined
the country's political and social life. I urge the
Bosnians to continue to base the country's progress
towards increased peace and stability on the virtues of
dialogue and tolerance.

The talks under way aimed at creating a
Government based on a broad consensus represents, in
my view, another major step forward in the process of
establishing the institutional mechanisms that are
crucial to political stability, economic and social
development and the strengthening of the country.

We also welcome the decision taken by the
European Union on 8 November to lift the visa
requirement for Albanians and Bosnians in the
Schengen area countries. This is a strong political
signal that demonstrates European Union commitment
to the peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to
that country's progressive integration into the
European community.

These positive developments lead me to once
again urge the various political stakeholders to
accelerate their implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. Gabon believes that it would be to their
benefit to strengthen their cooperation with the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
European Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR), NATO and the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. We must also continue to support
the parties in their efforts to achieve the five objectives
and two conditions set out by the Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council, which are essential to
the effective transition from the Office of the High
Representative to that of the European Union Special
Representative.
On the security front, Gabon welcomes the fully
stable security conditions throughout the country. In
that regard, my delegation commends the central role
of EUFOR to that end, in cooperation with the Armed
Forces of Bosnian and Herzegovina. I am of the view
that reform of the defence sector, which NATO fully
supports, will help strengthen security in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

For Gabon, the presence of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in this body is proof of the consideration
and respect it enjoys in the international community,
but also and above all, of its commitment to finding
peace and prosperity once again within and with
Europe. My country remains hopeful that the peace
process under way will be further strengthened by the
momentum towards unity, of which the ongoing
consultation and dialogue will be the main vectors.
Those two tools will open the path to a peaceful and
bright future for that country, which has long suffered
internal tensions.

