The President (interpretation from Russian): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Albania, Austria, Belgium, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the
Netherlands, Romania, Spain, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Turkey in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, Without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kulla (Albania)
took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Sucharipa
(Austria), Mr. Reyn (Belgium), Mr. Truelsen
(Denmark), Mr. Orpana (Finland), Mr. Reiehel
(Germany), Mr. Zacharakis (Greece), Mr. Hoey
(Ireland), Mr. Fulci (Italy), Mr. Wolzfeld
(Luxembourg), Mrs. Van Daalen (Netherlands), Mr.
Gorita (Romania), Mr. Laelaustra (Spain), Mr.
DZundev ( the former Yugoslav Republic ofMaeedonia)
and Mr. Celem (Turkey) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from Russian): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the letter
dated 14 June 1997 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council, document
S/1997/460, and the letter dated 16 June 1997 from the
Permanent Representative of Albania to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, document S/1997/464.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1997/472, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Albania, Austria, Belgium,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal,
the Republic of Korea, Romania, Spain, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1997/471, which contains the
text of a letter dated 17 June 1997 from the
Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
Denmark to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Albania, to whom I give the floor.


