Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): This will be the
seventh and in all probability the last periodic report
presented by me to the Council on the activities
carried out by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) since I had the honour to assume
its presidency in February 2011. The full report,
covering the period since my last report to the Council
on 11 May, has been distributed in hard copy to all
Council members, so I will not read it out. I will limit
myself to some brief comments.

During the period, the Committee met twice in
informal consultations, on 25 July and 10 October. On
25 July, the Panel of Experts presented its interim report
highlighting aspects related to the implementation of the
travel ban, asset freezes and the arms embargo, including
references to incidents of non-compliance. The interim
report included nine recommendations for action by
the Committee. All of them were agreed, including the
issuance of two implementation assistance notices on
arms embargo implementation aspects. On 10 October,
upon the request of a member, the Committee discussed
issues related to arms proliferation from Libya to the
region, including media-reported violations of the
arms embargo concerning two ships. As a follow up,
the Committee dispatched letters to relevant States,
requesting the provision of details concerning those
reports.

Turning to statistics, since May the Committee
has dealt mainly with arms embargo-related issues,
having received and approved or not objected to a total
of 41 notifications for exemption from States. On the
asset freeze issue, five notifications for exemption were
processed. On the issue of travel bans, one request for a
waiver was received and is still under consideration by
the Committee.

I would like to conclude by thanking the Panel
of Experts for its work, and especially to thank
my colleagues in the Committee for their constant
cooperation and constructive spirit during the past 20
months of the Committee's activity, which allowed it to
discharge its responsibilities in an efficient and timely
way.

