The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the second
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III),
document S/1995/274.

Members of the Council have also received
photocopies of a letter dated 13 April 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council, which
will be issued as a document of the Security Council under
the symbol S/1995/296.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the
Secretary-General's progress report of 7 April 1995
(S/1995/274) on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III).

"The Security Council welcomes the
confirmation by the Secretary-General that the
cease-fire is generally holding and that the level of
cease-fire violations has remained relatively low. It
also welcomes the continued deployment of
UNAVEM. III military and police observers to team
sites and regional headquarters outside Luanda, and
the progress reported by him in a number of important
areas, including liaison with UNITA, the completion
of the first phase of disengagement, discussions of the
modalities for the incorporation of UNITA into the
national army. It commends the parties for their
efforts in this regard.

 
"The Security Council notes that a number of
developments give cause for concern. These include
reports of continuing military actions and
preparations, in particular the attack on the airstrip
at Andulo by the Angolan air force, the failure to
complete the second phase of disengagement by
10 April 1995, some restrictions on UNAVEM. lll's
access to Government military facilities, and recent
attacks on the personnel of UNAVEM. III and
non-governmental organizations (NGOs). It
welcomes the improved access by UNAVEM. III to
UNITA-controlled areas but notes that some local
UNITA commanders continue to impose restrictions
on the movement of UNAVEM. III personnel and
calls upon UNITA to ensure unrestricted access.

"The Security Council calls on the parties to
cooperate fully with the United Nations, in particular
through the Joint Commission, and to ensure the
safety of the personnel of UNAVEM. III and the
NGOs. It notes with satisfaction that the members of
the Joint Commission, including representatives of
the Government of Angola, met Dr. Savimbi in
Bailundo on 7 April and that at that meeting he
publicly confirmed his commitment to the Lusaka
Protocol. It reiterates its call for a meeting between
President dos Santos and Dr. Savimbi as a matter of
urgency because such a meeting may help to
improve the climate of trust and give new impetus
to the peace process in Angola.

"The Security Council welcomes the
Secretary-General's decision to proceed with
preparations for the deployment of UNAVEM. III's
infantry units (S/l995/230). It notes that he has
reminded the Angolan parties that they must
implement without delay the requirements of the
Lusaka Protocol, provide UNAVEM. III with the
indispensable logistic support, and undertake
essential tasks such as mine clearance, the repair of
major transport routes, and the designation of
quartering areas, to make it possible for United
Nations infantry battalions to deploy to Angola in
May 1995. The Council fully supports the
Secretary-General in this regard and emphasizes the
need for full implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.
It welcomes his intention to deploy the infantry
battalions in stages. It stresses the importance it
attaches to the Government of Angola providing the
logistic support envisaged for UNAVEM. III. In this
context it welcomes the Government of Angola's
agreement to allow the United Nations full

 
operational access to Catumbela airfield and calls
upon the Government of Angola to ensure that this
arrangement is extended for as long as required by
UNAVEM. III. It also welcomes the Government of
Angola's intention to conclude, by 15 April 1995, a
Status of Forces Agreement with the United Nations.

"The Security Council reaffirms the obligation of
all States to implement fully the provisions of
paragraph 19 of resolution 864 (1993) and states that
the continuing flow of arms into Angola contrary to
the provisions of the 'Acordos de Paz' and resolution
976 (1995) contributes to the country's instability and
undermines efforts at confidence-building.

"The Security Council is encouraged that the
Secretary-General has been able to report overall
progress in the humanitarian situation in the month
since his last report to the Council. It calls upon the
parties to continue to facilitate access to all areas of
the country for the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
It also calls once again upon the parties to respect the
safety and security of all humanitarian personnel in
Angola. It endorses the call on the parties by the three
observer States to the Angolan peace process
(S/1995/239) to cooperate fully in releasing all war-
related detainees through the International Committee
of the Red Cross, as well as all captured foreign
citizens, or to provide information about their fate.

 

"While the Security Council takes note of the
progress made in the implementation of the
comprehensive mine action programme, it also notes
the statement in the Secretary-General's report that
the mine situation in Angola remains critical. The
Council therefore urges both parties to support and
facilitate mine clearance and to comply fully with
the relevant provisions of the Lusaka Protocol. In
this context, it welcomes the statement by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
following the 13th meeting of the Joint Commission,
that the Government of Angola and UNITA have
pledged to put 800 and 400 personnel, respectively,
at the disposal of UNAVEM. III for mine clearance
activities.

"The Security Council will continue to monitor
the situation in Angola closely. It looks forward to
the next monthly report of the Secretary-General and
requests him, in the meantime, to ensure that it is
kept informed of developments in Angola and on
prospects for the prompt deployment of the infantry
battalions of UNAVEM. III."
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/ 18.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 6.40 pm.
