Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Representative Salame' and Ambassador Skoog for their
comprehensive updates on the situation in Libya and
on the activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya.

Almost eight years have passed since the beginning
of the conflict in Libya, and the situation in the country
is still far from being stable. Libya still faces many
challenges, including on the political track. A volatile
security environment and terrorist activities, as well as
mass movements of refugees and migrants, continue to
be a matter of great concern.

Despite some positive steps undertaken by the
Libyans, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) and the international community, violence
and confrontations among rival armed groups are
increasing. Those actions not only threaten the lives of
hundreds of civilians, but also undermine the progress
achieved so far in the implementation of the Libyan
Political Agreement. Kazakhstan believes that the
Libyan Political Agreement remains the only viable
framework for putting an end to the protracted crisis
during the transitional period.

However, we need to move towards permanent
stability in Libya. In that regard, we call on all
Libyan parties and stakeholders to maintain a strong
commitment to the common goal of seeking a
political settlement to the crisis and a comprehensive
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement.
It is vital that the authorities of Tripoli and Tobruk
should continue their engagements in order to resolve
differences on the basis of an inclusive dialogue through
political means.

It remains essential to maintain the unity of the
Security Council and support the work of UNSMIL and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Salame.
My delegation welcomes the efforts of Mr. Salame to
engage constructively and supports an active, inclusive
dialogue among all Libyan stakeholders. We encourage
him to continue such efforts in order to broaden their
support and commitments to the political process.
Drafting a constitution, holding credible elections,
implementing economic reforms and putting an end to
the lawlessness in the country are the main avenues for
progress in Libya, which we must all work on.

The international community must create
favourable conditions to advance the political dialogue.
With that, the primacy of the United Nations as the main
mediator should be maintained. We fully support the
observation of the Secretary-General in his most recent
report (S/2018/429) that international and regional
engagement continue to play a vital role in support of
the United Nations efforts to address the crisis in Libya.

Lastly, concerning the sanctions regime, it is vital
that Libya's oil resources be used for the benefit of all
Libyans. Strict compliance with the embargo on the
supply of arms to Libya must be enforced.

