Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): The
Security Council has been working for years on the
North Korean nuclear issue and, for years, the threat
has continued to increase and worsen. The risks are
not only real and empirical, but also extremely high
and growing. As we meet here, the nuclear programme
continues to advance and fissile material continues to
be produced.

We fully share the concern voiced with regard
to North Korean provocations, in particular the 13
incidents in which some 20 ballistic missiles have
been launched over the past months. Those launches
demonstrate North Korea's willingness to develop
its missile arsenal. They violate our decisions, which
clearly prohibit North Korea from using ballistic
technologies. They undermine regional stability and
security and international peace and security. They
erode our trust and make us doubt the sincerity of the
regime's willingness to negotiate.
North Korea has continued to develop its nuclear
and ballistic capabilities. Despite what we may have
heard, it has decidedly taken no measures in the opposite
direction. Sites linked to its illegal programmes
remain operational and active. The test on 7 December
shows not only that the regime plans to continue its
provocations in violation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, but also that it is not respecting
its own commitments, as Kim Jong Un had previously
announced that the Tongchang-ri site, where that test
took place, would be dismantled, at the inter-Korean
summit held in Pyongyang in September 2018.

In that regard, we must remain both sober and
vigilant with regard to the situation. Our approach to the
issue must be firm, clear and unambiguous. I recall that
the strict and full implementation of the decisions of the
Security Council and, through it, of the international
community, is a collective obligation. It must be self-
evident to us all. The regime has methodically pursued
its efforts to circumvent the sanctions and avoid the
consequences of disregarding our decisions, whether
concerning the presence of workers sent by the regime
abroad or the illegal shipments of petroleum products
and coal. The Panel of Experts regularly reports to us
on its findings involving the many violations observed.

Sanctions are not a goal in and of themselves.
They serve our common goal of achieving the
denuclearization of North Korea. The situation does
not justify lifting them or scaling down their level of
implementation. We must also be prepared to respond
firmly to any challenge to our decisions and authority by
the North Korean regime. North Korea is undergoing a
dire humanitarian crisis. The sanctions imposed by the
Council include exemptions with regard to the latter,
and they are being applied. But it must be made very
clear that responsibility for the humanitarian crisis falls
squarely on the regime. Instead of devoting the major
part of its resources to the development of nuclear
and ballistic-missile programmes and threatening
international peace and security, the Pyongyang
authorities should feed their people.

The door to dialogue with Pyongyang remains open.
We are extending a hand. We support and welcome the
efforts made by the United States over the past two
years to initiate negotiations. What we now expect are
concrete gestures of commitment from North Korea,
which must refrain from any provocations. It should
comply with the relevant Security Council resolutions
and embark swiftly and in good faith on a process of
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization.
That is the only possible way to achieve a political
solution and lasting peace on the Korean peninsula.

