Mr. Jele (South Africa): My delegation would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting,
which provides us with an opportunity to voice our
concern at the disturbing turn of events in Burundi.

 

The report of the Secretary-General sketches a very
disturbing picture of the situation in Burundi, which is
bedevilled by strife and ethnic conflict of immeasurable
dimensions. The international community has become
accustomed to hearing of the most atrocious of deeds and
of a total disregard for human life.

The ordinary men and women in Burundi have no way
of knowing whether the first rays of a new dawn will bring
hope or signal the beginning of more tyranny. It is for this
reason that my delegation is very concerned about the
recent military coup in Burundi and believes it is bound to
delay the realization of an early solution to the conflict.

We in Southern Africa have lived under and succeeded
in overcoming the scourge of apartheid. This achievement
was facilitated by the unyielding support of the international
community to complement our efforts. We therefore concur
with the report of the Secretary-General that the gross
disregard for the rule of law and the contempt for
constitutional and elected organs by those who carried out
the coup is not conducive to the creation of conditions to
achieve lasting peace but will

"reinforce the fears of one side and strengthen
extremists on both sides. It will increase violence and
add to the suffering of Burundian" (5/1996/660, para. 47)

The international community can no longer allow acts
of unbridled violence to continue with impunity. Those who
commit serious violations of international humanitarian law
should be made to realize that they are individually
responsible for such violations and will be held
accountable.

My Government also agrees with the observation in
the report that the complexities of the Burundian conflict
require, in the first instance, political dialogue and solution.
Military intervention should be considered only as a last
resort if the situation deteriorates drastically. In this regard
my delegation supports fully the Arusha initiative and the
Mwanza peace process of Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, which
includes the imposition of sanctions against the Buyoya
regime. We see sanctions as a means to achieve the
political resolution of the conflict and not as an instrument
of punishment. It is our belief that sanctions are the most
effective and appropriate means of pressing for a speedy
end to the strife in Burundi.

These initiatives can only help to save Burundi from
further carnage and create conditions conducive to the

 

restoration of legal constitutional institutions. We believe
that the resumption of an all-inclusive negotiation process
without preconditions will serve to ensure peace and
security for all the people of Burundi.
The momentum gained by sanctions and other efforts
of the countries in the Great Lakes region should not be
lost. It is important that the international community act
in unison with the region by giving support to efforts
already in place and by ensuring that a process of
dialogue aimed at establishing a comprehensive political
settlement is achieved.

It is the sincere hope of my delegation that the
sanctions being applied to Burundi will lead the parties to
the negotiating table and that the deployment of a peace-
keeping operation or an intervention force under Chapter
VII of the Charter will not become a necessity. The
international community must act, and act now, to bring
about peace and end the cycle of violence in Burundi.

