Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): I shall deliver
this statement on behalf of our Permanent
Representative, but before doing so I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's meeting,
which is of vital importance. I also wish to convey my
appreciation to Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his very
informative and comprehensive briefing this morning.

I also wish to state that the Bangladesh delegation
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Egypt in his capacity as Chairman of
the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement. In addition, I also wish briefly to make
certain points that Bangladesh believes to be of
importance.

Bangladesh has always been committed to the
cause of Palestine. It maintains affirmed solidarity with
the Palestinian people in their just and legitimate
struggle for self-determination and statehood. Our
solidarity with the Palestinian cause and support for the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people are constant
and unwavering. Bangladesh reiterates its long-
standing position that the continued occupation of
Palestine is the root cause of violence, unrest and
destabilization in the region. The people of Palestine
are being denied their fundamental rights to self-
determination and to live freely in their own land. We
believe that the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital is
the only sustainable solution to this long-lasting
conflict.

Bangladesh condemns Israel's illegal settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory, which
undermines the Palestinian territory's unity and
contiguity. All concerned parties should call for an
immediate freeze on the expansion of Jewish
settlements, as well as for the dismantling of the
existing ones in the occupied territories.
15

Another major cause for concern is the unilateral
blockade imposed by the Israeli authorities. Such
repressive measures affect the lives and livelihoods of
the Palestinian people. Consequently, their social,
political and economic institution-building stands
crippled. Such injustice cannot be allowed to continue
and must be rolled back in the interest of the free
movement of people and access by the humanitarian
agencies. It is necessary to rededicate ourselves to the
Palestinian cause of self-determination and statehood,
and to work together to bring that aspiration to fruition.

While Bangladesh welcomes the various
initiatives and efforts undertaken on Palestine to date,
it emphasizes that the lack of progress on those
initiatives should not deter us from renewing our
commitment to and intensifying our efforts for a
permanent solution to this long-standing issue. We
need to seize every opportunity and take measures to
ensure that Israel and its patrons comply with the
relevant United Nations resolutions on Palestine. All
concerned must comply with Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009). The United Nations, in
particular the Security Council, must undertake the
necessary measures to ensure the full and effective
implementation of that resolution.

The continuous defiance and blatant disregard of
international law demonstrated by the occupying
Power should be addressed by all concerned, including
the Security Council and the international community.
Effective measures should be taken to oblige the
occupants to comply with international law, including
the Fourth Geneva Convention, the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Road Map. We should
demand that the Quartet assume greater responsibility
in steering the peace process and in ensuring Israel's
compliance with all relevant Security Council
resolutions and principles of international law.

As we continue to reiterate and strengthen our
support for the Palestinian issue and for the long-
standing human tragedy associated with it, we believe
that the unity and solidarity of the Palestinians need to
be preserved by all means. Otherwise, the whole effort
to achieve the goal of founding an independent
Palestinian State will be delayed.

Bangladesh firmly believes that a comprehensive
and just settlement is the key to peace in the Middle
East. The relevant United Nations resolutions, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Middle East Road Map can be

viewed as the guiding principles in this regard.
Bangladesh hopes that all parties involved will take a
pragmatic approach to this issue for the early
implementation of the Road Map for Peace in the
Middle East.

