Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We wanted to explain our position regarding
the proposal of some Council members to hear a
briefing to the Security Council on the report of the
Chairperson of the independent international fact-
finding mission on Myanmar (A/HRC/39/64). We
believe that this decision would be a mistake and would
create a negative precedent for the future work of the
Security Council.

As for thejoint letter to the President ofthe Security
Council from nine Member States (8/2018/926)
requesting the holding of this briefing, in our View its
very form is what might be termed an innovation in
the work of the Security Council. To say it like it is,
this is nothing but arm-twisting, in which the authors
of the letter show the rest of us that the potential result
of a procedural vote on it is for all practical purposes
predetermined. We believe that the delegations that
signed the letter are consciously torpedoing the
possibility of consensus in the Security Council.
The value of the Council's collective work lies in the
unanimity of its decisions. Instead of undertaking a
joint quest to find a long-term solution to the problem
of the Rohingya refugees, therefore, these members are
forcing the Council to engage in loudspeaker diplomacy.

The United States delegation, which actively
supported the holding of today's briefing by issuing
an invitation to the Human Rights Council briefer,
recently announced that it was leaving the Human
Rights Council and accompanied the announcement
with a good deal of criticism of it. But now it turns out
that the Human Rights Council is useful after all. Is this
not clearly a double standard?

We believe that the work of the fact-finding mission
on Myanmar is harmful and counterproductive. It does
not have reliable information on what is going on with
the Rohingya, as our and other experts said yesterday
in a dialogue with the fact-finding mission in the Third
Committee. In view of the foregoing, therefore, we
believe that the report of the Mission is underprepared
and one-sided, and the notion of chucking its so-
called conclusions at the Security Council is overtly
pernicious. Furthermore, since the report has already
been discussed both in the Human Rights Council
and the Third Committee, we see no added value in
considering it here in the Security Council. That is, if
we want to avoid the duplication of the efforts of the
principal organs of the United Nations in deeds rather
than words. We also believe that discussing the report in
the Council could cast doubt on the remit of the Human
Rights Council, to which the Mission is accountable.

We would once again like to stress that the key
to resolving the problem of the Rohingya refugees
is in bilateral cooperation between Myanmar and
Bangladesh. The role of the international community
consists in providing assistance to Naypyidaw and
Dhaka in implementing the existing agreements.

In the light of this, we will vote against holding
the proposed briefing to discuss the conclusions of the
fact-finding mission on Myanmar, and we call on other
delegations to do the same.

