Mr. Heinbecker (Canada): Mr. President, I too
want to join the others who have congratulated you on
the way in which you have managed the Council's
time, not least tonight.

(spoke in French)

I take this opportunity to speak in this necessary
and timely debate. We pay tribute to the Secretary-
General for the resounding comments made in this
Chamber a few days ago. The tragic worsening of the
situation in the Middle East, particularly the increase in
the number of civilian victims on both sides of the
conflict, reinforces our dismay and indignation at the
status quo. We cannot allow this inertia to go on
indefinitely. We must help the parties to find the
determination to escape the vicious cycle of violence.

(spoke in English)

In this quagmire unilateral measures to enhance
security succeed only in undermining it. The rising toll
of death and destruction on both sides of this conflict
must be brought to a stop.

Canada continues to support the security, well-
being and rights of Israel, including in particular its
right to live in peace with its neighbours within secure
and recognized boundaries. Canada also recognizes and
supports the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
people for a viable, independent State at peace with its
neighbours. The last 17 months present conclusive
evidence that neither the Israelis nor the Palestinians
will be able to live within secure, internationally
recognized borders until both do. It is our firm
conviction that genuine, enduring security for both can
be achieved only at the negotiating table.

Canada urges the parties to end the violence and
to reactivate the political process, which urgently
requires new energy and new effort. We welcome the
ideas voiced by Saudi Arabia in recent days that could
point the way to a solution based on the cardinal
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). All serious
proposals are welcome and merit thorough
consideration.

At the same time, ending the Violence remains
our foremost priority. The Mitchell recommendations
and the Tenet proposals have for some time provided
formulas for this. Courage and compromise are

SIPV.4478

 

required on all sides il' peace is to be achieved and if suspended. We will resume tomorrow, Wednesday, 27
the hard-won gains of earlier peacemakers are not to be February. at 6 pm.

wasted. Let the parties pursue all avenues to end the
violence and resume negotiations. and let us here all
resolve to exercise our influence, individually and
collectively, to help the parties help themselves back
onto the road to peace.

The meeting was suspended at 9.45 p.m.

