Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Following lengthy consultations, during
which the overwhelming majority of delegations
demonstrated a sincere focus on seeking joint
solutions - for which we thank them - the Security
Council has unanimously adopted the humanitarian
resolution 2401 (2018), on Syria. I wish to particularly
thank the penholders, the Permanent Representatives
of Kuwait and Sweden, for their tireless efforts
and resolve to reach a compromise up until the very
last moment. Russia supports the resolution because
it encourages the Syrian parties to work as quickly as
possible to bring a halt to the hostilities, comply with
previous agreed-on decisions in that regard, engage in
negotiations on a general de-escalation and establish
extended humanitarian pauses throughout the country.

The reason it took us so long to reach agreement
on the resolution was because we did not support the
directives it included for an immediate cessation of
hostilities for a relatively long period, and the reason
for that was simply because it was unachievable in that
form. A ceasefire would not have happened if we had
adopted the directives without any concrete agreement
between the warring parties, and any approach so
removed from reality would definitely not help to
address the pressing humanitarian problems in Syria.
It will be crucial to ensure that the Security Council's
demands are reinforced by concrete agreements on
the ground.

It would be naive to think that any of these
complicated issues can be resolved overnight. We trust
that all the external stakeholders with influence will
work to bring that about. We can see that some foreign
sponsors of the illegal armed groups have either fallen
very short in that regard or have been deliberately
flouting their obligations. Russia is working with
all the parties to the conflict and doing everything
possible to normalize the situation and actively assist
the humanitarian efforts. Iran and Turkey, our partners
in the Astana process, have taken on a major part ofthe
work, and we are preparing for an important meeting
in the Astana format next month. In the southern
de-escalation zone a fairly decent level of cooperation
has been established with Jordan and the United States,
although we have been seeing tension rising in some
areas owing to activity by armed groups.

The resolution clearly states that it does not apply
to military operations against the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, Jabhat Al-Nusra, other Al-Qaida-
affiliated organizations and various groups that the
Security Council has recognized as terrorists. That
struggle that will continue. We call on international
stakeholders to coordinate closely on this issue,
including with the Syrian authorities, and in strict
compliance with international law and with respect
for Syria's sovereignty and territorial integrity. The
goal of combating terrorism must not become a pretext
for solving this or that geopolitical issue of dubious
legitimacy, which is exactly what the United States is
doing in Syria.
Instead of being drowned in rhetoric about
Russia - and by the way, next time I am going to count
the number of times Ambassador Haley mentions my
country - what we are insisting on is a prompt end to
the occupation-style efforts of the so-called coalition,
which, among other things, would have a definite
humanitarian impact, enabling the Syrian Government
to address the issue of restoring normal life in all the
areas that have been liberated from terrorists, including
in the north and the east of the country. Closing the
coalition's Al-Tanf military base would solve the
problem of the internally displaced persons in the
Rukban camp. In that connection, we would also like
to point out that every effort should be made to deliver
aid via the most direct routes, as provided for in the
humanitarian resolutions on Syria.

It is important that today's resolution calls
for speeding up the immediate deployment of
humanitarian mine-clearing operations throughout
Syria. It also reiterates the demand that all parties
demilitarize medical facilities, schools and other
civilian infrastructure and refrain from establishing
military positions in residential areas, something that
the illegal armed groups have frequently been guilty of.
The conflict's flashpoints are more clearly identified,
and are not limited to eastern Ghouta and Idlib, and
that includes Raqqa, which the coalition has laid waste.
It also expresses indignation at the militias' shelling of
Damascus, in which our Embassy has been hit several
times. We know that the humanitarian situation in
Syria is dire and in urgent need of effective measures,
but we can see perfectly well that the propagandistic
picture being painted of eastern Ghouta is identical
to the loud campaign in late 2016 during the counter-
terrorist operation to liberate eastern Aleppo. We must
engage not just with eastern Ghouta, but with Raqqa,
Rukban, Foah, Kefraya and Yarmouk. Every area of
Syria should get help.

The resolution emphasizes the importance of
supporting the restoration of stability in the areas
that civilians are returning to, which in our view
sends an unambiguous message to those capitals that
continue to make restoration assistance conditional on
a specific transitional direction in the political process.
It stipulates that the humanitarian priorities for Syria
in 2018 are not limited to Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock's five requests. The agenda is far broader. We
hope in particular that the specialized United Nations
agencies and their partners will be sensitive to requests
from the Syrian authorities.
In conclusion, I would like to express my deep
concern about the public statements by certain United
States officials threatening aggression against Syria,
a sovereign country. This is a warning that we will
not countenance any arbitrary interpretation of the
resolution that has just been adopted. We demand an
end to this irresponsible and hateful rhetoric. Rather,
there should be joint efforts to settle the conflict in
Syria on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015).

