Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
meeting. I also wish to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Kubis for his briefing and
Ambassador Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for his statement.

The year 2013, which is coming to an end, is of
great significance to Afghanistan. The nomination
of candidates for the 2014 presidential election has
concluded and preparations for the elections have
already entered their final stage. The Afghan National
Security Forces are making good progress, with the
Forces already starting to assume responsibility for
security and stability across the country. All those
achievements have laid a good foundation for the
country's move into the next transformative stage.
China welcomes that development.

However, at this time, Afghanistan is still facing
a daunting task in restoring national stability and
reconstruction. China supports Afghanistan's ongoing
promotion of Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peaceful
reconciliation to achieve durable peace, stability and
development at an early date. In that regard, I would
like to make the following five points.

First, China welcomes the efforts carried out by
the different segments of Afghan society in preparation
for the 2014 presidential and provincial elections, and
it hopes that the Afghan Government will continue to
take effective measures to ensure that the elections can
be held in a safe and smooth manner. We call on the
international community to provide active assistance
to Afghanistan with a view to creating the conditions
for the elections to be held on time and in a successful
manner.

Secondly, China is concerned about the growing
number of security incidents that have resulted in
civilian deaths, especially those of women and children.
We urge the parties concerned to strictly abide by
international humanitarian law and international law
so as to effectively protect civilians. China supports the
Afghan Government in its continued efforts to build
the capacity of the military police so as to better carry
out its responsibility of maintaining security and safety
across the entire country to ensure that the security
transition phase can be successfully completed. The
parties concerned should give full consideration to the
need to maintain safety and stability in Afghanistan
and to transfer the responsibilities of security to
Afghanistan in a steady and orderly manner.

Thirdly, China supports the Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned reconciliation process and supports the
efforts carried out by the Afghan High Peace Council
toward reconciliation. It calls on the international
community to help the Afghan Government and
people assume responsibility in moving the national
reconciliation forward and to create an enabling
external environment. China welcomes the positive role
played by Afghanistan's neighbours and the assistance
they provide in that connection.

Fourthly, China encourages the Afghan Government
to further promote economic and social development and
urges the international community to effectively honour
their commitments of assistance as soon as possible
and to enhance the efficiency of their assistance. It is
important to scale up inputs in areas that have a direct
impact on people's livelihood. Priority should be given
to providing support and assistance in such areas as
agriculture, education and health. It is also important to
help Afghanistan to strengthen its own jobs-generating
capacity and to achieve durable economic and social
development to enhance people's standard of living,
thereby eliminating the breeding ground for terrorism,
narcotics production and smuggling and transnational
organized crime.

Fifthly, regional cooperation on the question of
Afghanistan should be further improved and enhanced.
Relevant cooperation should respect the legitimate
concerns of the countries of the region. It is essential
to give an important role to the regional organizations,
including the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
China is ready to continue to support and actively
participate in regional cooperation on Afghanistan,
including hosting the fourth ministerial meeting of the
Istanbul Process next year, in order to make continued
contributions to maintaining regional peace, stability
and development in Afghanistan.

During the past year, the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has
been positively received by different sectors of Afghan
society and the international community as a whole.
China supports UNAMA's continuing to work under its
mandate to strengthen communication and cooperation
with the Afghan Government and the parties concerned

in order to enable it to play an even bigger role. China is
also ready to work to with the international community
to explore ways and means for UNAMA to play a better
role in 2014 and beyond.

China and Afghanistan are friendly neighbours.
China has always been committed to developing
bilateral relations and has actively participated in
reconstruction in Afghanistan. In a spirit of mutual
benefit and common development, and in the light of
Afghanistan's real needs, China is ready to continue to
provide Afghanistan with support through multilateral
and bilateral channels. We are ready to work with the
international community to contribute to the early
realization of long-term peace, stability and sustainable
development.

