Mr. Prosor (Israel): Let me thank you, Sir, for
your able stewardship of the Security Council this
month. It is an honour and a privilege to have you
presiding over this important debate of the Security
Council.

I would like to begin by offering my
Government's condolences to the people and
Government of Norway following last week's appalling
attacks in Oslo and Utflya. The victims of this tragedy
remain in our thoughts and prayers.

I speak before the Council today as a proud
representative of the Jewish State and the Jewish
people - a people whose bond to the land of Israel
and our eternal capital, Jerusalem, extends back more
than 3,000 years. It is where we began and where we
have been reborn, realizing the dreams of our
forefathers to be a free people in our own land. Our
nation seeks a lasting peace in which the Palestinians
will have their own State alongside - but not instead
of - the Jewish State of Israel. This morning, I would
like to share several observations about the Middle
East peace process, which stands yet again at a critical
juncture.

First, let me state clearly that unilateral actions
will not bring peace to our region. Like a false idol, the
Palestinian initiatives at the United Nations may be
superficially attractive to some, yet they distract from
the true path to peace. Winston Churchill said that all
the secrets of statecraft lie in history. On this question,
history's lessons are unmistakable. Peace can be
achieved only through bilateral negotiations that
address the concerns of both sides. This was the way of
President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin; the way of
Prime Minister Rabin and King Hussein. It has been
the framework for negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinians for the past two decades.

Only this month, we were again reminded that
negotiations are the route to statehood when South
Sudan proclaimed its independence and was accepted
as the l93rd State Member of the United Nations. It
marked a new chapter in a long and difficult journey.
Both South Sudan and the Sudan harboured serious
frustrations. Major problems arose. Yet, the parties did
not seek quick fixes or instant solutions. Although it
was hard, they sat together and negotiated, reaching a
mutual agreement. This is why South Sudan was
accepted by such a broad consensus of the international
community.

It is no coincidence that we do not hear the same
resounding enthusiasm for the Palestinian's march
towards unilateralism at the United Nations. On the
contrary, many in the international community are
looking for ways to avoid this action. Many have
recognized that Palestinian attempts to create a State
by bypassing negotiations are akin to picking out a
chimney-pot for one's house before laying its
foundation. They see the potential consequences of
mistrust and unmet expectations that could lead to
violence.

It is evident that some Palestinian leaders
understand this as well. Prime Minister Fayyad has
spoken out against such a declaration. Just last week,
Nabil Amr, a member of the Palestinian Liberation
Organization Central Council and a former minister of
the Palestinian Authority (PA), called on the PA to
delay its statehood bid. Palestinians like Mr. Fayyad
and Mr. Amr see the practical reality before us. Like
many others, they recognize that after September will
come October, and November, and December. They
know that this declaration will be in violation of the
bilateral agreements that are the basis for Israeli-
Palestinian cooperation, and will create expectations
that cannot be met.

Now is the time for the international community
to tell the Palestinian leadership what it refuses to tell
its own people. There are no shortcuts to statehood.
They cannot bypass the only path to peace. The
Palestinians will have to make compromises and make
hard choices. They will have to get off the bandwagon
of unilateralism and back to the hard work of direct
peacemaking.

There have been attempts to find a framework for
relaunching the peace process between Israel and the
Palestinians. These efforts must be consistent, taking
into consideration the vital interests of both sides.
Some of those who speak most loudly and clearly
about the interests of Palestinians suddenly seem to
lose their voice, hesitate and sometimes even mumble
when it comes to discussing Israel's vital interests: its
recognition as a Jewish state and its right to live within
safe and secure borders. Both of these issues -
security and recognition of Israel as a Jewish State -
are absolutely essential to ensuring the future of the
State of Israel.

With regards to our security challenges, let me
remind the Council that Hamas and Hizbullah have
fired 12,000 rockets into Israel since we withdrew from
Gaza and southern Lebanon. You do not have to be a
rocket scientist to realize that if rockets fall on your
cities, schools and citizens, your Government has a
right to defend itself. Our civilians face this reality
every single day. No target is free from attack. Just this
year, rockets have been launched at homes,
synagogues, kindergartens and even a bright yellow
school bus, killing a 16-year old boy.

Without clear security arrangements, there is no
guarantee that terrorists, arms and munitions will not
flow into the West Bank in a future Palestinian State,
just as they are being smuggled into Gaza today as we
speak. One does not have to look too far to recognize
Israel's existential security challenges. Let me point
out that Israel's only international airport - named
after David Ben-Gurion, one of our founding fathers -
lies within a few miles of the West Bank. That is
shorter than the distance from where we are sitting
right now to JFK or Newark Airports. It could be a
target of constant rocket fire. One can only imagine the

reaction if other airports were under a similar threat.
Lasting peace must be based on a demilitarized
Palestinian State and an emphasis on education that
promotes peace instead of hatred, tolerance instead of
violence, and mutual understanding instead of
martyrdom.

On the issue of the Jewish State, we must have
clarity as well. If lasting peace is to take hold, Israel's
recognition of a future Palestinian State must be met
with an equal acknowledgement that Israel is the
Jewish State. Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu has
stated openly and repeatedly that we will accept a
Palestinian State alongside a Jewish State. Yet the
Palestinian leadership has not done the same. It will
not tell its own people that it accepts a Jewish State.
Without such an acknowledgement, it will remain
unclear whether the Palestinians' quest for statehood is
part of an effort to end the conflict with Israel or a
pretext to continue it.

Palestinian leaders claim that they will be
prepared for statehood by September, parading this as a
magic date before the international community. We
recognize the progress that the Palestinian Authority
has made over the past two years with the assistance
and cooperation of Israel and the international
community. The West Bank economy is a bright spot in
the midst of a global recession, growing by 10 per cent
in 2010.

Yet, it is clear that much still needs to be done to
create a functioning State that lives in peace with its
neighbours. Even the most basic condition for
statehood does not exist. The Palestinian Authority
does not maintain effective control over all of its
territory nor does it hold a monopoly on the use of
force. The Hamas terrorist organization still maintains
de facto control in Gaza.

Let me turn at this point to my Palestinian
colleague, Permanent Observer Mansour, and ask a
simple question. On behalf of whom will he present a
resolution in September - Mr. Abbas or Hamas? Will
it be on behalf of both the Palestinian Authority and the
Hamas terrorist organization, which promotes a charter
calling for the destruction of Israel and the murder of
Jews? Will it be on behalf of Akram Haniyeh, the
Palestinian Authority's chief spokesman? - Or Ismail
Haniyeh, the Hamas Prime Minister in Gaza, who in a
speech there last December said:
"When I say 'the land of Palestine', I am not
referring [only] to the West Bank, the Gaza Strip,
and Jerusalem. I refer to Palestine from the
[Mediterranean] Sea to the [Jordan] River, and
from Rosh Hanikra to Rafah."

On these issues Israel and the international
community must have clarity. Whether the Palestinians
bring forward a draft resolution in the General
Assembly or invoke the "Uniting for Peace" resolution
(General Assembly resolution 377 (V)), it is clear that
the Palestinians are not united, and are far from united
for peace.

There is much uncertainty about the future
Palestinian Government: its acceptance of the Quartet
conditions, the peace process, the control of its security
forces and many other questions that each and every
representative here knows very well. It will take at
least until after the Palestinian elections next year
before it is clear what Palestinian unity really means.
For Israel, this so-called unity has only brought
continued impunity for the terrorists who fire rockets
into our cities.

Today's debate is titled "The situation in the
Middle East". The turmoil that is sweeping our
region - from the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean
Sea - has shown that there are many challenges facing
the Middle East - most of which do not revolve only
around the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In particular, the
international community cannot allow the issue of Iran
to fall under the radar. Iran remains the centre of
terrorism in our region, transferring arms to Hamas,
Hizbollah and other terrorist groups, in serial violation
of numerous Security Council resolutions.

Iran continues to advance instability in the
Middle East - from Syria to Bahrain to Morocco. Last
month's report by the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to resolution 1929 (2010) made clear that Iran
continues to pursue nuclear weapons capabilities, in
complete disregard of the will of the international
community. New information shows Iran's intention to
install uranium centrifuges at its facility in Qom - a
facility that was concealed for many years from the
International Atomic Energy Agency. Such behaviour
does not just endanger the Middle East only, or a
specific group of countries. It endangers us all. We
cannot underestimate the danger of long-range missiles
and short-range minds. The international community
cannot stand by as the Ayatollah regime seeks to
assemble a dangerous mix of extremist ideology,
missile technology and nuclear radiology.

Let me remind the Council that Gilad Shalit,
Israel's kidnapped soldier, has been held in captivity
for more than five years, with not a single visit from
the Red Cross. We expect the international community
to do all in its power - and more than it has done so
far - to bring about his immediate release, which we
await, and every family in Israel awaits.

Israel is happy to have many friends around the
world. As we are often reminded, true friends never
shy away from letting you know what they think.
Today I issue a call to the true friends of the
Palestinians - to those who want to see them fulfil
their national aspirations. As they march down the path
of unilateralism, the Palestinian's true friends should
tell them the simple truths. Direct negotiations cannot
be bypassed. Peace cannot be imposed from the
outside.

To the Palestinians I also issue a call. Take
Israel's outstretched hand. Seize the opportunities
before us to advance down the real road towards
peace - a road of solutions not resolutions, dialogue
not monologue and direct negotiations not unilateral
declarations.

