The Deputy Secretary-General: I warmly welcome
Uruguay's initiative to hold today's debate. The number
of speakers is a clear sign ofthe urgency and importance
of today's subject.

Over the past 40 years, progress has been made
in establishing international norms to enhance the
protection of civilians and to make sure that perpetrators
of violations are brought to justice. The Security
Council has played a central role in that regard, which
we deeply appreciate. Despite that, the reality on the
ground is grim and bleak. In conflicts around the world,
great numbers of civilians are deliberately or recklessly
killed, maimed, tortured and abducted. Sexual violence
is rampant.

Hospitals must be treated as sanctuaries in
wartime. But recently we have seen a surge in attacks
on hospitals and health centres. In Afghanistan, an
air strike destroyed a surgical ward with devastating
consequences. In Yemen, hospitals have been attacked,
and children who were not killed by bullets and bombs
are now dying from the lack of medicine and health
care.

Today, I echo the words of the Secretary-General
and of the President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC), Peter Maurer - and I am glad
the ICRC Vice-President is present here today - who
last October called for an end to such blatant violations
of international law. They said: "Enough is enough.
Even war has rules. It is time to enforce them."

In 2014, civilians madeup 92 per cent of the people
killed or injured by the use of explosive weapons in
populated areas in situations of armed conflict. That
carnage of innocent people must not continue. Only
today, we learned that 19,000 civilians were killed
in Iraq between January 2014 and October 2015. We
must all work to achieve solid political commitments
to refrain from using explosive weapons in populated
areas, in accordance with international humanitarian
law, which is now so often neglected.

We have all seen the horrible reality in Madaya,
Syria, where thousands ofpeople have been denied food
and medical treatment for months, leading to starvation
and death. Let us remember that Madaya is just one
place where, shamefully, this is happening today,
in the twenty-first century. Sieges were a medieval
phenomenon, and now we see them happening in the
contemporary world. A siege that denies people access
to the basic necessities of life is one of the gravest
violations of international law and an affront to our
shared humanity, which the Secretary-General has,
in the clearest of terms, condemned during these past
days, naming such violations war crimes. Such crimes
simply must stop, and they must do so immediately.

The barbarity of non-State extremist armed groups,
such as Daesh, Boko Haram and others, present new
challenges. Those groups brazenly and brutally murder
thousands of people, kidnap young girls, systematically
deny women their rights, destroy cultural institutions
and undermine the peaceful values of religions. Their
aim is obviously to instil fear and to divide and destroy
the social fabric of our societies. I urge members
to do everything possible to address this threat in a
determined, comprehensive and rights-based manner.

In the face of such violations and developments,
what can the international community do?

First, we must consistently remind parties to armed
conflict of their obligations to uphold international
law and to respect and protect all civilians and civilian
objects, including humanitarian workers and facilities.
The loss of life is mounting among humanitarian
workers, who courageously are striving to gain access
to people in need. We must all unequivocally condemn
violations and use all the tools at our disposal to bring
about compliance with international humanitarian law.
For that, we need the Council's leadership.

Secondly, we must do much more to prevent
conflicts and situations that place civilians at risk. That
requires consideration and action on the part of the
Security Council and careful monitoring of violations
of human rights law and international humanitarian
law. Generally, the whole United Nations system must
continuously seek to resolve tensions and conflicts
through mediation and other peaceful methods to settle
disputes, as listed in Articles 33 and 34 of Chapter VI
of the Charter of the United Nations, which members
have before them to check.

Thirdly, where violations persist, there must be
accountability. Governments should adopt robust
criminal legislation and strengthen their judicial
systems in order to prosecute perpetrators. They need to
establish national fact-finding mechanisms and, where
deemed necessary, set up independent commissions
of inquiry. Judicial bodies such as the International
Criminal Court are to be used when national prosecution
options are not available. All States should accede to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.

When violence erupts and the threat of conflict
is growing, we all have a responsibility to act. The
Secretary-General's Human Rights Up Front initiative
requests all United Nations staff to react early and with
courage in the face of escalating risks of large-scale
violations. We are committed to bring situations of
concern to the attention of Member States. The failure
to give early warning so as to ensure accountability is
in itself a threat to peace and security. The resulting
impunity emboldens perpetrators to escalate their
brutality, as we have seen in several cases. It contributes
to the erosion of international human rights and
humanitarian law and to further loss of civilian lives.

Fourthly, Governments must do more to protect
people displaced by conflict, particularly those who
are vulnerable, primarily women and children. Policies
and legal frameworks aimed at protecting refugees and
internally displaced people must be strengthened and
strictly implemented. The high-level plenary meeting of
the General Assembly on addressing large movements
of refugees and migrants, to be held on 19 September
2016, will also be an opportunity to focus on those
issues.

The report (see S/2015/446) of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations, entitled
"Uniting our strengths for peace: politics, partnership
and people", pointed to a significant gap between
expectations and reality when it comes to the ability of
missions to protect civilians. The Secretary-General's
subsequent report (S/2015/682) announced several
measures to close that gap. Peacekeeping operations
must respond with speed and determination in the face
of threats to civilians. The opening of mission gates to
desperate people in South Sudan is one example of such
determination in practice. Missions must also report
directly and frankly on obstacles and failures to act.
Missions are to advocate strongly for the protection
of civilians. They should support host Governments'
efforts to protect their people by strengthening human
rights, the rule of law and inclusive institutions.

Dialogue between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries is critical. Each must ensure that the United
Nations never stands idly by in the face of attacks on
civilians. States should build on the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians, inter alia through
peacekeeping, which were agreed last year. Zero
tolerance for cases of sexual exploitation and abuse by
United Nations personnel must be strictly adhered to.
The recommendations of the panel set up after reported
abuses in the Central African Republic are being
taken seriously by the Secretary-General. We are now
working on a robust programme aimed at strengthening
prevention, enforcement and remedial action in the
area of sexual exploitation and abuse. I welcome the
Security Council's presidential statement of November
2015, which recommitted the Council to address the
protection of civilians as a core issue (S/PRST/2015/22).
When civilians are under violent attack, often from all
sides, as we now see far too often, it is particularly
important that the protection of civilians be at the
centre of the Council's deliberations.

In conclusion, let me say that protecting civilians
in armed conflict will be one of the central themes of
the World Humanitarian Summit, to be held in Istanbul
on 23 and 24 May. We must seize the opportunity of
the Summit to make progress on the serious challenges
that we face today. Respect for the norms established
to safeguard our humanity will be one of the priorities
of the Summit. We must redouble our efforts and take
ever more concrete action to ensure the protection
of civilians and enhance respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights law. It is time to
restore knowledge, to restore awareness and to restore
faith in those instruments and demonstrate in practice
that we are serious about placing human beings at the
centre of our work at the United Nations.

