Mr. Holliday (United States of America): I
would like to welcome the Foreign Minister of Benin,
as well as to express our appreciation to his country for
the leadership it has demonstrated in addressing the
issue of children in armed conflict. I would also like to
thank Special Representative Olara Otunnu for his
statement this morning, as well as to express my
gratitude for the report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict, which was issued earlier
this month.

Like other delegations, the United States
recognizes with deep regret the tragic consequences
suffered by children affected by armed conflict. We
urge the United Nations, the Security Council and the
Governments of all Member States to continue to focus
on the issue of children in armed conflict.

The Secretary-General's report details some
welcome evidence of compliance with regard to ending
the use of child soldiers in violation of applicable
international law. His report also notes progress in
addressing other violations suffered by children in
armed conflict. While the Secretary-General's report
indicates that some positive steps have been taken,
clearly there is much more to be done. My country
fully supports the call for all parties listed in the
annexes of the report to halt the recruitment and use of
child soldiers in violation of international law. As
noted in the report, the use of child soldiers is
especially dire in Burma, Colombia, Cote d'Ivoire, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia, the Sudan
and Uganda.

The United States notes that the Secretary-
General's report included the terrorist attack that
occurred in Beslan, in the Russian Federation, a
tragedy that resulted in hundreds of children being
injured or killed. We of course hope to do whatever we
can to prevent the recurrence of such outrages.

In the course of this discussion, the United States
would also like to emphasize that there is a serious
problem in our own peacekeeping operations that has
too often affected children. That is an issue that
requires immediate and sustained attention. An abuse
of power not only affects victims from the most
vulnerable sectors of society, but it also undermines the
trust and legitimacy that peacekeepers around the
world deserve, and which they require to carry out
their mandates.

The United States supports the Secretary-
General's commitment to stop continued violations
against children, such as recruitment or use child
soldiers in violation of international law, unprovoked
attacks targeting schools or hospitals, the maiming and
killing of children, child abduction, rape and other
forms of sexual violence and unwarranted denial of
humanitarian access. We welcome effective monitoring
and reporting of all such violations as an important
element of an effort to eliminate them.

My delegation does, however, have some
concerns about certain aspects of the proposed plan of
action. They include possible unanticipated policy and
resource implications of the proposed new thematic
sanctions committee in the Council and the call for an
expansion of the duties of voluntarily funded
programmes - such as UNICEF, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
related non-governmental organizations - without the
assurance that sufficient additional resources will be
available.

Although we agree that a broad partnership
among national Governments, civil society and the
United Nations is needed to address the issue of
children affected by armed conflict, we believe greater
clarity and selectivity is needed so that we can move
forward in an effective and efficient manner. Several
non-governmental organizations expressed related
concerns at last week's Arria-style meeting, which was
held under the able leadership of Ambassador de La
Sabliere.

We look forward to addressing those concerns
with other delegations as we continue negotiations on
the draft resolution following up today's meeting. We
are particularly interested in hearing the views of other
members of the United Nations today. We have already
heard some very valuable perspectives that will
contribute to the debate.

We look forward to addressing this critically
important issue. Again we welcome you to the United
States, Mr. President, and thank you for your
contribution to this debate.

