Mr. Feltman: This is the final briefing on the
Middle East for 2012. While I spoke to the Council with
concern a few months ago about how the world's gaze
was shifting away from the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
it is fair to say that recent events have forced it right
back into focus. What has transpired in the closing
months of this year should remind us, at the very least,
just how much the momentum for the two-State solution
has slipped and just how hard we should be working in
the year ahead to reverse this trend while there is still
time to do so.

As Council members are well aware, on
29 November the General Assembly accorded Palestine
non-member observer State status in the United Nations,
which was greeted by peaceful celebrations across the
West Bank and Gaza. Following that important vote,
the Secretary-General underlined that the Palestinians
have a legitimate right to their own independent State,
and that Israel has the right to live in peace and security
with its neighbours. There remains no substitute for
negotiations to that end, and the vote underscores
the urgent need to resume meaningful talks. The
Secretary-General, dismayed by some of the language
used by various parties on the occasion of that vote,
also appealed to all concerned to act responsibly.

Following the adoption of resolution 67/19, the
Israeli Government announced that it would approve
plans for settlement construction of 3,000 housing units
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and, most
alarmingly, indicated that planning would proceed on
several thousand housing units in the E-l area of the
West Bank between Jerusalem and the settlement of
Ma'ale Adumim. The Secretary-General has expressed
his grave concern and disappointment over those
announcements. Many international leaders have done
the same. In addition, the Israeli Government decided to
expedite the construction of some 6,500 housing units
in East Jerusalem that have already been approved,
including in Givat Hamatos. Settlement construction
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, violates
international law and is an obstacle to peace. If
implemented, the plans would represent an almost fatal
blow to the remaining chances of securing a two-State
solution.

These developments add to an increasing number
of settlement approvals in recent months. According
to reports from non-governmental organizations, there
has been a threefold increase in the number of new
settler housing units issued for tender in 2012 compared
to 2011. Given the clear history ofhow settlements have
developed and expanded since the signing of the Oslo
Accords, we are not reassured by comments by some
Israeli officials to the effect that the announcements are
in part only symbolic in nature. We strongly urge the
Israeli Government to heed the wide international calls
to rescind those plans.

On 12 December, Israel's Minister of Finance
signed the forfeiture of Palestinian funds in the
amount of 435 million shekels - approximately
$115 million - which were transferred to the Israel
Electric Corporation. While the Secretary-General
has noted his appreciation of Israel's willingness in
recent months to advance clearance revenues to the
Palestinians to address fiscal needs, we believe that
this unilateral Israeli decision on the use of Palestinian
funds undermines the integrity of the Palestinian
Authority.

Moreover, the decision of the Government of
Israel to withhold Palestinian revenues casts doubt
upon Israeli compliance with Paris Protocol provisions
related to the full, timely, predictable and transparent
transfer of tax and customs revenues. It comes while
the Palestinians already face a dire fiscal situation
that puts at risk the considerable achievements made
by the Palestinian Authority in recent years under the
leadership of President Abbas and Prime Minister
Fayyad. The Palestinian Government has been unable
to pay the salaries of its employees. Demonstrations
by Palestinian teachers to protest such non-payment
took place in the West Bank on 16 December and on
the following days. We call on Israel to reconsider its
decision and to resume the transfer of revenues without
delay. We also stress the importance of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority determining through direct talks
the resolution of any outstanding financial claims.

On 9 December, the Follow-up Committee on the
Arab Peace Initiative of the League of Arab States met
in Doha. Its final communique outlined intended next
steps, including transferring additional funds to the
Palestinian Authority to compensate for revenue lost as
a result of retaliatory measures related to the General
Assembly vote. The Secretary-General hopes that the
Arab States and others that expressed their support
for the Palestinian vote in the General Assembly will
indeed follow through with tangible, rapid and generous
disbursements to help the Palestinian Authority
address the needs of the Palestinian people on the
ground. The Arab League also expressed doubt about
the international architecture for the peace process and
announced future consultations with stakeholders in
the international community.

Palestinian leaders have discussed going beyond
the General Assembly vote to approach additional
international bodies. In particular, President Abbas has
stated that the Israeli announcement related to E-l has
crossed what he describes as a "red line". A dangerous
stand-off has emerged as a result. Confrontational
statements from both sides will only lead the parties
further away from achieving the two-State solution
that remains their stated commitment. It is vital that the
parties avoid negative steps that undermine the situation
on the ground and complicate a return to negotiations.

In that context, Quartet envoys met in Brussels on
12 December. They discussed ways to help the parties
avoid escalation diplomatically and on the ground
in the short-term, while also finding a way back to
negotiations. It is clear that new impetus must be found
for substantial peace efforts early in 2013. To that end,
the United Nations will continue its active engagement
with all concerned.

Regional actors and Quartet partners have an
important role to play. On 10 December, the Foreign
Ministers of the European Union (EU) reaffirmed the
EU positions, including on parameters for negotiations,
and reiterated that ending the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
is a strategic priority. The Arab Peace Initiative also
remains a critical supportive framework that should be
encouraged and nurtured.

The backdrop to those developments is a worsening
security situation in the West Bank, a fragile calm
in Gaza after last month's round of hostilities, and a
shifting geopolitical landscape in the region. In the
West Bank, the effectiveness of the Palestinian security
forces and their coordination with Israeli security
forces were repeatedly tested during the reporting
period. Citing security concerns, Israeli security forces
increased operations and arrests in the occupied West
Bank.

From 27 November to 17 December, a total of 182
operations resulted in two Palestinians killed, 159
Palestinians injured and 182 Palestinians arrested,
while seven Israeli soldiers were also injured. It is of
particular concern that Israeli forces reportedly arrested
several members of the Palestinian security forces
and intelligence. On 6 December in central Hebron, a
confrontation between Israeli soldiers and Palestinian
police officers reportedly resulted in injuries to nine
Palestinians and the arrest of over 20 Palestinians.

In another incident, on 3 December near Nablus, a
Palestinian allegedly rammed his vehicle into another
vehicle carrying Israeli security personnel. According
to Israeli reports, the Palestinian then attacked the
soldiers with an axe, injuring two. Israeli security
forces shot and killed the Palestinian. On 12 December
in central Hebron, a Palestinian teenager was shot dead
by Israeli forces as he allegedly threatened soldiers.
Riots followed and more than 20 Palestinians were
injured.

Confrontations between Palestinians and Israeli
settlers occurred on an almost daily basis, mostly
consisting of stone throwing on both sides, resulting
in injuries and material damage. So-called price tag
attacks vandalized Palestinian assets near Ramallah
and Hebron and desecrated a Christian monastery in
West Jerusalem. Prime Minister Netanyahu publicly
expressed revulsion at those events. On 4 December,
Israeli security forces detained three Israelis near
Hebron suspected of carrying out such attacks.

Israeli security forces demolished 14 structures
in the occupied West Bank, including the mosque
in Al-Mafkara near Hebron. These demolitions
resulted in the displacement of 41 Palestinians. In
another worrisome development, in the early hours
of 11 December, Israeli security forces, in another
incursion into the Palestinian-controlled Area A,
raided the Ramallah headquarters of three Palestinian
non-governmental organizations and reportedly
confiscated sensitive materials, including computers
and cameras.

Three recently arrested members of the Palestinian
Legislative Council were sentenced to a six-month
administrative detention. We are alarmed by the
news of the arrest of more than 500 Palestinians in
November in the West Bank, which is more than double
the number of arrests reported in the September and
October briefings.

We continue to be concerned about the
approximately 4,400 Palestinian prisoners in Israeli
detention centres. Their situation was discussed at
an Arab League conference on Palestinian prisoners,
which was held in Baghdad from 11 to 12 December.
We are particularly worried by indications that some
detainees have continued their hunger strikes, despite
initial progress after the agreement to end hunger strikes
in May. On 2 December, Israeli authorities resumed
family visits for Gazan prisoners jailed in Israel.

On 12 December, the Palestinian Cabinet announced
that the second round of local elections will take place
on 22 December, after being postponed owing to the
outbreak of violence in Gaza.

The calm in Gaza, brokered by Egypt on
21 November, has largely held, but it remains tenuous.
Since the last briefing, one rocket has been fired from
Gaza into Israel and one Israeli tank shell has landed in
Gaza. Israeli security forces conducted two incursions
into Gaza. One Palestinian civilian was killed and
37 Palestinian civilians were injured by Israeli fire,
mostly while attempting to approach the border fence.
A number of Gaza fishermen were also attacked by
Israeli forces while navigating in the vicinity of the
new fishing limit of six nautical miles, resulting in
one fisherman being shot and injured, over 30 briefly
arrested and the damage to, and confiscation of, some
Palestinian fishing boats.

More generally, the impact of last month's violence
has exacerbated the vulnerabilities of some of the Gaza
Strip's poorestpeople and left up to 3,000 people in need
of emergency shelter support. In terms of humanitarian
funding requirements identified by the United Nations
and non-governmental organizations partners, $12 to
$13 million are required to meet immediate needs just
for the remainder of2012. Moreover, at least $70 million
are required to kick-start the humanitarian response in
the first months of 2013.

The Hamas leader, Khaled Mashaal, visited Gaza
for the first time from 7 to 10 December. His visit
coincided with the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
founding of Hamas, an event that was attended by a
number of foreign delegations and Fatah. Khaled
Meshaal expressed support for an end to the division
of Palestinian. The United Nations supports Palestinian
reconciliation in the context of the Palestine Liberation
Organization's commitments, which remain a
central and yet unimplemented element of resolution
1860 (2009). But the United Nations condemns the
inflammatory remarks made by Khaled Mashaal
with regard to Israel in his main speech and rejects
any attempt to promote violence as a way to achieve
political goals or deny Israel's right to exist. Israel has
legitimate security concerns, which must be respected,
and ignoring or dismissing Israel's legitimate security
concerns undermines the prospects for a two-State
solution.

I would like to reiterate that the ceasefire provides
an opportunity to address the underlying causes of
conflict captured in resolution 1860 (2009). While talks
continue in the effort to implement the understanding
with regard to the ceasefire, we strongly urge all parties
to strictly abide by the understanding, starting with
security. The parties must agree on policy changes
that address the causes of instability in Gaza and the
recurrent eruptions of violence. Such changes must
include an end to weapons smuggling and a full opening
of crossings.

The Office of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
remains in close contact with Egyptian authorities,
with a view to encouraging progress on all aspects
of the understanding with regard to the ceasefire. In
particular, we advocate for a further extension of the
maritime boundary; unrestricted entry of aggregate,
iron bar and cement; and transfers of goods between
Gaza and the West Bank, as well as exports to Israel and
beyond. In parallel, it is important that tangible means
be identified and implemented so as to end weapons
smuggling. The United Nations stands ready to assist
the parties in all aspects of those issues.

In the Syrian Arab Republic, where conflict
is now in its twenty-second month, violence and
military confrontation have escalated dangerously. The
Secretary-General, in a statement over the weekend,
expressed his growing alarm over that escalation,
particularly the reports of sectarian killings in the
village oqurab in Hama province and the violence that
has engulfed the Yarmouk Palestinian refugee camp in
Damascus. All parties are failing in their obligations
to protect civilians. The Council should remind those
engaged in hostilities of their obligations to abide by
international humanitarian law and should stress the
consequences for those who fail to do so.

Valerie Amos briefed the Council in private
consultations two days ago on her visit to Syria and
stressed the severity of the increasing humanitarian
crisis. More than half a million people have fled the
violence to become registered refugees in Syria's
neighbours and other States. Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey
and Iraq now host over 150,000, 145,000, 135,000 and
65,000 Syrian refugees respectively, making Lebanon
host to the largest registered number of Syrian refugees
in the region. In addition, there is a growing number
of Palestinian refugees from Syria present in Lebanon,
including 2,000 to 4,000 who have crossed in recent
days, mainly coming from the Yarmuk camp.

During their recent respective visits to the region,
the Secretary-General and the Deputy Secretary-
General witnessed at first hand the dire situation of the
Syrian refugees. They thanked the host countries for
their hospitality and generosity and pledged to call on
donors to lessen their financial burden.

While it is important that Syria's neighbours
continue to allow those fleeing violence in Syria to
enter their countries, helping those countries cope with
the situation and address the needs of the refugees must
be a priority for the international community. We ask
donors to contribute more generously to our efforts and
respond to the revised appeal that is launched today.
Only about half of what is needed to meet the needs of
people inside Syria and the refugees has been received.
This is grossly inadequate.

As we have repeatedly underlined, the military
approach pursued by both sides in Syria comes at a
devastating cost in terms ofhuman lives and destruction,
and it breeds a serious risk of sectarian and communal
strife, radicalization and terrorism. If nothing is done
to change the current dynamic and to move toward a
political solution, the destruction of Syria will be the
likely outcome.

Long-standing fears that the conflict in Syria
would seriously threaten the stability and security of
Syria's neighbours have intensified. During his trip
earlier this month to Kuwait, Iraq, Jordan and Turkey,
the Secretary-General heard from all the leaders he met
expressions of concern about the possible political and
security fallout.

In addition to Syria's neighbours, the conflict in
Syria has also directly affected the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) area of
operation and consequently the ability of UNDOF to
fulfil its mandate, as acknowledged in resolution 2084
(2012), which this Council adopted a moment ago. On
Monday, Under-Secretary-General Ladsous briefed this
Council in detail on the recent report of the Secretary-
General on UNDOF (S/2012/897), including on daily
clashes between the Syrian army and armed opposition
in the area of separation, and several occasions of direct
and indirect fire at UNDOF positions or convoys,
in particular an incident on 29 November in which
peacekeepers were injured.

In this connection, allow me to reiterate that the
primary responsibility for the safety and security of
United Nations personnel in the area of separation and
the area of limitation on the Bravo side rests with the
Syrian Government. Countries with influence should
also impress upon the armed members of the opposition
the importance of ensuring the freedom of movement
and the safety of UNDOF personnel. More generally, let
me take this opportunity to remind all belligerents that
they must respect and ensure the safety and security of
all United Nations personnel, associated personnel and
humanitarian personnel in conflict zones.

The situation in Lebanon remains severely affected
by the ongoing conflict in Syria. Cross-border shelling
and arms smuggling continue. Multiple reports suggest
that there are Lebanese implicated in Syria's violence,
both on the side of the Al-Assad regime and the
opposition. This violates the Lebanese Government's
dissociation policy and puts Lebanon increasingly at
risk.

On 30 November, according to reports, approximately
14 Lebanese fighters were killed by Syrian regime forces
near the town of Talkalakh in Syria. The Talkalakh
incident sparked a new round of fighting in Tripoli
between the Sunni neighbourhood of Bab al-Tabbaneh
and the Alawite community of Jebel Mohsen, resulting
in approximately 14 killed and over 60 injured. Calm
was restored after the Lebanese Armed Forces deployed
heavily in the neighbourhoods affected and around
the city, following the adoption of a new security
plan by the Higher Defence Council on 9 December.
Once again, the Lebanese Armed Forces and security
forces are to be commended for their role in containing
threats to Lebanon's security and stability. During his
visit to Lebanon, from 9 to 11 December, the Deputy
Secretary-General reinforced to all his interlocutors
our strong message of support for Lebanon's efforts to
preserve internal stability, unity and dialogue against
the difficult backdrop of the Syrian crisis.

The situation in the area of operations of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) remained
generally quiet. There was, however, an explosion on
17 December near the southern village of Tayr Haifa.
The nature and circumstances of the explosion are
being investigated by UNIFIL in coordination with
the Lebanese Armed Forces. The increased operational
tempo of UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces
during the recent hostilities between Israel and Hamas
in Gaza has since reverted to previous levels. UNIFIL
maintained its enhanced presence across its area of
operations as the Lebanese Armed Forces continued
to operate at a lower strength of approximately two
brigades and one battalion. Israeli violations of the
Lebanese airspace continued on an almost daily basis.

On both sides of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
there is too much pain and anguish, disillusionment and
dismay and - as we saw in the recent violence between
Gaza and Israel - genuine fear and frustration. As
fellow human beings, I hope we can all feel empathy
for both the Palestinians and Israelis, who, in wanting
to raise their children to live normal, happy, peaceful
lives in viable independent States, are not seeking
unreasonable goals. At the same time, we must not
allow the airing of bitterness and grievances, however
strongly felt, to be a substitute for the constructive,
hard work of practical, tangible conflict resolution.

With the New Year nearly upon us, we believe
that it is important to look forward in the hope that
we can work collectively to change the dynamic of
impasse to one of real momentum towards a two-State
solution. Whatever it may mean in a practical sense,
the General Assembly vote last month symbolizes
the growing international impatience with the long-
standing occupation and a resounding endorsement of
Palestinian aspirations to live in freedom and dignity
in an independent State of their own, side by side with
Israel in peace and security.

The year 2013 will be decisive to the peace process.
It is incumbent upon all of us to support the parties in
stabilizing the situation and then permitting progress
towards the goal of achieving a two-State solution that
is so critical for regional peace and security.

