The most urgent task in Yemen today is to prevent widespread famine. The data released last week have again confirmed that the risk is growing. As the Security Council will hear from David Beasley, malnutrition has never been worse. In some parts of the country, one child in four is now acutely malnourished. Words such as "acutely malnourished", "food insecurity" and "excess mortality" are dispassionate, neutral, technical terms that obscure the horrors inflicted on the body and on the soul by famine. So how do the people, the actual human beings, whom we describe in those technical terms actually experience them? With no food, the body's metabolism slows down to preserve energy for its vital organs. Hungry and weak, people often become fatigued, irritable and confused. The immune system loses strength. As they starve, people, especially children, are therefore likelier to fall sick or die from diseases that they may have otherwise resisted. There is no shortage of diseases in Yemen that will prey on those weakened immune systems. They include cholera, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), other respiratory infections and illnesses such as malaria, dengue and diphtheria. For those who manage to escape disease but still find nothing to eat, their vital organs will start to wither and then fail. Eventually, the body starts to devour its own muscles, including the heart. Many will experience hallucinations and convulsions before the heart finally stops. It is a terrible, agonizing and humiliating death, and it is particularly cruel in a world, such as ours, where there is in fact more than enough food for everyone. It is the fate that the world has left hanging over millions of Yemeni men, women and especially children. The Nobel Prize winner Amartya Sen wrote decades ago that the history of famines is "full of blood-boiling tales of callousness and malevolence". In other words, people who could stop famines simply chose not to. That too is the case in Yemen today. Yemenis are not "going hungry". They are being starved. All of us - parties to the conflict, Security Council members, donors, humanitarian organizations and others - should do everything that we can to stop that. Time is running out. We prevented famine two years ago. To do so again, the world must act now on the five issues on which I will brief the Council again today: first, the protection of civilians; secondly, humanitarian access; thirdly, funding for the aid operation; fourthly, the economy; and, fifthly, progress towards peace. The first issue is the protection of civilians. Fighting continues along 48 front lines across the country, with the fiercest clashes occurring recently in Ma'rib, Al-Jawf, Taiz and Al-Dhale'e. The prospects of further escalation in Ma'rib, where 1 million displaced people are living, or renewed clashes in Al-Hudaydah, whose port is a lifeline for millions in the north, remain deeply concerning. A nationwide ceasefire, as we have long advocated, would go a long way towards protecting civilians. It would also help to stop the slide towards famine, as the data confirm that the worst hunger is in conflict-affected areas. The Secretary- General called for a global ceasefire in the face of COVID-19 in March - a call that he then reiterated specifically for Yemen. The second issue is safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access. We recently saw two disturbing attacks against humanitarian staff. On 19 October, a Turkish Red Crescent worker was shot and seriously injured in Aden. On 2 November, a grenade was thrown at an aid agency compound, also in Aden. We strongly condemn those attacks. We are also concerned by the delays and administrative constraints that humanitarian agencies are increasingly facing in some parts of the south. In the north, restrictions have been substantially more severe. There has been important progress on some of the problems, including assessments and project approvals. On Sunday, a long-planned pilot finally began in Sana'a to introduce the biometric registration of emergency food aid recipients. David Beasley will talk more about that. Those are important steps, but much more remains to be done. Tomorrow, senior donor and agency officials, convened by Sweden and the European Union, will meet to review developments and to plan for the future. The Council will also be expecting me to update members on the F'SO Safer tanker. We are yet to receive official approval for the assessment and the initial repair mission. After several more rounds of extensive discussions, the Ansar Allah authorities continue to indicate that they will approve the mission. My third point is funding for the humanitarian response. With seven weeks left in the year, our response plan has received $1.5 billion, or about 45 per cent of requirements. At this time last year, we had received twice as much - almost $3 billion. David Beasley will give Council members more detail on the implications for emergency food aid. Beyond that, 9 million Yemenis could lose access to basic health services, and the treatment of more than half a million malnourished children could stop. More money for the aid operation is the quickest and most efficient way to support famine prevention efforts right now. So, I implore donors to fulfil outstanding pledges and to increase their support. More than $200 million in pledges this year, including new funding announced in September, has still not been paid. The fourth issue is Yemen's economic decline, which is exacerbating the risk of famine. Yemen's currency continues to lose value. In the south, the exchange rate is hovering around 840 rials to the United States dollar - the lowest rate in its history. The Government is unable to defend the currency or subsidize imports because it lacks the foreign-currency reserves. Essential fuel imports through Al-Hudaydah also remain far below the requirements as a result of the still unresolved political dispute between the Government and the Ansar Allah authorities over revenue management. That dispute prompted the Government to suspend commercial fuel imports through Al-Hudaydah in June, although the Government has also allowed some vessels through on an exceptional basis, and fuel imports through other ports have reportedly increased. The parties must work with Martin Griffiths's team to resolve the underlying fuel dispute. Our immediate message on the economy therefore remains the same. Yemen's partners must provide a regular supply of foreign exchange to stave off the worst economic collapse and the famine that would follow. My final point is progress towards peace. Martin Griffiths just briefed the Council on the status of the joint declaration and its humanitarian and economic confidence-building measures. Many of those measures, including a nationwide ceasefire, resuming salary payments and reopening the Sana'a airport, could be game-changers, especially if they come along with more money for the relief effort. In conclusion, when I think about what famine would mean, I am at a loss to understand why more is not being done to prevent it.
