Mr. Touray (Gambia): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his detailed report on the situation in
Tajikistan. My delegation pays tribute to Mr. Merrem and
to Brigadier-General Boleslaw Izydorczyk for the excellent
work they did in that country. We also wish to congratulate
Brigadier-General Tengku Ariffin Bin Tengku Mohammed
on his new job.

My delegation is seriously concerned about the lack of
substantial progress in the peace situation in Tajikistan,
which is mainly due to the mistrust that exists between the
two parties.

We strongly condemn the resumption of hostilities
between the parties as evidenced by the recent clashes.
While we welcome the new ceasefire arrangements and the
exchange of prisoners, we believe that the parties should
exercise restraint and do everything to ensure that the peace
process is not jeopardized. The resumption of hostilities in
March, April and May clearly shows that the peace
situation in Tajikistan is not irreversible.

We are encouraged by the fact that both sides are
interested in continuing the peace process. It is therefore
imperative that the parties translate their interest into
commitments and work together to find a lasting solution
to this disquieting conflictIn this context, the parties should
work together towards building mutual confidence, as
distrust only undermines the already rocky status quo.

My delegation is very concerned about the lack of
effective control by both sides over their forces. This state
of affairs further deepens the fragility of the peace
situation. Thus, the speedy demobilization and
reorganization of the forces is a key step in the peace
process.

We welcome the continued registration of United
Tajik Opposition combatants. We are, however, disturbed
by the huge discrepancy between the number of fighters
registered and the number of weapons recovered. This
clearly shows that a large number of registered fighters
are still keeping their weapons. The recovery of these
weapons is very important for the peace process.
The reluctance of the fighters to take advantage of
the amnesty law - a consequence of the delays in the
peace process - is not a desirable situation. We hope
that the Commission on National Reconciliation will
review its processes with a View to enhancing its working
methods.

Some major concerns of my delegation are the
delays in making the necessary constitutional and
electoral reforms. We hope that the parties will give these
key issues the priority they deserve. In that vein, we
welcome the new timetable adopted by the Commission
on National Reconciliation and hope that the parties will
be committed to it.

We recognize that quite a lot of post-conflict
activities are required to turn the situation in Tajikistan
around. In this context, we welcome the demobilization
projects adopted by the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) and United Nations
agencies. We wish to underscore that vocational training
and start-up packages are essential for the reintegration of
ex-combatants into civilian life. While we wish to thank
the international non-governmental organizations and the
United Nations agencies for their interventions in these
projects, we hope that the international community will
respond to the resource-mobilization efforts of the World
Bank not only to support humanitarian activities, but also
to set the road for economic recovery and rebuilding of
infrastructure.

My delegation agrees with the assessment of the
situation in Tajikistan, as amply described in the
Secretary-General's report. We believe that things are far
from bright, but at least there is more light at the end of
the tunnel. The continued presence of UNMOT in
Tajikistan for a little while longer is necessary for the

 

peace process. With this recognition, my delegation
supports the Secretary-General's proposal to extend the
mandate of UNMOT for a period of six months, until 15
November 1998, and thus we will vote in favour of the
draft resolution before us.

