Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): It is a pleasure for me to congratulate Viet Nam on its election to the Security Council, as well as to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your succession to the presidency of the Council for this month. We also welcome Tunisia, the Niger, Estonia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on their election to the Council. We further thank Mr. Ghassan Salame and Mr. Mathias Licharz for their briefings to the Council. I apologize in advance if my statement is a little long today, but I think that the situation in my country deserves an in-depth explanation. Allow me to begin by honouring the memory of all innocent Libyans who have fallen and all martyrs who have fought against terrorism and tyranny over the past nine years. I am speaking on behalf of the people of Libya and many peoples of the region at a critical juncture in the crisis in my country. They are currently angry and distrustful of the international community - sentiments that have been ongoing for decades now. In response to their suffering, killing, displacement and destruction, they have been met with only silence or statements of condemnation. Those people are tired of seeing the aggressor and the oppressed placed on the same footing while the perpetrator is always unknown. The conflict and aggression in my country and against its capital have not arisen in a vacuum; they are the result of years of systemic interventions and proxy wars. In February 2011, when Libyans took to the streets to bring revolution to their country and, together with other peoples of the region, to demand their legitimate rights to change and freedoms, the Council adopted resolution 1973 (2011), under Chapter VII, calling for the protection of civilians as its principal priority. Since then, that resolution has been exploited by certain parties to destroy the country, export crises elsewhere and settle scores with the aim of controlling the country and pillaging its wealth. The aggression against Tripoli is nothing but another attempt to create chaos and fuel the conflict, thereby making it ever more difficult to return to where we were before. Some take advantage of those who are greedy for power. The resilience of Tripoli today is a symbol not only of the courage and determination of the Libyan people, but also of the people of the entire region and their determination to uphold the civil State in the face of those who seek to offer them only two options: either to be subjected to tyranny or face destruction. Countries that exacerbate our crisis today fear our independent decisions. They know that because of its geographic location and resources, Libya is poised to play a key role at the economic, political and security levels. That is why they do not want Libya to be stable and prosperous; rather, those countries seek prosperity and stability at home, while they kill our children and destroy our country. Given that the crisis has lasted nine years, the Council has a considerable moral responsibility to innocent civilian victims - children, women and young people - regardless of their affiliation. There have been six international envoys over the past nine years and the situation remains unchanged. The aggression has continued for 10 months and the Council is unable to end it. Seventy-five years after the establishment of the United Nations, it is high time to implement genuine Security Council reform, as proposed by the Group of African States, pursuant to the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte declaration.The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/41) on the United Nations Support Mission in Libya was published a few days ago. It reveals the extent of the violations and crimes committed by Haftar and his supporters. He has called for jihad to be waged against Tripoli and even during the Secretary-General's visit to the country. That has never occurred before. It was a few days prior to the Libyan National Conference, to be held in Ghadames. The Congress has been welcomed and supported by the Council. The current aggression has been in the works for years. That is why the aggressor has refused all political solutions. He has been provided by certain countries with heavy weapons, armoured vehicles and aircrafts, in addition to mercenaries from Chad, the Sudan, the Wagner Group and other sources. The Secretary- General's report, for example, notes in paragraph 22 that Haftar and his forces have conducted more than 1,000 air strikes, including 60 air strikes by foreign fighter aircraft. On 4 January, these aircraft carried out a strike against the military training institute in Tripoli, killing 32 young cadets, in the prime of their life. They represented all of Libya. How can that Army then claim that it is a national army, when it targets the cadets of a military training institute? Those young people are added to the thousands of civilians and displaced persons - women, children and the elderly - who have been killed under the rubble. Anas, Malek, Sanad and Zakariya were four children who were killed the day before yesterday, on their way to school in the Al-Hadaba region. Prior to that, there was a massacre in Farnaj, the killing of the children of the Keshirah family, the bombing of field hospitals and the killing of doctors and paramedics, such as Dr. Ayman Harameh and Samer Al-Sibaei. Even civilian airports and schools have been targeted. All of that has occurred and the perpetrator has not been named by the Security Council. The Tajoura Detention Centre has not been spared; it, too, was bombed by foreign aircraft in July 2019. Fifty-three migrants, the majority of them Africans, were killed, as noted in the report on the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and by the Human Rights Council just a few days ago. These are just examples of an unprecedented series of violations, crimes and displacement incidents that have occurred in Tripoli's ancient or contemporary history, not to mention the closure of oil ports and food manipulation of the Libyan people. The Secretary-General's report also notes that in the east of the country, the militias of Haftar have carried out a series of public executions before cameras. Other bodies, which are yet to be identified, have been found at a garbage dump. Kidnappings and torture continue, as we saw with the activist Ahmed Al-Kawafi and MP Siham Sergewa, who has been missing for six months. After all that, there are still those who equate the aggressor with the assaulted. Regrettably, there are countries that support such violations and crimes. There is proof of that. In addition, reports of the Council's Panel of Experts on Libya established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1973 (2011) have confirmed such incidents, including the involvement of the United Arab Emirates on 11 separate occasions. The Panel's final report (see S/2019/914) revealed the involvement of the United Arab Emirates in providing armoured vehicles, air defence systems, drones and laser projectiles. The Sudanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs has also stated that Emirati companies recruit young Sudanese and send them to Libya without their knowledge. Another document (S/2018/812) reveals information about the provision of equipment by Egyptian authorities and their participation in air strikes in eastern and western Libya over the past years. We therefore wonder - why such intervention? Thousands of miles separate Libya and the United Arab Emirates. Does such intervention not support the putschists? Although we understand Egypt's commitment to its national security, we do not understand how the big sister of the Arab nation can become involved in supporting those who kill the people of their country, thereby serving only to fuel chaos and threaten security in the country and the region. That has never occurred before in the history of the two neighbouring countries. In that regard, I was surprised to hear the representative of France speaking of violations these days. She forgot to name the countries that support aggression and commit violations. Unfortunately, the name of her country was cited in reports of the Sanctions Committee upon discovering Javelin rockets in Gharyan that belong to the forces of Haftar. The French Government responded at the time by saying that the rockets were to support the French Special Forces in 2014. Did France seek the approval of the Council in that regard?We say to the countries supporting the aggression that they are fighting a losing battle. Their efforts should seek to achieve peace and end bloodshed so that Libyans will not accuse them of having participated in the bloodshed. Despite our commitment to peace, we cannot be disloyal to our country. We cannot accept partial peace, which continues to expose us to threats. Our national army and the heroes of Operation Volcano of Rage are fully ready. They have demonstrated sufficient resilience and made enough sacrifices to stop the aggressors at the doors of Tripoli. It is our legitimate right to defend our people, cities and principles. We, respect and appreciate efforts made by the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya in monitoring all violations. However, we wonder about its usefulness and effectiveness. Revealing the involvement of certain countries in committing those violations makes them chose between two things. Either the accusations against them are false and therefore they must defend themselves, or they are guilty and must be held accountable. We are weary of visiting capitals, and we call on Libyans to meet in their own country as was supposed to happen in Ghadames. However, we appreciate all the international initiatives and efforts to achieve peace. To that end, we underscore our support for the role of the African Union in resolving the Libyan crisis, which some attempt to marginalize. We also appreciate the efforts of the Group of African States in the Council. We further thank President Sassou Nguesso of the Republic of the Congo, who chairs the Committee on Libya, which held its meeting earlier today in Brazzaville. Haftar and those with him did not participate in that meeting, as he clearly snubs African efforts. We support this African move to support national reconciliation, as it complements the United Nations plan and the efforts of the Special Representative. We also welcome the Russian-Turkish initiative to put in place a ceasefire agreement, despite the fact that the other party refused to sign it in Moscow. We hope that Russia will pursue its efforts to ensure that the initiative succeeds. In that context, we welcome the efforts of Germany and Chancellor Angela Merkel in convening the Berlin conference on Libya, despite all the challenges and obstacles. We would like to clarify the following points. First, continued violations by the aggressor, even after the Berlin conference, and his refusal to sign the ceasefire agreement or to participate until now in the 5+5 Joint Military Commission, which should have held a meeting in Geneva the day before yesterday, again confirm that he does not intend to make peace. The aggressor's spokesperson admitted as much last Sunday when he said, "Tw]e will attend international conferences, but not to find a solution. We believe that the solution will be found through guns and ammunition". Secondly, ongoing violations of the ceasefire might lead us to reconsider participating in any dialogue before such violations end and before the aggressor withdraws to its base and displaced persons return home. Thirdly, we call on the Security Council to quickly adopt a resolution that can support the outcomes of the Berlin conference, take a serious stance against the aggressor and demand that those who commit violations and war crimes be held accountable. We emphasize that we will pursue the countries involved in all international forums. Fourthly, any political dialogue must be based on the Libyan Political Agreement. The best way to end the crisis is to respect the will of the Libyan people and the constitutional process, as well as to move forward with presidential and parliamentary elections, under the supervision of the United Nations and the international community. That will ensure that all Libyans, regardless of their affiliation and without excluding anyone can choose their leaders, unify their institutions and build a modern democratic State. Three pretexts are always used to justify aggression, namely, the fight against terrorism, the elimination of armed groups and the fair distribution of wealth. With regard to the fight against terrorism, we have always cooperated with a number of States, foremost the United States of America, to eliminate terrorism wherever it arose. For example, the liberation of Sirte from the hands of Da'esh was carried out by the heroes of the forces of Al-Bunyan Al-Marsous, who are now defending Tripoli while some falsely accuse them as being terrorists. They were deceived during the truce violation, in which 10 of them became martyrs this past Sunday in an attack in the area of Abu Qurayn, where the fighting continues.We cannot deny that all Libyans have made sacrifices and fought terrorism, whether in the east, the west, the north or the south. But there are those who exploit their blood to gain power. As far as armed groups are concerned, we have to face reality. There are armed groups in every city and every region of Libya in one form or another. There are tribal groups, regional groups and ideological groups. We cannot put them all in one basket. The continuing chaos, the spread of weapons and the deterioration of the economic situation in the country over a number of years are all reasons that such groups thrive. There are also countries that provide them with financial support and weapons. Despite all that, through security arrangements made in coordination with UNSMIL and with very limited means, we have been able to reduce the number and power of the groups in aremarkable way. Moreover, we have managed to reintegrate a large number of their members, thereby enabling more than 40 diplomatic missions to set up in Tripoli since April 2019. Indeed, we have a long way to go. Violations are being committed, but everyone should know that many of our young people have been forced by circumstances to commit such acts and have been treated unfairly. Many of them are patriots who love their country, in some cases much more than those who call themselves the elite. That problem will be solved not through armed confrontation or submission to a military Government but through dialogue, reconciliation, containment and economic recovery. Regarding the third point, the fair distribution of wealth is in fact a false pretext. It is an attempt by some countries to introduce guardianship mechanisms over our resources. More than 60 per cent of the State's resources go to salaries and nearly 20 per cent to subsidies allocated to all Libyans. The rest is not even enough to cover administrative expenses or development projects. It would be much more useful to talk about the impact of the parallel entities on wealth. For instance, the parallel bank has printed 11 or 12 billion dinars outside the framework of the State, 35 billion dinars have been borrowed from commercial banks and public debt amounts to 50 billion dinars. Those are all indicators that Libya's economic regime needs radical reform. We need legislation to establish transparency and fight corruption. The fair distribution of wealth is guaranteed by the State Constitution by promoting decentralization and the optimal use of resources, as well as development and social justice. However, the Constitution, which was prepared by a committee elected by the people, has unfortunately not seen the light of day and the people have been deprived of their right to a referendum to accept, reject or amend it because of the same category of people who want to abuse power by force. Among Government priorities is the protection of the assets of the Libyan people. In that context, the Libyan Investment Authority, in coordination with the Panel of Experts, has put in place a new strategy for good governance and transparency in our administrative system. We reiterate that we do not wish to lift the asset freeze during this period of division, even though we know that some countries and banks are exploiting the freeze. We are simply asking to be allowed to manage the assets in order to avoid annual losses that amount to millions of dollars. We therefore express reservations about the proposal of the Panel of Experts to freeze the assets of companies affiliated with the Libyan Investment Authority, which could have negative effects on income and investments. In conclusion, we extend our hand to peace. We have always been at the forefront of any effort to stop the bloodshed of Libyans and will spare no effort in that regard. Before the aggression, we were very close toreconciliation with everyone, be they supporters of the old regime or among towns and tribes. Many displaced persons and migrants had returned to their homes. Today's battle is not between East and West, as some are trying to popularize it. It is a war waged by a single individual for power - a war fuelled by our citizens. Our young people should be fighting for building and reconstruction, not destruction and demolition. What everyone ought to know is that Libyans will reconcile. No one will succeed in sowing discord among us. The rule of law will ensure that wrongdoers are prosecuted. Certain countries will not succeed in dividing us. Whether we agree or disagree with the regimes that ruled Libya, the monarchy united our country and the previous regime did not divide it. We will never allow that to happen. Libya will remember those who stood by its side during the ordeal and those who killed its people and ignited the crisis. Libya may be wounded today, but it will recover tomorrow and be strong, unified and sovereign, whether some like it or not.
