Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Like others, let me also
thank Special Representative Leila Zerrougui; the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Zambia, who spoke on behalf of the Southern African
Development Community; my sister Ambassador
Mohammed, who spoke on behalf of the African
Union; Mr. Corneille Nangaa Yobeluo, President of the
Commission electorale nationale independante; and the
President of the Conference episcopale nationale du
Congo for their briefings.

My statement today focuses on three main issues:
the elections, the security situation and the need for
sustained international assistance.

First, we would like to congratulate our Congolese
brothers and sisters on the convening of the historic
elections on 30 December 2018, which took place in a
relatively calm and peaceful atmosphere, despite many
challenges. The democratic experience is anything but
easy. Elections are not an easy task, in particular in an
area as large as the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We have experience in elections in areas as large as
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with remote
areas to be covered. Covering an area with 75,000
polling stations is an enormous undertaking. Indonesia
commends the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo for taking ownership and full financial
responsibility of the elections, while demonstrating
perseverance throughout the process.

We are encouraged by the reports of high voter
turnout - evidence of the commitment of the Congolese
to the country's first democratic and peaceful transfer
of power. It is imperative now for all stakeholders
to exercise maximum restraint in their actions and
statements and to respect the democratic process of the
election. It is incumbent on all of us to ensure a calm
and stable environment in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is for the Congolese now to seize that
momentum to consolidate stability in the country and
create an environment conducive to development. We
should respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Secondly, with regard to the security situation,
Indonesia is deeply concerned about the continued
presence of armed groups in some parts of eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Just two days ago,
the Allied Democratic Forces attacked a military post
in Beni, taking the lives of seven civilians and three
soldiers. For far too long, the country has suffered
from recurring cycles of conflict, persistent violence
and the loss oflife ofinnocent civilians. My delegation
concurs with the view that the illegal exploitation and
trade of natural resources are among the root causes
of conflict in the region. The implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region holds
the key to building confidence among countries of the
region and promoting lasting regional stability.

Thirdly, we urge the international community to
provide sustainable development and humanitarian
assistance to the people in need in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Years of war and instability
have left millions of Congolese in dire humanitarian
situations and extreme poverty. The outbreak of Ebola
has exacerbated pre-existing needs for international
assistance. We express our solidarity to our Congolese
brothers and sisters who are affected by Ebola, and
commend the swift response of the World Health
Organization in leading international efforts against
one of the world's deadliest viruses. It is critical for the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the World Health Organization to have the support
needed to prevent a further outbreak of Ebola.

I should like to pay tribute to the important role
of the African Union and the Southern African
Development Community in helping the people of
the Congo. We believe that neighbours know best and
will be the first to assist. In that regard, I would like
to commend the critical work of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), including its
comprehensive approach to the protection of civilians,
as well as support to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. Indonesia takes pride in
being one of the largest troop-contributing countries
to MONUSCO, with 1,039 personnel on the ground.
We now have 27 female peacekeepers, who we hope
will be able to contribute to community-building. That
includes an 850-personnel rapidly deployable battalion,
which was deployed in November to provide assistance
in the elections.

We will continue to support any effort to secure
long-lasting peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. As we are approaching the mandate
renewal for MONUSCO, I would like to reiterate the
importance of meaningful consultations with troop-
and police-contributing countries and the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In conclusion, once again we look forward to
a peaceful and prosperous Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Peace is a luxury that the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have deserved for
far too long. Ithink that it is our responsibility to ensure
that they achieve peace at this time.

