Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): I thank France for
convening this important open debate. Singapore was
very pleased to co-sponsor resolution 2462 (2019),
adopted this morning. As a country with an open
economy, international transport hub and responsible
financial centre, Singapore has always strived to do its
part in the global effort against terrorism financing.
In our View, there are three key elements to a strong
regime to counter the financing of terrorism.

First, there must be good governance. Given the
cross-sectoral nature of terrorism financing, Singapore
adopts a whole-of-Government approach to put a strong
legal, institutional, policy and supervisory framework
in place. In that regard, we established a high-level
steering committee on anti-money-laundering and
terrorism financing in 1999 to drive the development of
our national policies for terrorism financing and ensure
that our systems adhere to the latest international
standards and best practices.

Our domestic legislation enables our enforcement
authorities to take swift action against terrorists,
terrorist entities and their supporters, including
financiers of terrorism. In particular, the terrorism
suppression of financing act was enacted in 2002 to give
effect to the United Nations International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, as
well as resolution 1373 (2001). The act criminalizes
the provision of property and services for terrorist
purposes and confers powers to seize and confiscate
terrorist property.

We regularly review our legislative measures to
ensure that our regime for countering the financing
of terrorism remains effective. In November 2018,
we passed the serious crimes and counter-terrorism
act in Parliament. To deal with money laundering and
terrorism financing risks from the precious stones
and metals dealers sector, we passed another act in
Parliament as recently as last month. Singapore has also
passed the payments systems act to tackle similar risks
from the use of virtual assets.

The second pillar of Singapore's strategy is active
partnerships with industry. National efforts cannot be
driven by the Government alone. Governments must
engage industry and the private sector to be better
aware of the practical challenges on the ground. That
builds a deeper sense of trust and shared ownership,
which in turn fosters a stronger culture of compliance.
Singapore established the Anti-Money-Laundering
and Countering the Financing of Terrorism Industry
Partnership in April 2017, which brings together
Government and private sector stakeholders to identify,
assess and mitigate key and emerging money-laundering
and terrorism-financing risks in Singapore.

The third pillar of our action is international
cooperation, because ultimately an effective response
cannot be limited to the national level. Given the
global nature of the terrorist threat, the international
community is only as strong as its weakest link.
We must work with one another through bilateral,
regional and international mechanisms to boost our
collective security.

Singapore has participated actively in such
mechanisms at the international level. We have been
a member of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
since 1992. We are also a founding member of the Asia
Pacific Group on Money Laundering - an FATF-style
regional grouping established in 1997. The Suspicious
Transactions Reporting Office is Singapore's equivalent
of a financial intelligence unit. We have also been a
member of the Egmont Group of Financial Intelligence
Units since 2002. We participate actively in the Financial
Intelligence Consultative Group under the regional
Counter-Terrorism Financing Summit organized by the
financial intelligence units of Australia and Indonesia.
Our authorities maintain close working relationships
with various enforcement and intelligence agencies
internationally. The FAFT has been a key node,
contributing to the fight against terrorism and terrorism
financing. Its work in identifying typologies - for
example, in Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
Al-Qaida - has been invaluable and should continue
to be strongly supported.

Let me conclude by reiterating Singapore's
unwavering commitment to combating the financing
of terrorism. Maintaining domestic vigilance and
broadening international cooperation are important for
our collective success.

