Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): First of all, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this quarterly debate on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as
well as the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Tadamichi Yamamoto; the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Yuri
Fedotov; and the Ambassador of Kazakhstan for their
informative briefings.

We in Uzbekistan are closely following the
situation in Afghanistan, because the prospects of
stable and sustainable development in Central Asia
are inextricably linked to the achievement of durable
peace in that country. We therefore fully support the
notion that there is no military solution to ensuring the
stability of Afghanistan. The only way to peace is a
direct dialogue among the central Government and the
main domestic political forces, without preconditions.
An Afghan-led inclusive peace process under the
auspices of the United Nations is essential for achieving
long-term peace and stability in the country.

We in Uzbekistan also agree that today the
international community should look at Afghanistan not
as a source of regional problems, threats or challenges,
but as a strategic opportunity that could serve as a solid
foundation for promoting multifaceted cooperation that
will be conducive to our common prosperity and well-
being.

Uzbekistan continues to support and actively
participate in all current international formats of
dialogue aimed at facilitating the improvement of
the situation in Afghanistan and its socioeconomic
development. In particular, over the past year high-
level delegations from Uzbekistan have taken part in
various events pertaining to Afghanistan, including
the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan, in Ashgabat; the Heart of Asia i Istanbul
Process, in Baku; the Moscow-format meetings and
the Kabul Process; and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization Afghanistan Contact Group, in Moscow.

Uzbekistan recently also supported the creation
of a new consultative meeting format, Central
Asia+Afghanistan, to discuss a wide range of regional
issues as well as to develop joint measures for ensuring
peace and sustainable development in our region.

For the past year, the new Government of
Uzbekistan, under the leadership of President Shavkat
Mirziyoyev, has also intensified bilateral dialogue with
Kabul. This year alone the two Heads of State met
several times on the sidelines of international forums.
Three weeks ago, President Ghani paid an official
visit to Uzbekistan. As a result of that visit, more
than 20 documents were signed. Those documents
are aimed at the expansion of cooperation in political
affairs, trade, economic, investment, transportation,
communication, education and other areas. Among
those documents were documents that provided for
the creation of a joint commission on security issues,
the construction of a railroad from Mazar-e-Sharif to
Hairatan, the construction of an electric transmission
power line, collaboration on transporting cargo, as well
as other projects.

In addition, the parties involved have also concluded
more than 40 contracts, which include provisions on
supplying Afghanistan with electricity, agriculture and
pharmaceutical products, as well as with construction
materials, means of transportation and others goods
from Uzbekistan. Today, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Uzbekistan visited Kabul and had a meeting
with officials from the Government of Afghanistan to
discuss issues related to how practically to implement
the agreements that were reached during President
Ghani's aforementioned visit to Uzbekistan.

Last month, regular flights between Tashkent and
Kabul started to operate with a view to facilitating
bilateral exchanges. The two countries have also agreed
to open an Afghan consulate in the Uzbek border city
of Termez. The Government of Uzbekistan has also
been taking coherent steps to galvanize the support
of the international community to efforts to integrate
Afghanistan closely into regional economic networks.

In particular, last month, Uzbekistan hosted
an international conference on ensuring security
and sustainable development in Central Asia. That
conference was hosted under the auspices of the United
Nations. Foreign Ministers from the five Central
Asian States and Afghanistan, as well as high-ranking
officials from other countries, the European Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and various international organizations participated in
that forum, which contributed to its success. In the final
communique, representatives supported initiatives
aimed at backing the peace process in Afghanistan,
promoting the reconstruction of socioeconomic
infrastructure and more actively integrating the
country into global economic networks. Participants
also supported the proposal for the Central Asian States
to draft a mutually agreed-upon General Assembly
resolution on enhancing regional and international
cooperation aimed at ensuring peace and sustainable
development in the region and the active involvement
of Afghanistan in that process.

Currently, given the importance of developing
a transportation and communication network for
developing the economy of Afghanistan, Uzbekistan
is planning to convene an international conference
on the situation of Central Asia within the system of
international transport corridors, which will provide
strategic perspectives and help seize unrealized
opportunities. That conference will take place in
Tashkent next year. We hope that those two initiatives
will receive the support of all Member States.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that in
Uzbekistan, we strongly believe that Afghanistan must
remain at the heart of the global agenda. Its integration
into regional and global economic networks is a key
prerequisite for establishing durable peace and stability
in the country. Uzbekistan therefore reaffirms its
readiness to continue with its close collaboration with
all Member States, both in bilateral and multilateral
forums, in order to bring about peace and stability
in Afghanistan.

