Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, we thank you for having taken the
initiative, through your Permanent Mission to the
United Nations, of organizing today's meeting and for
doing us the honour of presiding over it personally. We
also express our gratitude for the concept note that you
have prepared (S/2012/281, annex), which will no
doubt guide today's debate. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his presence and for the
information that he has presented.

The Government of Guatemala categorically
rejects all acts of terrorism and reiterates its
commitment to preventing and combating the scourge.
It is discouraging to find that terrorism in its different
expressions and locations continues to spread and even
to gain in intensity. The number of events and victims
is on the rise, at least in some parts of the world,
leaving a tragic trail of dead and wounded who are
almost always innocent men, women and children. The
methods used are becoming increasingly grotesque,
and no one, not even United Nations personnel and
representatives of humanitarian institutions, escapes
the risk of experiencing a terrorist act.

Nor does the phenomenon recognize borders,
which is why international cooperation is critical in
addressing it. In that regard, we acknowledge the
important progress achieved in the fight against
terrorism, but evidence shows that we can and must do
much more.

Consistent with our repudiation of terrorism, we
have to date ratified 12 universal instruments currently
in force and the Inter-American Convention against
Terrorism. In addition, we have a law against the
financing of terrorism, and we have established a
presidential commission against money-laundering and
the financing of terrorism. We are currently in the
process of incorporating into our national legislation
those acts of terrorism listed in the universal
conventions, and we have prepared a draft law against
international terrorism, which is currently under
consideration in the appropriate congressional
committees.

We are well aware that all States, in all regions -
be they large or small, strong or weak - are
vulnerable to terrorism and its consequences. Any
discussion of this important issue should therefore
focus not just on the threat to one country in particular
but on a concerted response by all countries.

Mr. President, in your concept note you have
submitted for discussion various ways of strengthening
international cooperation for the implementation of
measures to combat terrorism. In that respect, we
would like to make the following remarks.

First, we would like to see a stronger emphasis on
measures to prevent terrorism. We believe that we
should avoid focusing all of our attention on ex post
facto measures, particularly sanctions. In that regard,
we believe that conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism - its root causes - represent a key element
of the preventive measures that should be considered
on a priority basis.

Secondly, one of the many lessons learned over
the past 15 years is that it is not possible to combat
terrorism exclusively though military force. Although
terrorism is a criminal and unjustifiable act, all
measures to combat it must conform strictly to
international law, in particular international norms for
the protection of human rights and international
humanitarian law. The legitimacy of the actions
undertaken by the United Nations and its Member
States is of crucial importance.

Thirdly, in making international cooperation a
fundamental pillar of the global effort to eliminate
terrorism, it is important to take two dimensions into
account: cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, and cooperation within the United
Nations system. With respect to the latter, this year the
General Assembly will undertake the third review of
the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. That exercise will also
contribute to strengthening the capacity of the Security
Council as a key actor within the system. Concerning
the first aspect, we await with interest the
consideration of additional measures aimed at
strengthening the coordination, coherence, efficiency
and transparency of the Organization, with a view to
adequately responding to the needs and specific
circumstances of States and to optimizing relations
with regional and subregional organizations.

Fourthly, we believe that is necessary to adopt, as
soon as possible, a general convention on terrorism,
especially given the multidimensional character of this
phenomenon. We believe that the value added of a
general convention that would supplement existing
instruments to combat international terrorism would
include the following elements.

A general convention could contribute to
preventing impunity for those who commit acts of
terrorism, which is at this time one of the major threats
to international peace and security. It would facilitate
cooperation and mutual legal assistance among States
so as to bring the perpetrators to justice. It would
provide a definition of terrorism, allowing for the
universal classification of such despicable acts. It
would also bridge existing gaps in the work of the
Security Council, in particular with respect to the 1373
(2001) Committee and the measures taken by the
sanctions committees.

Fifthly, we express our solidarity with the victims
of terrorism and their survivors. We welcome the trend
towards the humanization of victims of terrorism.

Finally, my delegation fully supports the
proposed presidential statement that will be adopted at
the end of this meeting.
