Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank New
Zealand for convening today's open debate, which
draws the attention of the international community to
the alarming situation in the Middle East, including
in Palestine and its occupied territories. We thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. There are several
concerns on which my delegation would like to focus.

First of all, my delegation is concerned about
the Palestinian situation, and calls for urgent action
to mitigate the suffering of the local population. The
settlement process in the occupied territories aggravates
the conflict. Kazakhstan recognizes the legitimate
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
to the creation of an independent State of Palestine
peacefully co-existing with Israel within the 1967
borders, and to full-fledged membership in the United
Nations. We see the two-State solution as the only
viable option for a durable peace, and therefore call on
Israeli and Palestinian leaders to demonstrate political
responsibility and goodwill to reach a historic peace
agreement that would meet the legitimate aspirations
of their peoples.

We need to respond urgently and boldly to combat
ongoing attempts to create quasi-State entities opposing
and fighting legitimate Governments, in order to avert
atrocities in local populations. Kazakhstan co-sponsored
resolution 2178 (2014), on foreign terrorist fighters, as
we are committed to combatting terrorism through a
comprehensive approach that involves all Member
States and regional organizations in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.

All perpetrators should be brought to justice and
all impunity ended, and every effort must be made
to isolate, impede and incapacitate terrorists and
their funding sources. Most of all, social media 4 a
powerful weapon in the hands of terrorist groups to
spread religious extremism and separatism and recruit
volunteers 4 instead of being indiscriminately
exploited, should be utilized to encourage the youth to
become agents of peace and harmony.

Last month, Astana hosted the Central and South
Asia Regional Conference on Countering Violent
Extremism to develop new strategies, specific
programmes and initiatives to be considered at a similar
summit to be held on the margins of the general debate
of the forthcoming session of the General Assembly.
The Regional Conference was a follow-up to the summit
on the issue held in Washington, DC, in February.

We need to find inclusive political solutions
through the Security Council, the good offices of the
Secretary-General and dialogue that includes system-
wide coherence in the United Nations, with civil
society as the watchdogs. Likewise, attention should
be given towards combating transnational crime and
the illegal trafficking of weapons, arms and narcotics,
trafficking of human beings and violence against
civilian populations.

My country also expresses concern for the
humanitarian crises in Syria and Yemen, with the
increasing flow of refugees and displaced persons. We
call for the mobilization of emergency relief efforts,
and we see peaceful means as the only way to resolve
the conflict in the Middle East.

We believe that regional and international players
must create conditions for solving the Syrian crisis,
but a peaceful solution to the conflict can be found
only by the Syrians themselves. They need to come to
a peaceful solution. The aim of global players should
be to create conditions for solving the Syrian crisis,
without any external pressure or interference. That is
the basis of our approach. We have no hidden agenda
and our position is clearly neutral, with the sole interest
of creating durable, long-term peace in Syria.

We are confident that all political peaceful
means, including various regional dialogue platforms,
should be used to achieve long-awaited peace and
non-violence. The Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-Building Measures in Asia, established
at the initiative of Kazakhstan's President more than
two decades ago and uniting 26 States from Asia
and the Middle East, represents that kind of dialogue
opportunity to bridge political gaps among nations
of the region. Kazakhstan supports the efforts of
the Secretary-General, the President of the General
Assembly and the High Representative for the Alliance
of Civilizations in promoting the ideals and values of
tolerance, mutual understanding and respect for long-
lasting security and stability.

Last month, Kazakhstan convened the fifth
Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions
to promote peace based on spiritual values, with the
Secretary-General in attendance. The final declaration
of the Congress calls on world leaders to end the abyss
of distrust and restore peace and harmony.

My country is willing to share its experience in
maintaining harmony among more than 100 different
ethnic groups and almost 20 religious confessions in
its territory, including the work of the Assembly of the
People of Kazakhstan, which was created 20 years ago
to promote peace and stability in the country through
maintaining inter-ethnic and interreligious accord.
As seen in our efforts with the Alliance and the
Congress, Kazakhstan is known to be a bridge-builder,
bringing about durable rapprochement among various
groups and helping to further peace processes. A key
example I can cite is that Kazakhstan hosted, in Almaty,
two rounds of talks between Iran and the international
mediators during the interim phase, in 2013, which
helped to carry forward the draft Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action regarding Iran's nuclear programme. We
therefore welcome the recently concluded agreement
and Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.

Kazakhstan has made a further contribution for
peace and stability through non-proliferation. I am
pleased to say that my country has reached an agreement
with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
on hosting the IAEA Low Enriched Uranium Bank on
its territory, as a guarantee mechanism to meet the fuel
supply needs of States members of the Agency.

Kazakhstan will stand in solidarity with the
international community to ensure peace in the Middle
East based on freedom andjustice for all.

