Mr. Akram (Pakistan): The issue before us today
is not unfamiliar to the Security Council; it has indeed
been a hardy perennial of its agenda for two decades.
The Security Council has adopted several resolutions
under the agenda item "Situation between Iraq and
Kuwait". These resolutions include 686 (1991), calling
on Iraq to accept liability under international law in
regard to Kuwaiti and third country nationals and to
return all Kuwaiti property; 687 (1991), deciding that
Iraq shall not acquire nuclear weapons and that it shall
unconditionally accept the destruction and removal of
all chemical and biological weapons and ballistic
missiles of more than 150 kilometres in range; and
1284 (1999), deciding to send the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) to Iraq for weapons inspection.

Article 25 of the United Nations Charter states:

"The Members of the United Nations agree to
accept and carry out the decisions of the Security
Council in accordance with the present Charter".

This Article imposes a clear-cut obligation on Member
States to implement the decisions of the Security
Council without conditions. The implementation of
Security Council resolutions is essential to upholding
the credibility of the United Nations. We urge Iraq to
cooperate with the Security Council and with the
concerned countries and international agencies and to
implement these Security Council resolutions in
conformity with Article 25.

Security Council resolutions should be
implemented through measures and modalities which
are consistent with the provisions of the United Nations
Charter and international law. These measures include
the provisions of Chapter VI of the Charter providing
for mediation, conciliation, arbitration and other
methods for agreed and cooperative implementation.
We commend the Secretary-General and involved
agencies, including the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and the United Nations oil-for-food
programme, for their tireless and sincere efforts to
secure the implementation of the Security Council
resolutions relevant to their respective mandates.

Most of the resolutions relating to Iraq have been
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter and therefore
contain the implicit and even explicit implication that
enforcement action could be taken by the United
Nations, as envisaged in Article 42 of the Charter, to
secure compliance with its resolutions. Clearly, such
enforcement action has been an option, in particular
with regard to securing compliance with Security
Council resolution 687 (1991) dealing with Iraqi
disarmament of weapons of mass destruction.
However, enforcement action involving the collective
use of force has been and must remain an option of last
resort, not the first policy choice. We therefore greatly
admired the intervention of Secretary-General Kofi
Annan in 1998 to personally negotiate arrangements
with Iraq which averted the use of force. It is
unfortunate that these were not fully implemented.

Notwithstanding the precedents of the past, any
decision involving the use of collective force to secure
implementation of Security Council decisions has such
grave and serious implications that there must remain
no doubt in anyone's mind that it has been clearly and
expressly authorized by the Security Council. Article
42 does not provide the authority to one or more
Member States to resort to force unilaterally and on
their own judgement, independently of the Security
Council or without its explicit approval.

A grave responsibility, therefore, rests on the
Security Council today, when it has been challenged to
secure the enforcement of its own resolutions relating
to Iraq. In taking these decisions, Pakistan trusts that
all the members of the Security Council will remain
cognizant of their responsibility, in particular, to adhere
strictly to the principles and relevant provisions of the
United Nations Charter.
A first responsibility is to ensure that all
possibilities for the peaceful resolution of the problem
have been visibly exhausted. In this context, due note
should be taken of Iraq's declaration that it will comply
with its obligations under the Security Council
resolutions; of its Foreign Minister's letter of 16
September accepting weapons inspections "without
conditions"; of the arrangements with UNMOVIC and
IAEA worked out in Vienna as outlined in Mr. Blix's
letter of 8 October to his Iraqi interlocutor; and of the
two letters of 10 and 12 October from the Iraqi side
confirming the acceptance of these arrangements. We
trust that these arrangements and understandings will
be observed and implemented in letter and spirit.

Pakistan, like most Members of the United
Nations, supports the full and faithful implementation
of the Security Council resolutions relating to Iraq. At
the same time, we are concerned that international and
regional peace and security be preserved and
strengthened, and not destabilized. We are especially
concerned about the implications for peace, security
and stability in the Middle East and in the Islamic
world.

We are concerned that Iraq's sovereignty,
territorial integrity and unity be respected and
preserved; that the suffering of the people of Iraq be
ameliorated and not exacerbated, including through the
early lifting of United Nations sanctions.

We are concerned that those States which are
occupying of foreign territories and suppressing the
right of peoples to self-determination not be further
encouraged in their aggressive policies, such as in the
case of Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab
territories, and India's occupation of Jammu and
Kashmir.

We are concerned that the global economy and
the economies of the States of the region not be
damaged.

We believe that these concerns are shared by all
the members of the Security Council. Therefore,
confident that the decisions they will adopt will not
only adhere to the principles of the Charter and
international law but also be responsive to the wider
concerns of the world community as reflected in the
voices of common people everywhere appealing for a
peaceful resolution of the problems relating to the
implementation of these Security Council resolutions
relating to Iraq.

Pakistan is confident that the United Nations will
succeed in responding to the challenge to establish its
relevance and credibility. It is essential, however, that
the credibility of the United Nations be established not
only in the case of Iraq but also in other instances
Security Council resolutions remain to be implemented
or are being flouted, such as in J ammu and Kashmir.

We live in new times today, when globalization is
pressing together nations and peoples who remain
divided by asymmetric prosperity and asymmetric
power. In these conditions, global order can be
preserved only if the great Powers possess the wisdom
to respect international law and the principles of the
United Nations Charter. If great Powers respect
international law, even if they feel they need not,
smaller States will realize that they must do so.

Almost a hundred years ago, Joseph Chamberlain
is reported to have said: "The day of small nations has
long passed. The day of empires has come." With 191
sovereign States now Members of this United Nations,
no one should be seduced by similar prognostications
today. The alternative to an international order based
on law and equity is a Hobbesian world of chaos and
conflict, war and terror, poverty and pestilence, which
surely no one is prepared to contemplate.

