Mr. Fall (spoke in French): Seized by a
vindictive and destructive fury, the occupying Power
has plunged into wanton, systematic reprisals,
buttressed by a mad all-security and all-military policy.
The catastrophic toll has been countless dead, Israelis
and for the most part Palestinians, under a ghastly
deluge of air raids, bombardments, terrorist attacks and
wanton murders or targeted assassinations. The
surrealistic and monolithic option of unjustified
collective punishment has failed, despite the obvious
connivance of hard-liners in both camps, paradoxically
united in their apocalyptic vision of a general
conflagration spreading beyond the Middle East.

The Israeli forces have thus entered a new stage
in the escalation of Violence and illegal repression with
military offensives launched against the headquarters
of the President of the Palestinian Authority, who has
been confined in a tiny space in Ramallah and whose
physical integrity is even threatened, notwithstanding
the recognized international status conferred upon
President Arafat.

It is therefore a matter of urgency that the
international community act immediately. The Security
Council has just reacted by adopting resolutions 1397
(2002), of 12 March, and 1402 (2002), of 30 March,
which stress using the peace process to find a political
settlement in the wake of the exercise of good offices
by the Arabs, Africans, Americans, European and
others - who have committed themselves to rescue the
situation through the Mitchell and Tenet plans intended
to resurrect the peace process on the basis of the
principle of normalization for total withdrawal, which
was endorsed by the recent Arab Summit held in Beirut
on the welcome initiative by Saudi Arabia. Given the
rapidly worsening of the situation due to acts of terror,
provocation, destruction and suicide bombings - acts
that the Committee strongly and without exception
condemns - through me, the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People would like to state its position, a position of
which I know you, Mr. President, are particularly
mindful.

The path to peace is basically dependent on the
end of this relentless Israeli occupation, which has
gone on for 35 years. It also depends on the creation of
an independent, viable Palestinian State co-existing
with the State of Israel within secure and
internationally guaranteed borders, in keeping with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), from which resolution 1397 (2002) stems - a
resolution that broke a taboo in the Council's
vocabulary by proclaiming, with rare clarity, the
Promethean vision of a Palestinian State.

It follows that the conclusion of a just and lasting
settlement based on those resolutions and on General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) remains inseparable from
the question of Jerusalem as an open city that is the
capital of two States, Israel and Palestine, as well as on
the question of a just and fair solution to the problem
of refugees and their right to return. As the Palestinian
question is so central to any lasting solution to the
conflict in the Middle East, the United Nations has a
sacred duty to continue to exercise its full
responsibility with regard to this question until an
effective comprehensive solution is found pursuant to
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.

It is for that reason that the parties to the conflict,
and Tel AViv in particular, are strongly required to
abide by the Geneva Convention relating to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 1949.
To that end, our Committee demands international
protection, deployment of a United Nations
interposition force, and/or the immediate dispatch of
international observers. We also urge donors to
mobilize urgent humanitarian relief and economic
assistance to be directed to Palestinian Victims.

In that context, when it comes to moving towards
peace, the Council is called upon to break the vicious
cycle of violence and recurring attacks in order to
explore innovative approaches and new ideas such as
those so wisely advocated by the Secretary-General, of
which resolution 1397 (2002) represents the most
significant milestone prior to the holding of the Arab
Summit in Beirut. It is vital that a two-fold
precondition precede the implementation of such a
strategy. I am referring to the immediate withdrawal of
Israeli troops from occupied Palestinian cities,
including Ramallah, and Tel Aviv's total and
unconditional restoration of freedom of movement to
President Arafat, to whom our Committee pays tribute
for the courage, calm and leadership he has
demonstrated in the face of adversity, with a fierce will
for peace and negotiation.

We would like to reiterate our congratulations to
you, Mr. President, as well as to your distinguished
predecessor, the Ambassador of Norway. I am
particularly grateful for this opportunity to participate
in the work of the Council and to see at first hand the
expression of active solidarity which the Council, in
addition to its constant support to the peace process,
reiterates to the innocent Palestinian and Israeli people,
as well as to all the peoples of the region.

Following the historic Arab Summit held in
Beirut - which, in endorsing resolution 1397 (2002),
also endorsed the innovative approaches spoken of by
the Secretary-General in an effort to catalyse and
channel international peace efforts - our Committee
welcomed the determined commitment and ongoing
efforts of Mr. Kofi Annan and his Special Coordinator,
as well as those of the American, European and
Russian special envoys to find a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution to the question of Palestine on the
basis of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and the governing principles of land for peace and
normalization for total withdrawal.

