Ms. Guo Xiaomei (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I should like to thank Presidents Robinson and
Khan, and Prosecutors Brammertz and J allow, for their
briefings. I wish also to take this opportunity to
congratulate Judge Khan in particular on her election
as President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), and to thank her predecessor, Judge
Byron, for the contributions he made over the years to
the work of the ICTR.

I should like to make the following points.

First, with respect to the progress made in the
work of the two Tribunals, last year the Council
adopted resolution 1966 (2010), by which it decided to
establish the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. Its ICTR branch and its
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) branch will begin to function in
July 2012 and July 2013, respectively. In its resolution
1966 (2010), the Council also requested the two
Tribunals to complete all remaining work before the
end of 2014 at the latest.

In that connection, we urge the two Tribunals to
take effective measures to complete their work as soon
as possible, as requested by the Security Council in its
resolution, and to ensure a stable transition to the
Residual Mechanism.

We note that both Tribunals are facing difficulties
in the retention of staff, which has had a negative
impact on the Tribunals' work. We hope that they will
work cooperatively with the relevant organs of the
United Nations and other parties concerned to address
this problem as soon as possible.

Secondly, cooperation among countries is
essential to the successful fulfilment of the judicial
functions of the two Tribunals. The arrest and transfer
of fugitives, the acquisition and provision of evidence
and the enforcement of sentences all require
cooperation among countries, especially with respect
to the countries of the region.

We have taken note of the recent progress made
by the Tribunals in the arrest and transfer of fugitives
and welcome the cooperation provided by Serbia and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in that
connection to the ICTY and the ICTR, respectively. We
also welcome the cooperation provided by the
countries of the former Yugoslavia, including Croatia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina, to the ICTY, and the
cooperation provided by Kenya to the ICTR.

The Presidents of both Tribunals also highlighted
the difficulties they face in the enforcement of
sentences and the resettlement of acquitted persons. We
call on countries that are in a position to do so to show
political will and assist the two Tribunals in solving
this problem.

Thirdly, the transfer of cases and fugitives, to the
extent possible, to countries that are able and willing to
handle them is an important step in the implementation
of the completion strategy of the two Tribunals. We
note that the Prosecutor of the ICTR has already
provided a request to the relevant trial chamber on the
transfer of the relevant cases to Rwanda. We welcome
this progress and hope to see a positive outcome. In
that respect, we also support full cooperation with the
Tribunal by the countries concerned.

