Mr. Cengizer (Turkey): Turkey has aligned itself
with the statement made by the representative of Spain
on behalf of the European Union. That statement not
only laid out the many questions that are currently at
the forefront of Turkey's concerns, but also showed a
sensible way out of the very worrisome and worsening
situation in the Middle East. That being the case, I am
taking the floor only to emphasize a number of points
that are, from our perspective, of particular importance.

Before I take up those points, I wish to salute
Secretary-General Kofi Annan and thank him for a
historic speech that stressed hope at this very critical
juncture. Indeed, we should find ways to penalize
extremists rather than play into the hands of those who
perpetrate acts of terror, and see to it that hope prevails
over dismay.

Turkey is increasingly worried about this tragic
cycle of violence. The suicide bombing in Netanya and
the ensuing events followed the cold-blooded murder
of a ranking Turkish member of the temporary
international presence in Hebron and that of a Swiss
member, while another Turkish member was wounded.
We will not rest until a full investigation is completed
and the perpetrators of this cowardly act are brought to
justice.
We strongly condemn all acts of terror. We are
horrified by the scenes of innocent civilians in baths of
blood. We cannot think of any reason that can justify
repeated brutal acts of violence perpetrated against
innocent civilians.

This vicious cycle of violence and reprisal
defines the immediate problem: there is no imperative
more important and more urgent than the immediate
cessation of all acts of violence. This is the cornerstone
of Security Council resolution 1397 (2002), which was
adopted only three weeks ago. It is all the more so if
the vision of a region where two States will live side by
side in peace is to be realized in good time.

Chairman Arafat's leadership is now more central
than ever. He is the legitimate leader of the
Palestinians; hence, he is the only interlocutor with
Israel in the quest for a political settlement. After all,
no one can imagine a military solution to this conflict.

As true friends ofthe glorious and historic Jewish
and Arab nations and as witnesses to their great
historic and defining moments, it is incumbent upon us,
Mr. President, to ask where they are going and which
way they wish to take. We have listened with dismay as
Chairman Arafat talked of his wish to become a martyr.
His becoming a martyr would not serve any purpose.
Likewise, we do not see the purpose of the siege of his
headquarters. Rather, he should be rendered the
capacity to act as the leader of his people. Martyrdom
in a headquarters under siege cannot be an end; it will
curse generations to come. It is not acts of self-
annihilation, but of statesmanship, that are required
from both parties right now.

The representative of Israel declared a while ago
that his Government had no intention of occupying
territory under the control of the Palestinian Authority.
He also said that the road to peace could be walked
together. We welcome this statement. But, at the same
time, Israel, when defending itself, should show
restraint and listen to the calls made by the
international community, as well as take into account
the increased pace of the quest for a just and viable
peace in the Middle East, most recently demonstrated
by the Arab Summit in Beirut. As a matter of fact,
every passing day shows the inherent value of both the
Mitchell report and the Tenet plan. These should be
implemented forthwith.

Turkey, as always, is ready to bring whatever
contribution it can to ease the way to peace. Today, as
was the case at other moments of destiny, there is cause
for fear and abandonment- and there is cause for
hope and courage. Once again, it is about the road to be
taken. We believe both parties know which road they
should take and how to strengthen their grip on hope.
Today an Israeli and a Palestinian are born under the
same star at the same hour. As Rabindranath Tagore
has said, every newborn shows that God continues to
believe in us.

