Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
wish to join others in congratulating you, Sir, upon
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
December, and to thank Ambassador Puri and his team
for their leadership of the Council last month. Let me
also thank Special Adviser Benomar for his briefing.
We appreciate his hard work to support the National
Dialogue and the broader transition process in Yemen.

My remarks today will focus on three areas. First,
the United States remains committed to working
with President Mansour, the people of Yemen and
the international community to support a successful
National Dialogue. Secondly, the international
community must work to translate recent Friends of
Yemen pledges into concrete aid through the Mutual
Accountability Framework. Thirdly, we must continue
to oppose those who seek to undermine Yemen's
progress.

On 23 November, we marked the first anniversary
of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Initiative
and Implementation Mechanism, which laid the
groundwork for Yemen's political transition. To meet
the goals laid out one year ago, President Hadi Mansour
and the people of Yemen must move forward with an
inclusive, transparent and timely National Dialogue
to build consensus on issues fundamental to Yemen's
future, including the structure of the Government and
constitutional reform.

We welcome the recent announcement regarding
progress on the composition of the National Dialogue,
and we look forward to hearing more details and a
timeframe for the dialogue to commence. We also
commend the efforts of the preparatory committee and
the United Nations Special Adviser to ensure that the
dialogue includes representatives from all elements of
Yemeni society, including political parties, southerners,
Houthis, women and youth. The outreach and support of
Special Adviser Benomar will continue to be important
as Yemen turns its attention from the preparations for a
dialogue to substantive questions of reform.

Beyond the National Dialogue, we also need to
consider several other issues that are important for a
successful political transition. We welcome President
Mansour's 29 November decree naming a new Supreme
Commission for Elections and Referendums, We hope
the Commission will be empowered to update Yemen's
voter rolls and complete other steps necessary for the
constitutional referendum in 2013 and elections for the
presidency in February 2014.

Separately, a focus on transitional justice
would promote accountability, the rule of law and
reconciliation, furthering reinforcing stability in
Yemen. We look forward to hearing more regarding
progress in those areas.

With nearly half of Yemen's population lacking
adequate food and basic services, humanitarian
assistance remains critical to achieving stability.
In September, the Friends of Yemen pledged over
$7 billion to bolster the ongoing transition and address
Yemen's basic needs. We commend the generosity of
our international partners and call on them to follow
through on their pledges in support of the priorities
that the Yemeni Government has laid out in the Mutual
Accountability Framework. We also urge donors to
contribute to the United Nations 2012 humanitarian
response plan, which, as we heard earlier, remains only
57 per cent funded, as well as the 2013 appeal expected
this month. For our part, the United States has more
than doubled its assistance to Yemen, including over
$117 million in humanitarian assistance in fiscal year
2012.
While humanitarian assistance is critical in the near
term, there can be no lasting stability in Yemen without
economic progress. The United States is partnering with
the Yemeni Government, the private sector and civil
society to promote long-term sustainable development,
boost economic activity and reform, and strengthen
investment opportunities.

Our Ambassador to Yemen recently brought a
trade mission to the United States, during which
Yemeni business leaders met with companies and
organizations throughout the United States to explore
potential cooperation in areas such as renewable
energy and water resources. We are also partnering
with Yemeni ministries to expand essential services,
improve efficiency, combat corruption and enhance
transparency. Progress in those areas could do much to
solidify Yemen's transition.

The international community must also remain
resolute in confronting violent extremists and others
who attempt to block Yemen's progress. Attacks on
Government officials and other civilians cannot be
justified, and we condemn such acts of terrorism in
the strongest possible terms. We also recognize the
enormous personal sacrifice and commitment of the
Yemeni military and police, who have helped to turn
the tide against those who attempt to use violence as a
means to block positive change.

In line with the terms of the GCC implementation
mechanism, we strongly support President Mansour's
decrees to restructure Yemen's military and security
institutions, which the Council also called for in
resolution 2051 (2012).

We call on all Yemenis to show that they will put
Yemen's national interests ahead of parochial concerns
and abide by the letter and spirit of the GCC Agreement.

In May 2012, President Obama signed an executive
order that allows the United States to take action
against those who seek to undermine the transition.
Shortly thereafter, resolution 2051 (2012) affirmed
the Council's willingness to consider measures under
Article 41 of the United Nations Charter for the same
purpose. We will continue to follow closely any efforts
to undermine the Government of National Unity and
the political transition, and we are ready to consider
further action, as appropriate.

Last year, hundreds of thousands of Yemeni men
and women took to the streets to courageously demand
reform. Their courage initiated a historic transition.
The United States is committed to doing its utmost to
continue supporting these aspirations for a democratic,
stable and prosperous Yemen.

