Mr. Razali (Malaysia): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the very able way in
which you have presided over the affairs of the Council
during the month of February.

The last time the Security Council pronounced on this
issue was in 1980 - almost 15 years ago. Many milestone
events and developments have taken place in that time, but
the issue of illegal Israeli settlements has remained an

 

obdurate stumbling-block to the many initiatives for a
durable solution to the Middle East problem.

Eighteen months ago, many believed that the signing
of the Declaration of Principles marked a fresh beginning
in the efforts to resolve this conflict. Regrettably, this has
not come to pass. The international community has yet to
see the seeds of peace take deep root in the Middle
East - in particular, in the occupied Palestinian
territories.
One of the salient characteristics of the peace
process so far has been its apparent disregard of
deadlines: although the Declaration of Principles was
signed on 13 September 1993, the implementation
agreement, known as the Cairo Agreement, was not
concluded until 4 May 1994; although the implementation
accord was signed last May, the Palestinian National
Authority, scheduled to be put in place in December
1993, did not actually happen until July of last year,
while troop redeployment, and the elections in the rest of
the West Bank due last July, have yet to have any
credible timetable.

While recognizing that there has been some progress
in some areas, we have to say that the situation on the
ground remains far from satisfactory. The lack of political
will and commitment on the part of the occupying Power
to implement the provisions of the peace accord
complicates and delays the peace process.

My delegation is deeply concerned about the
continuing policy and practices adopted by Israel
regarding its settlement activities in the occupied
territories, especially in the West Bank. My delegation is
disturbed to learn from official sources and media reports
that the Israeli Government is still actively pursuing its
settlement policy in the occupied territories.

According to the November issue of Settlement
Report, a Washington-based bi-monthly publication of the
Foundation for Middle East Peace, the settler population
of the West Bank and Gaza Strip has increased by
28,000 - from 112,000 to 140,000 - while that of
Jerusalem has grown by 22,000- from 148,000 to
170,000. This represents an overall settler increase of
50,000, or about 20 per cent over two years since July
1992. The report also indicated that the settler population
was increasing faster than the rate anywhere in Israel
itself.

 

The expansion of Israeli settlement policy is also
substantiated by facts and figures provided by the
representative of Palestine in his letters to the Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People and to the Secretary-General
(S/49/50 and S/1995/95).

Given the importance of the issue for the future of the
peace process itself, my delegation would like to urge the
Israeli Government immediately to cease such a policy and
practices for the following obvious reasons.
Legally, such a policy and practice of settling parts of
its population and new immigrants in the occupied
territories constitute a violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War of 12 August 1949. Article 49 of that
Convention, among other things, stipulates that

"The Occupying Power shall not deport or
transfer parts of its own civilian population into the
territory it occupies."

The policy also violates numerous resolutions of the
Security Council - resolutions 446 (1979) and 452 (1979)
and 465 (1980), which, among other things, called upon the
Government and people of Israel to cease the establishment,
construction and planning of settlements in the occupied
territories, including Jerusalem. Members will recall that
one of those resolutions, resolution 465 (1980), was
unanimously adopted.

Politically, the settlement issue would further
complicate and undermine the peace process. The Special
Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the
Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of
the Occupied Territories reported to the General Assembly
late last year that the existence of the settlements, the
persistently violent behaviour of the settlers and the
presence of the Israeli Defence Forces constituted the
principal source of tension in the occupied territories.
Furthermore, it violates the spirit and letter of the
Declaration signed in Washington on 13 September 1993.

My delegation is of the View that a resolution from the
Council reaffirming its earlier decisions as reflected in the
resolutions that I have mentioned would be timely and
would facilitate the peace process. The argument by some
that the United Nations has no role to play on central issues
such as the legality of Israeli settlements, the status of
Jerusalem, Palestinian refugees and Palestinian sovereignty
is unjustifiable and unacceptable. The United Nations - in

 

particular this Council, which is charged with primary
responsibility for international peace and security - has
an important role to play in the peace process in the light
of current developments. It was a Security Council
resolution that rejected the Israeli policy and practice of
establishing settlements; it was this Council which called
upon Israel to respect the Geneva Convention and
reaffirmed that settlements in the occupied territories were
illegal and an obstacle to peace. The Council is being
called upon again to live up to its responsibilities on this
1ssue.
It is the View of my delegation that the successful
progress of the peace process very much depends on the
sincerity and willingness of both parties to implement all
the provisions that they have agreed to. At this very
critical juncture, when the situation is delicate and fragile,
it is vital for the success of the peace process to make
every effort to remove the climate of distrust and
suspicion. The leaders who were bold enough to forge a
historic breakthrough for peace must not allow extremism
or a shortsighted policy to prevail. The international
community opposes all forms of extremism and the
recourse to terror tactics by extremists. For Israel in
particular, it would be delusory to conclude that an
improvement of relations, even cooperation, with some
other Arab countries would permit it to equivocate on the
settlement issue. The hard, critical choice has to be made
in a timely, decisive manner, or the conflict will continue
and worsen. For countries looking at Israel, encouraged
by the signing of the Declaration of Principles, efforts to
join in the momentum for peace by normalizing relations
with it remain in abeyance, given the uncertainty over its
commitment and sincerity to move critically on the
remaining central issues, including the settlement issue.

