Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres for his briefing on the
topic of our discussion today. We also are grateful to
Mr. Prendergast for his remarks.

We all recognize the negative effects of corruption
on the political, economic and sociocultural stability of
societies. It undermines accountability and transparency
in the management of public affairs, and it is inimical to
socioeconomic development. As stated in the preamble
of the United Nations Convention against Corruption,
it can also pose a threat to the stability and security
of societies, while undermining the institutions and
values of democracy, ethical values and justice and
jeopardizing sustainable development and the rule of
law. While recognizing that fact, we do not believe
that this is an issue within the purview of the Security
Council. Based on the principle of complementarity, the
Council should be able to allow other relevant organs to
handle such cross-cutting issues.

Of course, there is nothing that precludes the
Council from considering corruption in the context
of conflict-specific situations, and we understand that
that has been the case so far. Within the framework
of the various relevant sanctions regimes, the Council
has been taking measures to address the embezzlement
of public resources. In that regard, a number of cases
can be cited in which the Council took decisions to
ban trade in charcoal, oil and minerals. In terms of the
fight against terrorism, the Council also has adopted
important resolutions for countering the financing of
terrorism. The Council should continue to use such
tools where appropriate in mitigating the negative
impact of corruption in instigating and fuelling
conflicts and violence. Nevertheless, even in the context
of conflict-specific situations, corruption cannot be
looked at in isolation, as it cannot be the only factor,
but a manifestation of many other serious political and
socioeconomic challenges contributing to instability
and conflict. That is why sanctions cannot be the only
tools for addressing the threats posed by corruption.

There has to be a comprehensive and long-term
strategy aimed at tackling the root causes of conflict,
among which corruption could be one of them. That
cannot be done without ensuring good governance,
strengthening State institutions and promoting
accountability and transparency, as well as ensuring
the rule of law. Neither is the fight against corruption
something that should be left to Government alone; it
requires the active participation and engagement of all
segments of society, including women, young people,
the media and the private sector. It is because of that
broader scope and dimension that we believe that
corruption should be dealt with by other relevant United
Nations organs. The United Nations Convention against
Corruption is the only legally binding anti-corruption
instrument that provides a comprehensive response,
and the vast majority of us are State parties to the
Convention. In that regard, we recognize the work
by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in
providing technical assistance to Member States in
various corruption-related thematic areas, such as
prevention, education, asset recovery and integrity in
the criminal justice system, among others.

We in Africa have been facing serious challenges as
a result of corruption that are hampering efforts aimed
at promoting democratic governance, socioeconomic
transformation, peace and security and the enjoyment of
human rights. The High-pevel Panel on Illicit Financial
Flows from Africa, chaired by President Thabo Mbeki,
highlighted the magnitude of the problem in its report
submitted to the African Union Commission and the
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa
in February 2015. The report found that, on average,
African countries lose $50 billion every year - with
a potential of rising to $148 billion - through illicit
financial flows. Also according to the report, corrupt
practices play a key role in facilitating those outflows.

That is why the African Union declared 2018 as the
African Anti-Corruption year to curb corruption, which
is considered as a major societal flaw causing setbacks
in the socioeconomic and political development of

the continent. The feeling by our leaders is that, if
corruption is not dealt with as a matter of priority,
Africa cannot make meaningful progress towards
achieving its Agenda 2063 and the 2030 global plan for
sustainable development, and neither can it succeed in
its efforts towards silencing the guns.

At the level of the African Union, we also have in
place the Convention on Preventing and Combating
Corruption, along with other legal instruments aimed
at fostering a culture of democracy and ensuring good
governance and the rule of law. We believe that greater
cooperation and collaboration among the relevant
bodies of the United Nations and the African Union and
its regional mechanisms in the fight against corruption
is something that needs to be encouraged.

The meeting rose at noon.
