Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Russia is deeply committed to rooting out
international terrorism. We favour comprehensive
intensification of coordinated international efforts to
combat a scourge that undermines the safety of
individuals and the stability of States and of entire
regions.

The Security Council must continue to give top
priority to this problem. Here we also reaffirm our
consistent position that Security Council resolutions on
the Libyan question must be implemented.

Since the imposition of sanctions, Libya has made
progress towards fulfilling the requirements set out in
resolutions 731 (1992) and 748 (1992), which relate to the
condemnation of terrorism and to the provision of
information on this subject. Thanks to Libya's
cooperation, the investigation into the UTA flight 772
incident is being successfully concluded.

At the same time, the deadlock in the Lockerbie
case, which has existed for many years, has prevented
complete compliance with those Security Council
resolutions. As a result, the sanctions regime against
Libya has been maintained. Russia has consistently said
that it favours searching for mutually acceptable solutions
on the venue and format of the trial of the two suspects.

Initiatives on possible scenarios for holding the trial
have been put forward by the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, the Organization
of African Unity and the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries; these are well known and have received broad
international support. We consider that the present
initiative by the United States and the United Kingdom is,
broadly speaking, on the right track. It is essentially based
on one of the options that had been proposed: that the
trial should be conducted in a third country, before a
Scottish court and in accordance with Scottish law.

The draft resolution under consideration by the
Council today is aimed at putting that option into practice.
We believe that it will ensure a fair trial, with proper
guarantees of the legal rights of those who appear before
the court as accused or as witnesses. It is extremely
important that, as soon as the two suspects arrive in the
Netherlands, the sanctions regime against Libya should be
terminated.

Agreement on the draft resolution confirms that this
is the only way - by stepping up all-round interaction

 

among States and on the basis of the norms of international
law - that we can put a firm halt to international
terrorism.
On the basis of these points, the Russian delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution which, given the
sensitivity of this problem, is the result of a difficult
compromise by all interested parties. This decision by the
Security Council paves the way not only to resolving the
Lockerbie case, but also to the final closing of the Libyan
problem in the Security Council, as envisaged by the
appropriate decisions of the Council.

It is particularly important to have the cooperation of
all sides in implementing the draft resolution we are to
adopt today. In this connection, we welcome the Permanent
Representative of Libya's expression of his country's
willingness to cooperate with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations in order to fulfil the procedures envisaged
in this draft resolution.

