Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing
to the Security Council today on her twenty-fourth
report, in implementation of resolution 1593 (2005).

In her report, the Prosecutor reviews a number of
challenges and makes some comments about the Court's
performance with regard to Darfur. It concludes with
two fundamental requests to the Security Council,
the first being that the Council, through the United
Nations, facilitate financial support to the Court for its
investigations on Darfur, and the second that it act to
ensure that justice is done to a number of the accused. I
would like to address the following points.

First, there is a united African position on dealing
with the ICC on various issues related to the African
continent, and it is reflected in a number of African
Union (AU) resolutions, including resolutions 547,
586 and 590, adopted at its twenty-fourth, twenty-
fifth and twenty-sixth sessions, respectively. Based on
those resolutions, the AU stresses, among other things,
that since it is committed to combating impunity in
accordance with the African Union's Constitutive Act,
the ICC's measures against President Omar Al-Bashir
of the Sudan should be suspended.

Secondly, successive resolutions adopted by the
African Union have urged the Security Council to
withdraw its referral of the situation in Darfur to the
ICC and have expressed deep concern about the fact
that for a number of years now the Council has not
taken into consideration the African Union's calls on
the matter.

Thirdly, in the light of African States" reservations
about the Rome Statute in particular, the Court should
not take any measures that could affect peace, security,
stability, sovereignty or territorial integrity in African
States. At the same time, it should respect the norms
of international law pertaining to the immunity
of Presidents and high officials during their terms
of office.

Fourthly, it should reject any measures to be taken
against anyAfrican States based ontheirnon-compliance
with the Rome Statute or non-cooperation with the
provisions of resolution 1593 (2005) through a refusal
to arrest President Al-Bashir or to hand him over to
the ICC, which is a commitment on the part of African
Union member States in accordance with AU resolutions
and its Constitutive Act.

