Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): As I
said, during the consultations on Saturday, there is a
prevailing feeling of consternation when we see what
is happening in Ukraine and when we hear what our
Russian colleague has just said. It is in fact the voice
of the past that we have just heard. I was 15 years
old in August 1968, when the Soviet forces entered
Czechoslovakia. We heard the same justifications,
the same documents being flaunted and the same
allegations. We hoped that, with the building of Europe
and the collapse of communism, we would awaken
from such nightmares. We had hoped that we would
have replaced the dangerous logic of the balance of
power with cooperation in respect for the identity and
the independence of each.

Now we are brought back to a world where force
prevails over the law, where every crisis must have
a victor and a vanquished, and where propaganda
denies the reality. Let us first recall the facts that no
manipulation can hide in the age of television and the
Internet.

The facts are straightforward. The Russian army
is occupying Crimea, Ukrainian territory, against the
will of the Ukrainian Government and in violation
of international law. The reasons invoked are blatant
untruths. No one is killing anyone in the streets of
Kyiv today. No one is threatening the Russian-speaking
populations in Crimea or elsewhere. Those are only
excuses, which even those voicing them cannot believe,
so crude they are.

By occupying Crimea, Russia has taken a territorial
bet. The goal is clear - to bring the authorities of Kyiv
to heel, to bring them back into the sphere of influence
of Moscow and to remind them that their sovereignty
is limited, as Mr. Brezhnev once said after invading
Czechoslovakia. In short, Russia is taking Europe back
40 years. It is all there: the practice and the Soviet
rhetoric, the brutality and the propaganda.

France does not want to play this ridiculous game,
which does not serve the interests of anyone, and
certainly not the Ukrainian and Russian people. That is
why, at the very beginning ofthe crisis, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of France, along with his German and
Polish colleagues, went there to negotiate an agreement,
which Russia has refused to endorse until now, only to
invoke it today.

When events - the President's flight and the
Parliament's about-face - made it impossible for the
agreement to be implemented, France continued to
defend its spirit - reconciliation through the formation
a Government of national unity and the holding of
elections under international supervision. That is what
is being proposed today by the Prime Minister, who is
being stymied by the refusal of the Party of Regions to
join the Government. That is what the acting President
is seeking; he has refused to sign a law that, rashly
and unfortunately, diminished the role of the Russian
language.

In line with the position of seeking a reasonable
solution that respects everyone's interests and
sensitivities in the framework of Ukraine's
independence and territorial integrity, there are six
points that should be the basis for putting an end to
the crisis. These six simple points should be accepted
by all parties who respect international law: first,
the return of Russian armed forces to their bases,
verified by international observers; secondly, the
immediate cantonment, disarmament and dissolution
of paramilitary elements and other groups with illegal
weapons, monitored by international observers; thirdly,
the Ukrainian Parliament's re-establishment of the law
on regional languages; fourthly, the establishment of a
high council for the protection ofminorities; fifthly, the
implementation of constitutional reforms; and sixthly,
the organization of presidential elections on 25 May
under the aegis of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). These are simple
principles, the implementation of which international
mediation should be able to negotiate with all the parties
concerned. The Secretary-General of our Organization,
together with the European Union and the OSCE, has a
central role to play in that area.

But let there be no mistake - the will to find
a negotiated solution that meets the requirements
of international law, safeguards the rights of all
Ukrainians, and makes it possible to stabilize a
democratic and unified Ukraine in its regional context,
cannot accommodate the persistent violations of
international law perpetrated by Russia. France wants
to cooperate with Russia, with which we have a long
common history, but not at any price and not in violation
of our principles and values.

The denial of reality, the scorn for international
law and the renunciation of any discourse that protects
national sovereignty that we have heard today do not
inspire optimism. Russia seems to be returning to its old
ghosts, playing outmoded roles in an outdated setting
on the stage of a bankrupt theatre. If it continues to
misread the mindset of the new times and to place more
trust in force than in dialogue, it is with regret but with
determination that France, with its European partners,
will draw consequences in its relations with Russia.
Russia alone would be responsible for that setback.
France, its partners and the international community
as a whole ask only for respect for international law
and Ukrainian sovereignty, which Russia is clearly and
brutally violating.

