Ms. Anderson (Ireland): A written version of
my statement is being circulated, and I will deliver a
slightly abbreviated version so as to respect the time
constraints.

I welcome the initiative that Pakistan has taken
in scheduling this open debate on United Nations
peacekeeping. Indeed, for such a crucial and iconic
part of the United Nation's work - Blue Helmets are
instantly recognized the world over 4 the Council
would undoubtedly benefit from scheduling such
debates more frequently.

Ireland is one of the staunchest supporters of
United Nations peacekeeping, with our Defence Forces
participating continuously in United Nations peace
operations since their first deployment 55 years ago. We
are also among the top 10 donors to the Peacebuilding
Fund. We are therefore keenly interested in the evolving
interlinkages between peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
I would like today to touch briefly on four points.

My first point concerns sustainability. Paragraph 1
of resolution 2086 (2013), adopted earlier today, refers
to peacekeeping contributing to "a comprehensive
strategy for durable peace and security". There are at
least two critical aspects to ensuring such durability
or sustainability. First, peacebuilding tasks must be
undertaken by peacekeepers in a coordinated and
coherent manner within an integrated United Nations
framework. Secondly, they must support national
strategic priorities and planning.

The question of how quick-impact projects can
contribute more effectively to peacebuilding is of
relevance here. From the many such projects delivered
over the years by the Irish Defence Forces, we have
learned one key lesson. While maintaining the
flexibility and responsiveness characteristic of these
projects, efforts to better coordinate and integrate
them into broader frameworks greatly enhance their
sustainability, and thereby their impact.

My second point concerns realism. We must
do more to engender a sense of realism. Oscar
Wilde famously wrote: "I can resist anything except
temptation". Over time, the temptation before this
Council has been to add, paragraph by paragraph in
mandate resolutions, more and broader objectives. No
one objects to these objectives, but missions 4 even
modern multidimensional operations - struggle to
deliver them as an entire set, not least because they do
not always receive a proportionate increase in resources
or clear guidance as to what the real priorities are. As a
United Nations community, it is important that we either
match our expectations of missions with resources,
or alternatively we should temper our ambitions. It is
wishful thinking, and even somewhat hypocritical, to
try to have it both ways.

In standing back and looking at the peacekeeping
and peacebuilding activities currently undertaken by
the United Nations, we must also ask ourselves whether
we, collectively, are continuing disproportionately to
focus on the symptoms of conflict at the expense of
addressing the root causes. It is a truism that preventing
conflict is far more cost-effective than managing crises,
yet we continue to pour resources into the latter.

Perhaps a paradigm shift is needed. Rather than
saddling peacekeeping missions with more and more
responsibilities, we should instead be thinking about
enhancing political peacebuilding missions, separate
missions, or separate arms within existing missions.
But this is a larger debate for another day.

My third point concerns the role of regional
organizations. Ireland has direct experience of the
positive contribution that regional organizations can
make to peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We have
led initiatives to improve cooperation between the
United Nations and the European Union in relation
to peace operations and have given financial support
to the expansion of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations Liaison Office in Brussels. In the written
version of my statement, I set out in some detail
how Ireland is utilizing its current presidency of the
Council of the European Union as an opportunity to
drive efforts to further enhance this European Union/
United Nations cooperation. I also make the point that
more prominence could be given to non-United Nations
partners, including regional organizations, in the
United Nations lessons-learned processes.

The fourth point concerns gender. There is a crucial
element common to peacekeeping and peacebuilding
that is conspicuous by its absence in the concept note
for today's debate (S/2013/4, annex). Perhaps the single
most transformative step towards ensuring the success
of peacekeepers as early peacebuilders would be the
deployment of more women on missions. If deployed
peacekeeping missions were to reach out to populations
in more traditional societies, the deployment of more
women would act as a multiplier of peacebuilding
potential.

This is a difficult challenge for all troop contributors,
no less for Ireland than for any other Member of the
United Nations. The Irish Defence Forces ensure that
its personnel receive tailored predeployment training
in the human rights of women and minorities, cultural
awareness and codes of conduct and behaviour. We
also fund and participate in a gender perspective pilot
programme in the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon. But there is an important point to be made.
If we are serious about achieving the current targets for
women in peacekeeping, we have to think realistically
about finding the necessary incentives and innovative
ways to advance towards these targets.

I would conclude by acknowledging the sacrifices
made by peacekeepers seeking to sustain and build
peace in some of the most difficult places on Earth. In
the past year, 111 peacekeepers were killed in carrying
out their duty. It is our duty here in New York to ensure
that the work of those who run such risks makes the
maximum possible difference.

