Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): At the outset,
we wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her briefing
on the activities of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). South Africa recognizes the
important role that MONUSCO plays in addressing
the perennial instability in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the protection of civilians.

We also thank Ambassador Alotaibi for his
statement on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We welcome the Secretary-General's
acknowledgment of the positive steps taken by
President Felix Tshisekedi towards the launch of the
reform agenda. This includes the opening of political
space, the release of political detainees and progress
with regard to freedom of speech.

On the security front, South Africa notes the
relative stability in the western provinces. However, we
acknowledge and are concerned by continued instability
in parts of the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in particular the Kivus and Ituri provinces.
In this regard, we welcome the vital role played by
MONUSCO in collaboration with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo authorities in securing these
regions. South Africa reiterates the need for continued
support for MONUSCO's efforts in stabilizing the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
need for the establishment of an effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, in addition to
financial support, as requested by the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Despite continued instability in the east of the
country, a positive trend has been observed in President
Tshisekedi redefining his strategic approach to conflict
resolution and peacebuilding in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region. This is reflected
in the trust- and confidence-building initiatives with
neighbouring countries and his reinforced personal
commitment to the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region through the appointment of a
Coordinator for the National Oversight Mechanism to
oversee the Framework's national implementation.

It is South Africa's belief that the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework remains a fundamental
agreement with the potential to unlock stability,
peace and economic development in the region. In
this respect, we encourage all parties to abide by their
commitments set out in the Framework, including
at the national, regional and international levels. We
commend President Tshisekedi's outreach efforts in the
region, which could contribute to the stabilization of
the security situation. We reiterate our continued role
in promoting peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as a guarantor of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework.

South Africa supports the Southern African
Development Community's continued commitment
to assisting the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
achieving sustainable peace, security and stability. We
are encouraged by the cooperation between the African
Union (AU) and the United Nations in undertaking to
continue engagement in support of the consolidation of
stability and democratic governance in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

We express our concern with regard to the
humanitarian situation in parts of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and are especially concerned
by the Ebola virus outbreak, which has been declared
a public health emergency of international concern
by the World Health Organization. Furthermore, we
are concerned by and condemn the attacks by armed
groups on Ebola treatment centres and staff. We
would like to take this opportunity to commend the
efforts undertaken by MONUSCO and other United
Nations agencies in the fight against the Ebola virus
outbreak. Furthermore, we welcome the AU's response
in strengthening capacities to combat the disease. It is
important for the international community to support
all efforts to bring the situation under control.

Allow me to reiterate our position with regard to the
sanctions regime. South Africa continues to assert that
any sanctions regime should supplement peace efforts.
Furthermore, sanctions should neither be politicized
nor hinder the provision of humanitarian assistance and
should not affect ordinary citizens.

In conclusion, we are of the firm view that it is
imperative for the international community, working
through the AU, the United Nations and regional
partners, to continue to maintain solidarity with the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
to provide the necessary political, financial and other
support in an effort to ensure that there is no reversal of
the gains made thus far.

