Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I thank the Russian presidency of the Council for
organizing this meeting. We also thank the briefers for
their valuable input.

Afghanistan is passing through a critical juncture,
and there are alarming trends in its political and
security domains. Numerous efforts are being made to
hold a successful presidential election on 28 September.
However, there are attempts to undermine that
important event.

Holding free and fair presidential elections can
further enhance the democratic institutions of the
country. We call upon the United Nations and the
international community to support holding the
elections as scheduled. Iran also urges all Afghan
parties and political groups, as well as all Afghans
eligible to vote, to actively participate in the elections,
as that is essential for the improvement of the security
and socioeconomic conditions of Afghanistan.

In the security domain, the high number of
incidents, as referred to in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/703), serves to indicate that the security
situation remains volatile. The increase attacks by
Da'esh is a source of grave concern and underlines
the need to combat it seriously and resolutely. It is
evident that its elements, aided by certain countries,
including in transferring them from Syria and Iraq to
Afghanistan, have significantly increased the offensive
capability of Da'esh. Those countries are therefore also
responsible for the crimes committed by Da'esh.

After almost two decades of United States invasion
of Afghanistan, it is quite clear that the United States
has no choice but to leave that country, and the sooner,
the better. As we have stated time and again, the
time-bound and responsible withdrawal of all foreign
forces is a strong national demand of the people of
Afghanistan. We urge the Government of Afghanistan
and all Afghan parties to be vigilant and cooperate
closely in successfully passing through the current
critical security situation. Any conflict and fratricide
will help those who do not wish to see a secure and
stable Afghanistan.

We urge all parties, pending national reconciliation
and a permanent ceasefire agreement, to exercise
maximum restraint and avoid deteriorating the security
conditions and targeting civilians. Neither Afghanistan
nor our region can afford a new round of conflict. Peace
is the strongest demand of the people of Afghanistan,
and it must be heard by all Afghan groups, who, instead
of confrontation, should cooperate for peace.

Any peace process must be facilitated by the United
Nations and Afghan-led, -owned and -controlled.
We call on regional and international players to
support such a peace process and allow the future of
Afghanistan to be determined exclusively by Afghans
themselves. The Government of the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan must have the central role in all peace
efforts, and any peace agreement must be concluded
with its participation.

Furthermore, any peace process shall preserve
the achievements of the International Conference
on Afghanistan held in Bonn in 2001, including the
Constitution and the institutions derived from it.
At the same time, in case of an agreement to amend
the Constitution, it shall be conducted according to
the procedure foreseen in the Constitution itself and
under the supervision of the legitimate Government
of Afghanistan. No country has the right to decide the
future of Afghanistan, and any peace negotiation in the
absence of Afghanistan's Government and the political
factions of the country, or in a unilateral, exclusive and
non-transparent manner, is doomed to fail.

While respecting the sovereignty ofAfghanistan and
underlining the need for the ownership and leadership
of any peace process by the people of the country, Iran
stands ready, within a regional initiative, along with
its neighbouring countries, as well as Afghanistan's
Government and all groups, to enter into consultations
and negotiations with all parties in the conflict in order
to prevent more bloodshed and facilitate the conclusion
of a durable agreement.

As a neighbouring country that has always
wholeheartedly supported the Afghan-led and -owned
initiatives for a stable and prosperous Afghanistan, Iran
will spare no genuine or impartial effort to that end

The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.
