The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Cote
d'Ivoire.

I would like to begin by welcoming the presence
among us of the new Permanent Representative of
Yemen and wishing him every success in his duties.
I would also like to thank the countries of the Gulf
region, especially Kuwait, Oman and Saudi Arabia,
for making it possible to foster hope at the meeting
in Stockholm. I also thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their
briefings, which underscored the need for the Security
Council to remain united and engaged in the quest for
durable solutions to the serious social, political and
humanitarian crisis that has gripped Yemen for the past
four years.

My delegation welcomes this briefing following
the consultations that have been being held since
6 December in Stockholm between representatives of
the Yemeni Government and the Houthi rebels. That
is a testament to what humankind is capable of when
will and good faith are in abundance. Let us recall that
the purpose of those consultations was to establish a
framework conducive to constructive exchanges on
thorny issues between the protagonists, as well as to
build confidence in order to facilitate the settlement of
the political and humanitarian crisis in Yemen.

My country thanks the Swedish authorities for
hosting those important consultations to give peace
a chance in Yemen. We were satisfied to note the
personal commitment of Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres, which led to the success of the negotiations
in Stockholm. My delegation welcomes the fact that, in
a context of heightened tensions, the consultations led
to an agreement that, among other things, focuses on an
immediate ceasefire in the port city of Al-Hudaydah,
a strategic city through which more than 75 per cent
of humanitarian aid passes, the redeployment of
forces outside the city within a maximum of 21 days
starting from the entry into force of the ceasefire, the
establishment of a joint committee, overseen by the
United Nations, to oversee redeployment and mine
clearance, and the cessation ofhostilities in the besieged
city of Taiz, which should be accessible again thanks to
the opening of humanitarian corridors.

My delegation welcomes the relative calm observed
over the past few days in the Yemeni theatre of conflict,
as well as the signing of the agreement reached
prior to the beginning of the talks. That includes the
exchange of more than 15,000 prisoners, thanks to the
mediation of Special Envoy Griffiths. The inter-Yemeni
consultations that just concluded in Stockholm generate
new hope for peace and could also serve as a prelude to
the end of the suffering endured by the Yemeni people
since the outbreak of hostilities - which have plunged
this country into one of the most worst humanitarian
crises, according to the United Nations. In that regard,
Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the strong and encouraging
gesture of the symbolic handshake between the Yemeni
Minister for Foreign Affairs and the representative of
the Houthi rebels, in the presence of the Secretary-
General.

Despite the hope kindled by the talks for an end
to the crisis in Yemen, several points of contention
remain. I refer to the reopening of Sana'a airport to
international civilian traffic and its oversight and,
ultimately, political arrangements between the parties
to the conflict for the final settlement of this crisis. My
delegation remains concerned about the development of
those troublesome issues and calls on the belligerents
to remain willing to continue discussions, without
preconditions, in accordance with the commitments
made at the end of the Stockholm consultations, with
a view to holding upcoming negotiations scheduled
for January.

My country commends and encourages the organs
and agencies of the United Nations system for their
efforts to restore peace in Yemen. We also congratulate
the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for their
involvement in the peace process in the region. My
delegation hopes that all efforts undertaken by the
international community will lead to lasting solutions
for the well-being of the Yemeni people, as well as for
security and stability on the Arabian peninsula.

Finally, Cote d'Ivoire calls for a peaceful and
definitive settlement of the crisis, with respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Yemen, in the
interest of its people. We also urge all stakeholders
to strengthen the negotiating framework to render
it more inclusive, in line with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

