Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): Allow me at
the outset to say how pleased my delegation is to see
you, Sir, presiding over this meeting, and also to
welcome the five new member countries of the
Security Council.

The Security Council, through this meeting, is
restating its determination to give high priority to the
international community's fight against terrorism. Let
us recall that it was during the French presidency of the
Council, in September 2001, that the tragic terrorist
attacks were perpetrated against the United States of
America. Under the active leadership of France, the
Council, at that time, adopted important resolutions,
including resolution 1373 (2001).

I should like also, Sir, to stress the particularly
active part played by your country in the process of the
drafting and adoption of the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. That
is why I am pleased to commend your delegation for
France's ongoing outstanding efforts effectively to
combat terrorism, which poses a clear threat to
international peace and security.

I should like also to thank the Secretary-General
for his introductory statement, and the Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) for his important
statement.

Since the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001,
the international community has taken many steps - at
the subregional, regional and international levels - to
combat the scourge of terrorism. The adoption and
implementation of various resolutions by the General
Assembly and the Security Council, as well as the
actions taken by Member States, are part of this
approach.

We commend the work done by the CTC. The
progress it has made is evidence not only of its resolve
to discharge its responsibilities effectively and quickly,
but also of the political will of our Member States to
shoulder their responsibilities. I wish also to pay a
well-deserved tribute to Sir Jeremy Greenstock for his
ongoing dedication, his skills and the outstanding
manner in which he has guided the work of the
Committee.

We welcome the CTC's proposal to convene, in
the near future, a special meeting with representatives
of international, regional and subregional organizations
and institutions, which will without a doubt help to
strengthen the capacity of States to combat terrorism
through concerted and coordinated action at all levels.
My delegation would encourage the Committee to
continue its dialogue with all States on the specific
steps to be taken to implement the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001).

My delegation notes with satisfaction the fact that
several Member States have undertaken to sign and
ratify the 12 terrorism conventions. My delegation
advocates the swift adoption of the comprehensive
convention against terrorism, and we support work on a
draft convention to combat acts of nuclear terrorism.

The Committee has certainly been able to
highlight the relationship between terrorism and other
forms of organized crime. However, the Committee's
work is far from over, for combating terrorism is a
long-term endeavour which requires the strengthening
of national legislations and the ratification by States of
the various international instruments.

My delegation would restate its strong
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, whatever the cause the perpetrators
claim to be defending. Political disputes and
differences should not overshadow our commitment to
combat this evil, which affects the international
community as a whole. Guinea believes that the fact
that a country has not been the victim of such acts
cannot be a reason for its failing to join in the struggle
to eliminate terrorism.

Therefore, Guinea has added to its penal code
provisions aimed at averting and suppressing all
terrorist threats or acts. Furthermore, our national
courts have jurisdiction over terrorist acts or threats
recognized in the international conventions to which
Guinea is a party. This derives from article 79 of our
Constitution, whereby international law has primacy
over our national legislation.

Our Government has taken steps to accede to all
international conventions on terrorism to which we are
not yet a party. The competent authorities have already
undertaken proceedings to that end.

My country, which has always been involved in
efforts by the international community to combat
terrorism, participated, inter alia, in the Special
Conference of Foreign Ministers of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference, held in Kuala Lumpur from 1
to 3 April last. We also attended the High-Level
Intergovernmental Meeting of the African Union on
Terrorism, held in Algiers from 11 to 14 September
2002.

My delegation believes that we can gauge the
success of our efforts to combat terrorism by looking at
how many lives have been saved and how many
terrorist acts thwarted. Unfortunately, the Bali and
Mombasa attacks and the Moscow hostage-taking
resulted in the loss of human lives, making it clear that
we need to strengthen cooperation further to combat
terrorism.

Guinea is willing to contribute to the
implementation of the recommendations of the Policy
Working Group on the United Nations and Terrorism,
which were submitted to the Secretary-General.

Success depends on the solidarity of the entire
international community in order to overcome divisive
factors. This will require tolerance, a dialogue among
civilizations, and accepting our differences for the sake
of our common interests. We must also settle regional
conflicts, which are ravaging so many countries, and
seek just solutions to development problems.

We are convinced that the road ahead is long and
full of obstacles, but we must nonetheless continue to
move towards our common goal to eradicate terrorism.
We hope that the outcome of this meeting will give
fresh impetus to our common efforts, and, in this spirit,
we support the draft statement to be adopted at the end
of this meeting.
