I thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his briefing. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has made the challenge of delivering life-saving assistance to those in need across Syria ever more difficult. After nine years of conflict, Syria is enormously underequipped to deal with the pandemic, and Syrian health infrastructure is largely downgraded, fragmented or destroyed. The restrictions imposed on cross-border and cross-line humanitarian movements widen the gaps and compound shortages, thus amplifying risks and vulnerabilities. It is critically urgent to narrow the gaps and scale up nationwide preparedness and response capacity so as to avoid a potentially catastrophic and overwhelming outbreak of the disease in Syria. A focused effort to fight COVID-19 requires sustained calm throughout Syria and the commitment of all parties to safe, timely, durable and unimpeded access of humanitarian aid, including of medical aid. The recurring disruption of the water supply in north-eastern Syria because of the hostilities is yet another issue of serious concern, as it hampers sanitation and hygiene measures and aggravates vulnerabilities in the face of COVID-19 for nearly half a million people in the region. We call on the parties to protect civilian infrastructure, including water-supply infrastructure, in line with their obligations under international humanitarian law and international human rights law. We thank the Secretary-General for his updated review, in implementation of resolution 2504 (2020), and take note of his recommendations on the way forward for cross-border and cross-line operations. Tunisia reiterates that a dual approach, combining cross-border and cross- line modalities, that is firmly based on needs remains pertinent for ensuring the principled and effective delivery of humanitarian aid in Syria, along with a strengthened United Nations monitoring mechanism of cross-border operations. We stress the importance of such an approach being incremental, in a way that respects and ultimately preserves Syria's sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic, cross-border and cross-line modalities will need to be recalibrated in northern Syria to ensure an efficient and coordinated health response. More cross-line modalities from within Syria will be needed in order to strengthen the cohesion of the Syrian national health response to the pandemic and prevent its further fragmentation across regions. In that regard, we welcome the stepping-up of cross-line operations in recent months in the north-east, the latest of which was the 10 May delivery by land of COVID-19 medical treatment items. We urge further cooperation and coordination between the United Nations and the Syrian authorities, including on outstanding approvals of vital medical aid. We also look forward to the establishment of cross-line operations in the north-west following the 14 April agreement of Syrian authorities on a joint mission by the United Nations, the International Committee of the Red Cross and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent in the region.
