Mr. Danon (Israel): This is unfortunately not the
first time I have had to speak on the troubling reality
that is the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
UNRWA has been political since its inception. It
continues to amaze me how the States Members of the
United Nations do not see the hypocrisy that lies within
the Agency's very existence.

Let us start with organization itself. No other
refugee population in the world currently has an
UNRWA - not the Syrian refugees, not the Yemeni
refugees, not the refugees from any other conflict in
the world. Every other refugee in the world is under the
jurisdiction of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).

The United Nations created UNRWA and its
unique criteria specifically for the Palestinians.
UNRWA defines its beneficiaries as refugees, but an
UNRWA refugee is different from an UNHCR refugee.
An UNRWA refugee has a special refugee status that
is automatically passed down to future generations.
Palestinian refugees can obtain citizenship from other
countries while maintaining their refugee status. The
vast majority of UNRWA beneficiaries do not meet
the recognized criteria for what constitutes a refugee
under international law. No other refugee population
in the world enjoys these same criteria. Why, then,
does UNRWA grant its beneficiaries all of this special
treatment? Let us take a look at history.

In 1947, the United Nations partition plan proposed
the formation of two States - a Jewish State and an
Arab State - in the land of the former British Mandate.
The Jews accepted the proposal immediately, but the
Arabs did not. Following their rejection, five Arab
armies launched a war on the young and tiny State of
Israel, attacking our borders from all sides. We won.
UNRWA was established following that war 4 68 years
ago.

In 1952, Lieutenant General Alexander Galloway,
director of UNRWA in Jordan, spoke candidly about
UNRWA's purpose. I was not born back then. He said,

"It is perfectly clear that the Arab nations do not
want to solve the Arab refugee problem. They want
to keep it as an open sore, as an affront against the
United Nations, another weapon against Israel."

The Palestinians have never let go of that agenda.
The unique status ofautomatic inheritance continues and
worsens the Palestinian refugee problem. What began as
750,000 Palestinian refugees has now turned into over
5 million, simply because ofUNRWA. By manipulating
the scale of the Palestinian refugee problem, UNRWA
plays a direct and biased role in the politics of the
conflict. In addition, 2.1 million Palestinians living in
the West Bank and Gaza, who have never crossed an
international border, are still considered by the United
Nations to be refugees. In every other case on Earth but
the case of the Palestinians, a person must be forced
to leave one country and cross an international border
into another to be considered a refugee by the United
Nations.
Let me ask the Council members, why is it that a
Palestinian who was born in Ramallah and lived there
his entire life considered a refugee? How come? But
that is indeed the case.

Had the original 750,000 refugees been resettled
in 1949, the Palestinian refugee crisis - and therefore
the illegitimate claim of return - would not exist. But
today approximately 5.4 million so-called refugees still
hold on to the hope of returning to houses in which they
have never lived. That hope, if realized, would erase
the State of Israel simply by sheer numbers. Under the
guise of the claim of return, the Palestinians, through
UNRWA, are refusing to accept the Jewish right to
self-determination in any part of the land of Israel and
within any borders. Those sentiments run rampant in
Ramallah today.

In September, we all heard Mahmoud Abbas say
in the General Assembly that he believes in a two-
State solution (see A/73/PV.10). But he also said that
he would fight for the return of over 5 million so-called
refugees. Those views are contradictory. If the millions
of so-called Palestinian refugees return, Israel, as the
one and only Jewish State, will cease to exist.

Numerous reports reveal close ties between
UNRWA employees and the Hamas leadership. In April
2017, Suhail Al-Hindi, an UNRWA teacher and the
Chairman of the UNRWA employees" union in Gaza,
was accused of being elected to the Hamas leadership.
He resigned amid those allegations.

For years, UNRWA has been empowering the refugee
problem instead of trying to solve it, while adopting a
unilateral political position. The organization's schools
have been transformed into terror and incitement
infrastructures, with textbooks that deny Israel's
existence distributed on the ground and underground
tunnels dug by Hamas. UNRWA employees assist
terrorist groups by using official UNRWA vehicles to
transport weapons and terrorists to carry out attacks
against Israel. As if that were not enough, every
UNRWA school has a Hamas-appointed representative
on campus who is responsible for recruiting students to
participate in the Hamas student group.

In the light of recent events, Israel simply cannot
take lightly the alliance that appears to have been
formed between members of UNRWA and Hamas.
Just two weeks ago, Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad
and other terrorist groups in Gaza fired more than 700
rockets and mortars into civilian population centres
in Israel. Those rockets hit Israeli homes, hospitals,
factories and even kindergartens. Four Israeli civilians,
Jews and Arabs alike, were killed. Moshe Agadi, Ziad
Alhamada, Pinchas Pshuzman and Moshe Feder were
killed in those acts of terror, and more than 100 others
were injured. Two Palestinians in Gaza, Falastin Abu
Arar and Saba Mahmoud, were also killed by a Hamas
rocket that was fired towards Israel, but landed in Gaza.
As protectors of international peace and security, the
United Nations should wonder why its Agency, which
is meant to help the Palestinians, is working so closely
with the Hamas terrorists, who do nothing but hurt
the Palestinians.

It is therefore in the best interest ofUNRWA, Israel,
the Middle East and the Palestinian people for the
United Nations to take the following two actions. First,
the Security Council must finally designate Hamas as a
terrorist organization. Secondly, the time has come for
a reassessment of UNRWA, its objectives, its success
in implementing those objectives and whether or not
those objectives match the reality on the ground. It is
time to stop pumping money into an organization that
has perpetuated the plight of the Palestinian people in
Gaza. UNRWA has failed to rehabilitate the Gaza Strip.
It has succeeded only in inciting violence against the
State of Israel. UNRWA's mandate must come to an end.

I have a question for the representative of UNRWA.
Like any other organization, it must have clear goals.
Can the UNRWA representative present those goals?
How long will it take to reach those goals? Will we still
be sitting here in 10 or 15 years? How much money will
it cost to achieve those goals? The Security Council
should receive answers within three or six months, but
we need to hear those answers.

