Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): On 24 February
2000, the Security Council adopted resolution 1291
(2000), which endorsed the Lusaka Agreement signed
by the Congolese parties as a framework for bringing
about peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The resolution expressed its strong support for the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement which, according to
resolution 1291 (2000),

"represents the most viable basis for the peaceful
resolution of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo". (resolution 129] (2000),
fifth preamhular paragraph)

Resolution 1291 (2000) went on to call on all parties to

"fulfill their obligations under the Ceasefire
Agreement". (ibid, para. 1)

The Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement states that

"In order to arrive at a new political
dispensation and national reconciliation arising
from the inter-Congolese political negotiations,
the Parties agree upon the implementation of the
following principles:

(a) the inter-Congolese political
negotiations process shall include beside the
Congolese parties, namely the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Congolese Rally for Democracy and the
Movement for the Liberation of Congo, the
political opposition as well as representatives of
the forces vives;

(b) all the participants in the inter-
Congolese political negotiations shall enjoy equal
status;

(0) all the resolutions adopted by the
inter-Congolese political negotiations shall be
binding on all the participants". (S/1999/815, enclosure 1, annex A, para. 5.2)

However, the report of the Security Council
mission that visited the Great Lakes region from 27
April to 7 May 2002 stated that

"The mission trusts that, in accordance with the
views expressed by its interlocutors, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, MLC and RCD-Goma will pursue their
talks with a view to reaching a comprehensive
and inclusive agreement in accordance with the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. Such an agreement
might then be endorsed by the parties to the inter-
Congolese dialogue, in the presence of the neutral
facilitator, Sir Ketumile Masire. In this context,
the mission recommends that the Security
Council, within the next few days, should
consider taking further initiatives on this matter
in coordination with the signatories of the Lusaka
Agreement and the leaders of the region."
(S/2002/537, para. 23)

The Security Council will therefore understand
the concern of my Government that the Security
Council seems to be departing from resolution 1291
(2000) and the intent of the Lusaka Agreement, which
it has already endorsed. Our concern is that paragraph
23 of the report before the Council may be read to
mean that the three armed parties in the Congolese
dialogue can reach agreement by themselves and then
impose it on the unarmed groups in the Congo. There
are five components to the inter-Congolese dialogue:
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Movement for the Liberation of the Congo
(MLC), the Congolese Rally for Democracy-Goma
(RCD-Goma), the unarmed groups and civil society.
According to the Lusaka Agreement, the five
components must be treated equally. That is how they
were treated during the inter-Congolese dialogue.

As the Security Council is aware, South Africa
has had the honour to host the inter-Congolese
dialogue, in which the people of the Congo negotiated
an end to decades of conflict in their country. Over 500
Congolese from all walks of life came to Sun City to
begin the process of rebuilding their country. The
delegates at the inter-Congolese dialogue repeatedly
made the point that, since the 1960 overthrow of
President Patrice Lumumba and the only
democratically elected Government that the Congo had
ever known, the Congo itself had never had legitimate
State institutions. Accordingly, they saw the dialogue
as a critically important step in a process that would
lead to the emergence of legitimate State institution,
born of the democratic elections that would be held at
the end of a short transitional period. They were
determined, once and for all, to confront and deal with
what they called the "crisis of legitimacy" in their
country. When they adjourned after 52 days, they had
adopted 40 resolutions that defined the kind of truly
independent, united, peaceful, democratic and
prosperous Congo that they and their people want to
see. The content of those resolutions included political
and legal concerns, peace and national reconciliation,
the economy and finance, humanitarian, social and
cultural concerns, and defence and security.

By any standard, it was a wonderful, historic and
extraordinary achievement, especially because it
expressed the sovereign will of a very representative
convention of the leaders of the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It left the dialogue
with one outstanding task specified in the 1999 Lusaka
Agreement 7 agreement on the political institutions of
the transition to democratic Government, the next
urgent and decisive task that confronts the Congolese
political and social leadership that met at Sun City.

The illegal removal of the Lumumba Government
in 1960 destroyed the brand-new legitimate political
institutions of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The dialogue has an historic obligation to begin the
process leading to the birth of new and stable political
institutions that derive their legitimacy from the will of
the people, as did the institutions that led to the
Government of Patrice Lumumba.

My Government believes that, for the inter-
Congolese dialogue to succeed in its tasks, it will have
to draw the necessary lessons from the disastrous
period since the overthrow and assassination of
President Patrice Lumumba, as well as from all
genuine friends of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The Congolese people must determine their
destiny without the foreign interference of patrons. The
Congolese people must defeat those within the
Congolese political class who put personal power and
benefit above the people's interests. The Congolese
people must fight against ethnic and regional divisions
for the unity of their country. The Congolese people
must insist on an inclusive process as a necessary
condition to unite the country and the people, to
destroy mistrust and to build mutual confidence among
all stakeholders, without which a new and stable Congo
will not be born. The Congolese people must oppose
the use of force as a means to acquire and legitimize
political power. And the Congolese people must insist
that all agreements be honoured, including the Lusaka
Agreement, as a critical first step towards the
entrenchment ofthe rule oflaw.

My delegation would like to appeal to the
Security Council to assist the people of the Congo on
their journey to freedom by reaffirming its support for
the Lusaka Agreement. The Council must support and
respect the position of former President Ketumile
Masire as the neutral facilitator chosen by the
Congolese people and endorsed by the Organization of
African Unity. My Government strongly believes that
the Council can do that by encouraging and supporting
all components of the inter-Congolese dialogue - the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Mouvement de liberation du Congo (MLC), the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratie (RCD- Goma), the unarmed groups and civil society - as they
seek to rebuild their own country. We would hope that
the Council would not be seen as taking sides in the
Congo, especially between the armed and the unarmed
groups. We hope that the Council will continue to treat
all sides equally in their quest for a lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

