Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for
his briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). We are grateful
to him and the Australian delegation for their skilful
leadership of that subsidiary body of the Security
Council.

Russia's diplomacy over the years has been to
work unstintingly to achieve the agreements that were
concluded between the six international mediators and
Iran on 24 November. The Geneva agreements are based
on a concept elaborated by Russian President Vladimir
Putin. Its thrust is to unconditionally recognize Iran's
right to develop a peaceful civilian nuclear programme,
including the right to enrich uranium, on the
understanding that all outstanding issues regarding the
Iranian nuclear programme will be resolved and that
the programme will be placed under the strict control of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).

The agreement is based on the principles of the
phased mutual response that is known in the global
diplomatic world as the Lavrov plan. The principles
enjoy consensus support. It is important that the
agreement incorporates provisions for the mitigation
of the anti-Iranian sanctions regime, above all the
unilateral sanctions, the legitimacy of which have never
been recognized and which have long had a negative
impact on the social and economic situation of the
Iranian people.

Today, in his message to the Federal Assembly, the
President of Russia stated:

"With respect to the Iranian nuclear programme,
a breakthrough has been achieved this year. It is,
however, only a first step. We must further pursue
our painstaking work to find a broader solution that
would guarantee Iran's inalienable right to develop
its peaceful civilian nuclear energy programme
and, I stress, the security of all countries of the
region, including Israel."

I invite all colleagues to familiarize themselves
with that message, especially the section devoted to
fundamental issues of Russian foreign policy and
current international relations.

The Geneva document must be implemented in
good faith by all parties. Furthermore, the six mediators
and Iran need to work on the next stage of the settlement
process - the elaboration of a final package that will
allow us to fully close this problem in the near future.

The progress in cooperation between Iran and the
IAEA is promising. That cooperation has reached a
new stage and provides for Iran's implementation of
good-faith transparency measures that go beyond its
commitments in the framework of the IAEA guarantees.
We hope that the IAEA will close the Iranian dossier
in the near future and handle it in the normal way.
We anticipate the entire international community's
understanding and support for these efforts. It would
be wrong to set up artificial obstacles in that process.

We are convinced that the decision concerning the
Iranian nuclear programme will have a positive impact
on the situation in the Middle East and enable us to
overcome the dangerous trends of recent years, whereby
attempts have been made to resolve a number of crises
and conflict situations in the Middle East by means
of force. As a result, the security of the region will be
enhanced and the foundations will be strengthened for
a fair and balanced system of international relations
that have no place for force and coercion.

In the current, critical stage, it is particularly
important for the 1737 Committee and its Panel of
Experts to continue to act in an unbiased, balanced and
objective manner in the interest ofpromoting a political
and diplomatic settlement of the situation concerning
the Iranian nuclear programme. Russia will spare no
effort to achieve a final, comprehensive solution that
will allow all sanctions imposed on Iran, including
those imposed by the Security Council, to be lifted.

