Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Like other delegations, the Chinese delegation would
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for his
detailed and informative briefing. We appreciate the
enormous work done by Mr. Vieira de Mello and his
team in extremely conditions.

Although there continue to be occasional violent
incidents, we are pleased to note that, since Mr. Vieira
de Mello last came to brief the Council, UNTAET has
made notable progress in the reconstruction of housing
and infrastructure, the maintenance of law and order,
the promotion of human rights, the drafting of
legislation and the creation of local job opportunities
and training programmes. We are also pleased to note
that Mr. Vieira de Mello has maintained good and
cooperative relations with the Indonesian Government
and the parties in East Timor.

We welcome the positive results of the Lisbon
donor conference. We believe that they will provide
sufficient resources for the reconstruction in East
Timor and lay a solid financial basis for East Timor to
make its transition to independence.

China supports the work of UNTAET and is ready
to continue to contribute civilian police and experts.
Within our capabilities, we will continue to provide
assistance to East Timor through bilateral channels.

We are concerned about the problem of the
refugees remaining in West Timor, and we hope that
UNTAET will resolve this problem as soon as possible,
through continued consultation with the Government of
Indonesia.

China is also very concerned about the security
status of the minorities in East Timor, and we hope that
UNTAET will continue its work to encourage
harmonious relations among all the ethnic groups.

The people of East Timor have attach hopes to
the United Nations. At the same time, the United
Nations still faces arduous tasks in the country and
should carry them out with a sense of urgency. In our
view, what is important is the principle of putting the
interest of the East Timorese above all else.

We fully support the work of the National
Consultative Council. It is a very good way to
encourage local participation. We endorse UNTAET's
intention to take further steps to achieve greater and
more effective local participation in the work of this
transitional period, especially the decision-making
process, so that the East Timorese can stand on their
own as soon as possible.

