Mr. Tadmoury (Lebanon)(spoke in Arabic): Mr.
President, it gives me pleasure to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. I would also like to extend our thanks to
your predecessor, the Ambassador of Tunisia, for the
constructive efforts he deployed during his presidency
last month.

It is regrettable and sad for us to witness the
suffering, repression and killing of the Palestinian
people in the occupied territories due to the excessive
use of force by the Israeli occupation forces since last
September. We are deeply concerned at the escalation
of violent acts and the besieging of the occupied
territories in an attempt to bring the Palestinians to
their knees and to deprive them of their basic needs for
survival. Israel, as an occupying power, has taken
measures that represent a violation of the Palestinian
citizens' human rights, in flagrant defiance of the
Fourth Geneva Convention and related Protocols. The
tragic situation prevailing in the occupied territories
can only deepen the feelings of desperation, hatred and
violence and can only bring about more violence.

Last Thursday we listened to statements by
Member States in the Security Council. It is only fair to
say that they expressed a positive view of the provision
of an international observer force in the Palestinian
territories. This force would be established with a view
to protecting the Palestinians from the excessive use of
force by Israel, providing for their basic security needs
and helping them in rejecting occupation and in their
search to establish their own State, an idea that enjoys
widespread international support.

The dispatch of an international observer force is
only a small step and not a solution to the occupation
of the Palestinian territories by Israel since 1967. It
does not call for suspicion, hesitation and rejection.
One of the positive aspects of dispatching such an
observer force would be to provide reasonable
conditions that would enable the parties to go back to
negotiations in order to continue on their path towards
peace; another would be its embodiment of the
international community's willingness to find peaceful
and acceptable solutions within the framework of
international legitimacy.

The Security Council is called upon today, more
than ever before, in the light of the new political
environment in Israel, to provide assistance to the
Palestinian people and to alleviate the suffering that
they are unjustly facing every day. These actions would
be in the Security Council's interest in the context of
the maintenance of international peace and security. It
would only be opportune for the Council to establish an
international observer force as a first step on the road
to peace.

It is worth mentioning here that the just,
comprehensive and lasting solution that would secure
the interests of all the warring parties in the region can
be achieved only through the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and General Assembly resolution 194 (III),
within the framework of the principle of land for peace
and in accordance with the Madrid terms of reference,
while also taking into account the important
achievements that have been reached in past
negotiations.

Peace and security have their own requirements.
Israel, as a society and as a Government, should be
prepared to accept that, beginning with the recognition
of the legitimate rights of others.

