At the outset, I would like to thank Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, in particular Prime Minister Gonsalves, for convening this important debate on contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity. Under the German presidency in July, we put two related topics high on the Security Council's agenda - pandemics and security and climate and security. We are grateful to the Prime Minister of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for bringing conflict prevention and sustainable crisis management back to the agenda of the Security Council with today's pertinent open debate. As The Honourable Prime Minister of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and every briefer highlighted, today's conflicts are driven by complex, multifaceted challenges that require a concerted effort by the entire United Nations system. That must include the Security Council. Unless the Council systematically and effectively considers the security implications of climate change, global pandemics, underdevelopment and violations of human rights, we will fall short of what the international community - and, most of all, those who are most severely affected by conflicts -expects us to deliver. I am confident that everyone around this virtual table realizes that the challenges of the twenty-first century are not the same as those we faced in the middle of the twentieth century. If we want to live up to our responsibility, we must keep up with these developments and act accordingly. Hurling procedure and tradition at reality might work in a closed system, but the Council does not deal with a closed system. It deals with an ever changing world. And if the Council wants to remain relevant, it will have to up its game and finally grapple with the security implications of pandemics, climate change and all the other pressing global issues the world expects it to deal with. A comprehensive approach to peace and security implies the need to address root causes and anticipate mid- and long-term challenges. We must strive harder to find integrated solutions to interconnected challenges. And we must do more to strengthen prevention, peacebuilding and sustaining peace. In my intervention I will focus on three concrete examples of contemporary drivers of conflict to illustrate this, namely, pandemics, climate change and violations of human rights. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to rage across the world. It is a multidimensional challenge that heavily affects health, humanitarian, political, social, economic and environmental developments. As a consequence, it increases insecurity and undermines peacebuilding efforts in conflict-affected countries and countries in transition. The security implications are crystal clear. In July, the Council explicitly recognized in resolution 2532 (2020) that the pandemic is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security and might reverse peacebuilding gains. We should do more to follow up on this resolution. As the Deputy Secretary-General elaborated earlier in her intervention (annex 1), the United Nations system as a whole continues to adapt in response to the pandemic. We welcome such efforts and encourage the Secretary-General to fully integrate the impact of the pandemic on security in his reporting. Such reporting would support prevention and early warning, which is key to the work of the Council. The COVID-19 pandemic has massive, immediate socioeconomic repercussions. It has disproportionately negative effects on people in vulnerable and post-conflict environments. We must ensure additional support for humanitarian, development, prevention and peacebuilding efforts. Peacebuilding needs are already critically underfunded despite the fact that preventing a crisis is much less costly than addressing it later. The Secretary-General's Peacebuilding Fund has remarkably evolved and adapted its work and projects to COVID-19 realities and needs. We continue to remain one of its major supporters. That is not good enough, though. We must find ways to secure reliable and predictable funding for prevention and peacebuilding. Climate change is undoubtedly one of the most relevant threats to stability and security in our time. The year 2020 is likely to be the hottest year on record. The security implications of that can be felt around the world. From the Sahel to the Caribbean and to small island nations in the Pacific, climate change is threatening the stability, security and, in some cases, the very existence of nations. The Council has discussed the link between climate and security repeatedly, and today's briefings once again make it clear that climate change is a major driver of conflict in the twenty-first century. The Security Council has to live up to its responsibility. More needs to be done to enhance our understanding of this dimension of conflict. We encourage the Secretary-General to include the climate dimensions of conflict in his reporting and call on all members of the Council to use all available formal and informal forums to contribute to enhancing the information flow to the Council. The informal expert group, which a number of members of the Council are convening, is an important step to anchor climate and security firmly in our agenda. There is a vicious circle of climate change, environmental degradation and conflict. It increases the risk of violent conflict, displacement and, consequently, humanitarian crises. We see that in different regions of the world. This is most evident in the Sahel region. Two weeks ago, Germany, together with the United Nations and Denmark, convened a conference on humanitarian assistance for the Sahel region. While we were delighted that more than $1.7 billion was pledged, the humanitarian response is only one part of the puzzle. Only when all Member States and United Nations actors work together to address the root causes as well as the medium- and long-term effects can we hope to build and sustain peace. Conflicts will always harm the most vulnerable most. Their human rights are most at risk in contemporary conflicts. In the pandemic, gender equality gains are at a risk of being lost as many Governments are diverting funds originally dedicated to supporting women and girls and their participation in peace processes. Through the Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund, Germany supported the establishment of its Emergency Response Window and made available $2.5 million for local women's organizations to support them through the crisis. Crises and conflicts, whether driven by climate change, pandemics or underdevelopment, have gendered dimensions that need to be taken into account by the United Nations whole-of-system response. The response, including the work of the Council, must be built on respect for human rights and strive for political processes that are inclusive and allow all parts of society, especially women, youth and marginalized groups, to participate in a full and meaningful way. In doing so, we can contribute to building resilient societies that can better withstand the impact of pandemics and climate change and strive for development. Let me conclude by stressing the need for constructive collaboration - collaboration among Member States as well as collaboration across the pillars of the United Nations system. There are concrete steps that the Council needs to take. We should further empower and encourage the Peacebuilding Commission to submit specific and targeted advice to the Council, as it holds a unique mandate within the United Nations system to enable integrated and cross-pillar approaches. We need to ensure that the United Nations and its presence on the ground, especially peacekeeping operations and special political missions, are sufficiently mandated and equipped to address the direct and indirect consequences of the pandemic, climate change and human rights violations. We should keep these complex security challenges firmly on the Council's agenda and work with the other pillars on addressing them holistically. Nothing less will do.
