Mr. Burian (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to join the previous speakers in thanking the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, Mr. Qazi, for his briefing and for introducing the
current report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI). I wish to
take this opportunity to commend him in person, as
well as all UNAMI staff for the outstanding work they
are doing in and for Iraq under really difficult and
challenging circumstances.

I also thank Mr. Wolff for his report on behalf of
the countries making up the Multinational Force in Iraq
(MNF-I), including my own country, Slovakia. We
welcome the presence of the Vice-President of Iraq,
Mr. Adil Abdal Mahdi, at our meeting and we thank
him for his statement.
As we have heard in the briefing, the security
situation in Iraq remains precarious and highly
complex. The challenges for political and economic
consolidation and reconstruction are mounting. This
situation has an immensely adverse impact on the daily
life of the Iraqi people and on the ability of the
Government of Iraq to deliver essential services to
them. All this is overshadowing the ongoing efforts and
achievements in building democratic institutions. In
this regard, we believe that it is crucial for Iraq and for
the international community to mobilize all efforts to
reverse these trends and to prevent the country from
slipping to an even deeper internal conflict and
sectarian violence, with the potential to destabilize the
whole region.

Iraqi ownership of these efforts and processes is
crucial for achieving a lasting and sustainable solution
and the stabilization of the country. The Secretary-
General rightly states in his report that "[o]nly the Iraqi
people themselves can determine their common destiny
and agree upon the structure of the Iraqi State".
(S/2007/126, para. 61).

Indeed, during the past almost four years, the
people and the leadership of Iraq have many times
clearly demonstrated their commitment to and support
for Iraq's transition and stabilization. They have made
numerous sacrifices to this end, and we believe that
there is enough political will and potential to achieve a
negotiated political settlement and build a stable and
prosperous Iraq, living in peace with itself and its
neighbours.

In this respect, we consider the overall
improvement of the security and humanitarian situation
and the promotion of national reconciliation, human
rights and economic and social welfare to be the key to
peacebuilding in Iraq. Developing fully inclusive
political processes and dialogue and fostering
consensus, mutual respect and compromise is the only
way, in our view, to stop the increasing violence and
sectarian strife.

The country must achieve further progress in
building democratic institutions based on the principles
of fair distribution of power and equitable sharing of
national resources. In this regard, we remain convinced
that a genuine constitutional review process, a review
of the de-Baathification process and finalizing
legislation on provincial elections represent important
confidence-building measures that can help Iraq to
tackle its many challenges. Last but not least, all
efforts should be undertaken to address the increasing
humanitarian suffering of a large number of refugees
and internally displaced persons.

We share the view that the strong involvement of
the United Nations in Iraq's transition and stabilization
processes remains instrumental. We therefore support
the active engagement and role of the United Nations
in developing the International Compact with Iraq.
Along with the European Union, Slovakia expresses its
readiness to participate actively and constructively in
this process. In this regard, we welcome the recent
finalization of documentation resulting from the
preparatory activities for the International Compact.
We are looking forward to tomorrow's meeting on the
Compact to be convened by the Secretary-General and
to the briefing by Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Saleh on
the latest developments and progress in the
implementation of commitments under the framework
of the ICI.

We also welcome and support Iraq's efforts and
initiatives aimed at promoting a greater and stronger
regional dialogue. We maintain that regional actors,
mainly Iraq's immediate neighbours, can and should
play a more active role in promoting Iraq's peace and
stability, which would benefit not only that country but
also its neighbours, as well as the wider region. Their
contribution to the success of Iraq's stabilization
therefore remains vital. In that regard, we welcome the
holding and the outcomes of the conference held last
weekend in Baghdad, which managed to bring together,
in a constructive manner, Iraq's neighbours and
regional and international players. That was an
important first step, and we hope and expect that all
involved parties will now swiftly build on that positive
encounter and endorse further practical steps to
promote Iraq's stability and security.

