The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the members of the Security Council, I would like to
condemn, in the strongest terms, the heinous attack on
two mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand, earlier
today, in a hateful act in which at least 49 people were
killed and dozens wounded. They were targeted at their
place of worship.

The members of the Council would like to express
their deepest condolences to the families and loved ones
of the dead and to offer their sympathy to the people
and the Government of New Zealand. I ask all present
to rise to observe a minute of silence for the victims.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute ofsilence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan

Report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (covering the period from 1 December 2018 to 26 February 2019) (S/2019/191)

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2019/225, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/l9l, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan, covering the period
from 1 December 2018 to 26 February 2019.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.

I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.
Infavoar:
Belgium, China, C6te d'Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, South Africa,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America

Against:
None

Abstaining:
Russian Federation


The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received l4 votes in favour, with one

abstention. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 2459 (2019).

I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.


