Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank your country, Mr. President, for
having convened today's open debate, and you, Sir, for
presiding over this meeting. We extend our
appreciation to Assistant Secretary-General Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco for his informative briefing. We
have also listened carefully to the statements made by
the representative of Israel and the observer of
Palestine.

Over the past two years, the situation in the
Middle East has gained increasing attention on the
agenda of the Security Council and also in
international public opinion. Events have evolved at
dizzying speed, often demonstrating contradictory
trends.

The so-called Arab Spring has inspired many who
call for societies that are more democratic, more
participatory and more tolerant, and where social
justice prevails. As was foreseeable, however, the
concrete expression of those popular demands varies
from one country to another and has so far produced
differing outcomes. The refreshing and stimulating
winds also bring signs of growing tensions, both within
countries and between States. In accordance with this
Council's mandate to maintain international peace and
security, we are obliged to closely follow unfolding
events, keeping clearly in mind that the primary
responsibility for resolving intra-State conflicts lies
with the citizens of the country concerned.

In the spirit of Chapter VI of the Charter, we
believe that whatever action the Council takes to
support the parties directly involved in processes that
involve conflicts should give priority to preventive-
diplomacy measures. In our opinion, invoking Chapter
VII is a last resort. Moreover, in keeping with the spirit
of Chapter VIII of the Charter, we advocate working
very closely with regional and subregional entities, in
this case with the League of Arab States.

I will mention only a few specific issues
pertaining to the Middle East region.

In regard to Lebanon, we welcome the Secretary-
General's recent visit and his productive meetings with
its Government officials and main political
stakeholders. We commend the Economic and Social
Commission for Western Asia for having organized the
high-level meeting on reform and transitions to
democracy. We urge the Government of Lebanon to
continue meeting all of its international obligations,
especially those related to the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon and those derived from resolution 1701
(2006). We support the efforts to maintain its security,
and we also underscore the need to cease violations of
Lebanese airspace, which, in our opinion, are
unacceptable.

I now turn to what is perhaps the most urgent

topic on the before the Council in the Middle East: the

situation in Syria. We support demanding that the

parties immediately cease the use of force and adopt
concrete measures that will lead to reconciliation.

However, the term "parties" is an abstract
concept. We believe that popular demands expressed in
a peaceful way cannot be compared to a Government
responding with force to those demands. That type of
situation, as we have learned far too well in many Latin
American countries, tends inevitably to devolve into
violations of civilians' human rights, posing a serious
danger of free-falling into a dynamic whereby
repression provokes armed resistance, leading to a
spiral of violence with unforeseeable consequences.
That is precisely the situation that the Secretary
General of the League of Arab States described in his
report of 22 January to that body's Council. We trust
that the presence of Arab League monitors and the
search for what is called an Arab solution to the
situation will help keep Syria from the brink. We
support the agreement proposed by the Arab League
Council at its meeting last Sunday. That matter will no
doubt require some type of collective pronouncement
by the Security Council.

I would now like to address the age-old dispute
between Israel and Palestine, which is always a
background to the tensions that affect the Middle East.
For our part, we favour the creation of a viable,
sovereign and independent Palestinian State living in
peace and harmony within secure and defensible
borders next to the State of Israel. We understand that
realizing that vision falls to both parties, Israel and
Palestine, through direct negotiations on all
outstanding issues. Based on our belief that supporting
such negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis is
the only means to resolve their current differences, we
welcome the direct meetings held between the parties
in recent weeks in Amman - the first of their kind in
more than a year and a half. Moreover, we believe that
the Council must continue to support the actions of the
Quartet and the Arab Peace Initiative, and at the same
time guarantee that the peace process moves forward
so that the parties can achieve a definitive solution.

However, we also note an increasing divergence
between the suggestions offered by the Quartet and the
political realities on the ground. The Council must
therefore address those obstacles, which include,
among others, illegal settlement expansion in the

occupied territories, which greatly complicates
progress in the peace process. Our position on the
settlements is that they are illegal under international
law and that they constitute a serious obstacle for
peace, undermining the requirements for a two-State
solution. At the same time, we are aware of the need to
address the legitimate security concerns expressed by
Israel.

In conclusion, in each of the unique Middle East
situations on the Security Council agenda, it behoves
us to call upon opposing parties to renounce the use of
violence and to search for negotiated solutions to their
differences. For that to occur, the demands welling up
from the grass roots of the various societies must be
heard and addressed. Finding peaceful outcomes to the
various points of tension in the region - each one with
its unique characteristics - is in the interest not only
of the region but of the whole world.

