Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): Let me first of all
extend my delegation's congratulations to you, Sir, on
your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February. We look forward to
an energized Security Council under your presidency
as the Council carries out its responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

We commend the delegation of the Russian
Federation on its presidency for the month of January.

My delegation wishes to express its appreciation
to you, Sir, for organizing this open debate on an issue
which is of the utmost importance. It is our earnest
hope that this open debate will be followed up with
timely and concrete action by the Security Council on
the situation in the Middle East, in particular the
Palestinian issue. It is our earnest hope also that the
Security Council, under your able presidency, will take
the necessary just decision to protect the Palestinians,
including their inalienable rights, and to act
accordingly on the Israeli occupying Power.

My delegation associates itself with the
statements made by the representatives of Azerbaijan
on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

There is no denying that the Palestinian question,
including the Palestine-Israel conflict, remains the
most important issue in the Middle East. Not only does
it remain the single most important reason for and
catalyst for conflict, strife and terrorism in that region;
it is also becoming the justification for the violence
related to international terrorism that we continue to
see throughout the world. We strongly believe that a
solution to that problem would be a major step for the
international community in our shared desire for
international peace and security.

Sadly, while we all share that concern and hope
for a peaceful world, we failed miserably for years on
end to find durable and lasting peace in the region. The
situation in the Middle East continues to remain
volatile. The lack of political commitment and will,
particularly on the part of the major players, is telling
and well manifested through the incapability of the
Security Council to come up with relevant resolutions.
In the meantime, Israel continues with its belligerent
acts against the Palestinians, disregarding international
law, conventions and United Nations resolutions and
ignoring calls by the international community to stop
its atrocities against the Palestinians. Israel continues
to use violence against the Palestinian civilian
population, destroy civilian infrastructure and strangle
the economic livelihood of Palestinians. Israel also
continues to build the illegal separation wall on
occupied Palestinian territory, despite the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice and
international condemnation. Illegal Israeli settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory continue
to be supported and encouraged by the Israeli
Government, in total disregard of international laws
and norms and its obligations as the occupying Power.

Most recently, Israel came up with yet another
belligerent action that smacked of sheer arrogance and
insensitivity towards the feelings not only of the people
in the region but also of others around the world, in
particular those of Muslims. Israel's excavation work
around and beneath the holy Al-Aqsa mosque and its
wilful destruction of religious, cultural and heritage
sites in Al-Quds constitute direct aggression upon the
holy Al-Aqsa mosque. Malaysia condemns Israel for its
action in that regard. We denounce that blatant act of
provocation and the complete disregard shown for the
sanctity of the holy mosque. That act will ignite the
feelings of Muslims all over the world, and is in fact a
step backward in the efforts to achieve peace in the
region.

Those acts by Israel against religious, cultural
and heritage sites in the occupied territories are direct
violations of international law. Malaysia demands an
immediate stop to the excavation work being carried
out by Israel that has had direct impact on the Al-Aqsa

mosque. We urge the Security Council to demand that
Israel immediately seize those illegal activities. We call
upon the international community to intervene
immediately in order to stop those illegal actions by
Israelis.

Israel, as a Member of the United Nations, must
respect international laws, conventions and United
Nations resolutions, which gave birth to Israel itself.
Israel must be held responsible for all breaches
committed under the norms of international practice
and international law. It cannot continue to do
whatever it pleases with impunity and in total disregard
of the demands of the international community. Israel
must cease its practice of extrajudicial killings,
excessive use of force and other destructive practices,
such as destroying civilian infrastructure, homes and
means of economic livelihood. Such measures violate
its obligation as an occupying Power to protect the
civilian population.

The United Nations, and in particular the Security
Council, must act to ensure that Israel respects and
abides by its responsibilities as an occupying Power
and as a Member of the United Nations. Continued
Security Council inaction and paralysis in the face of
Israeli actions will be interpreted as promoting double
standards in terms of international practice.

Palestinian statehood remains the apex of the
aspirations of the Palestinian people. Israel and its
allies must understand that without resolving the
Palestinian question, lasting peace cannot not be
achieved in the region or beyond it. The Quartet peace
process must be put back on track. Israel must agree to
return to the peace process and to the implementation
of the Quartet Road Map. All parties must have the
resolve and political will to provide justice for the
Palestinian people. The agreement reached among
Palestinians in the holy city of Mecca to form a unity
government in Palestine is a positive development in
the process of comprehensive engagement among all
parties to find long-lasting peace in the Middle East.
We commend the Palestinians in that regard, as well as
Saudi Arabia for facilitating the agreement.

