Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to express our gratitute for the
briefings by Mr. Alexander Zouev, Assistant Secretary-
General for Rule of Law and Security Institutions of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Sudan and South Sudan.

I shall focus my statement on two points: first,
specificallly on the work of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA); and secondly,
the lack of concrete headway in implementing the
agreements of 2011 and 2012 intended to resolve the
conflict over the status of Abyei.

There can be no doubt that, since its establishment
in 2011 and to date, UNISFA has played a stabilizing
role in Abyei and along the entire border between the
Sudan and South Sudan, as clearly pointed out in the
report (S/2017/870) of the Secretary-General's report.
Although some violent incidents have been reported
over the past few months, the security situation in
the Abyei Area has remained relatively calm, to a
great extent thanks to the role played by UNISFA.
Nevertheless, it is worth highlighting that the situation
remains unstable due to the lack of progress made in
the political process. In that regard, I would like to
express our gratitude for the work of UNISFA. Thanks
to its proactive stance and unflagging support for
mediation initiatives and political dialogue, the mission
has contributed enormously to the fact that there have
been no major clashes between the armed forces of the
two countries in the Abyei Area since 2011. In short,
UNISFA has fulfilled the role that was expected of
it - that is, establishing a secure environment in which
the Sudan and South Sudan can resolve their differences
through dialogue.

However, the peacekeeping mission has been
hamstrung in achieving its full potential as a result of
the glaring lack of willingness to compromise by both
parties to the conflict, which have not only incessantly
put obstacles in the way of UNISFA's work, but have
also failed to show tangible progress in implementing
the agreements of 2011 and 2012, aimed at achieving a
lasting solution to the status of Abyei.

That leads me to my second point, namely, to
reiterate the primary responsibility borne by the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to fulfil
the commitments they themselves undertook in those
agreements. However much support the international
community might offer the parties - as it has done
throughout the years, in particular through the United
Nations and the African Union - we reiterate that the
responsibility for showing real progress in resolving
the conflict lies primarily with both Governments.

We take note of the point made by Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, in his communication dated 23 October,
where he referred to the latest efforts to convene
meetings of the various mechanisms established under
the 2011 and 2012 agreements, including the Abyei
Joint Oversight Committee and the Joint Political and
Security Mechanism. In that connection, we urge the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to take
advantage ofthe mechanisms that have been established
to resolve outstanding issues and to implement the
decisions taken. That is vital in order to promote good-
neighbourly relations and avoid a relapse into conflict.

In conclusion, allow me to recall that resolution
2352 (2017), which the Security Council adopted in
May and which set out the current mandate of UNISFA,
is a conditional resolution. Through the resolution, it
was decided that the continuation of UNISFA support
tasks with regard to the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism would end with that
extension unless both parties demonstrated, via their
actions, clear commitment and firm assurances for
operationalizing the Mechanism. UNISFA's mandate
expires in mid-November, which is why I repeat here
what we stated at the time of the adoption of resolution
2352 (2017):

"[l]et me clearly reaffirm that the future of this
peacekeeping mission is now exclusively in the
hands of the Governments of the Sudan and South
Sudan." (S/PV. 7939, p. 6)

