Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Huang Xia for his detailed briefing. The Dominican Republic commends the efforts of the countries of the Great Lakes region to curb the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and mitigate its socioeconomic impact. We also welcome the progress in the region, including the signing of a peace agreement between the Government of the Sudan and the armed groups, as well as the peaceful manner in which affected countries have managed cross-border security incidents. This friendly rapprochement demonstrates the maturity of regional leadership and their commitment to peace and stability. In that context, we urge them to continue to resolve their differences through diplomacy. Despite regional progress and the continued military operations of the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo to counter armed groups, we continue to be worried about the ongoing attacks carried out by foreign and local armed groups against civilians and Congolese armed forces. There is no doubt that this violence is the primary factor of destabilization in the region, due to the number of deaths and calamities suffered by the people, who are forced to leave their homes and live in deplorable conditions as internally displaced persons. We therefore call on the leaders of the region to regain control over the illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons, including the transfer of such weapons among armed groups, and to intensify efforts to prevent the training, residence and transit of armed groups through their territories. We further call on them to use the certificate of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region to manage and trade natural resources. The impact of the reduction of economic activities due to the pandemic, the violence of armed groups, natural disasters and the violation of human rights, including gender-based violence, abductions and the lack of development opportunities, are the driving force behind the grave humanitarian situation in the region. The large number of internally displaced persons in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, of Congolese refugees and of refugees from other countries in the region being hosted by the Democratic Republic shows the serious state of the humanitarian situation in the country. In addition, according to the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, the economic recovery of the region could not begin before 2021, and only if the COVID-19 pandemic is properly managed. Accordingly, we encourage donor countries to increase their support through official development assistance and innovative financial and debt relief programmes for the countries most affected by the pandemic and its devastating consequences. In addition, we call for the vaccine and other health technologies needed to address COVID-19 to be made available in an equitable manner and for their distribution to be guaranteed to all human beings on the planet. To that end, the role played by the World Health Organization, donor countries and the private sector is essential, based on cooperation, solidarity and justice. As peace and development are intrinsically linked, we call on the signatories to the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region to promote national and regional development programmes aimed at providing employment opportunities, especially in cross-border areas, and at involving more women and young people in conflict resolution and decision-making. In conclusion, we thank all the facilitators, including Special Envoy Huang Xia, for the progress made their efforts aimed at implementing regional peace and cooperation mechanisms. We urge the signatories to the Framework agreement and its co-guarantors to continue working in favour of a region where justice, peace, respect for human rights, equity and sustainable development prevail for all.
