Mr. Motoc (Romania): My delegation voted in
favour of the resolution, since, as recommended by the
Secretary-General's report on the United Nations Force
in Cyprus (UNFICYP), after consultations with both
sides and the guarantor powers, and in the absence of a
comprehensive settlement, the presence of UNFICYP
on the island continues to be necessary.

We welcome the intention of the Secretary-
General to conduct a review of UNFICYP's mandate,
force levels and concept of operations. We believe that,
in the current conditions, a comprehensive review of
the scope of the United Nations Mission in Cyprus is
required.

UNFICYP's review is an inextricable part of the
way forward for Cyprus, as also noted in the Secretary-
General's report on his mission of good offices. As a
country of the region, Romania considers that efforts
aimed at the reunification of Cyprus should continue.
During the past month, there have been considerable
advances towards a much better perspective for a
solution to this longstanding problem. As stated in
paragraph 81 of the report, "A new fluidity has
developed in the interaction of the players." There have
also been encouraging positive developments between
Greece and Turkey; and probably the most important is
the message sent by the Turkish Cypriots in favour of
reunification.

All these elements can gradually improve the
situation on the ground and create conditions
conducive to renewed efforts. The responsibility for
the continuation of efforts lies primarily with the
leadership of the two communities. We need strong
leadership and goodwill from all parties, as well as a
sustained focus on the part of the international
community, in order to reach a feasible solution to this
longstanding issue.

The European Union played a major role in the
recent attempt to end the division in the island. We
hope that the European Union will continue to be the
same driving force in the pursuit of the goal of the
reunification of Cyprus.

Regarding the recommendations included in the
good-offices report, we will support further action by
the Council to encourage positive steps forward for
Cyprus as well as any measure by the European Union
or other international players aimed at promoting
reunification and goodwill on the island. An incentive
in that respect could be the removal of unnecessary
restrictions and barriers for the Turkish Cypriot
community, with due regard for resolutions 541 (1983)
and 550 (1984).

We would nonetheless like to caution against any
rash steps that could upset the delicate balance in
Cyprus.

