The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to brief
the Council on the Secretary-General's report on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict (8/2014/694).
The report reminds us that peacebuilding is at the core
of United Nations aims and ambitions. The challenges
and responses described in the report will directly
affect the future of individuals, communities and
societies and their chances of living in peace. I would
like to highlight five key features of the report.

First, peacebuilding is most effective when
political, security and development actors support
a common, comprehensive and clear strategy for
consolidating peace. We have seen examples of this in
Guinea and Burundi. In Guinea, the United Nations
country team supported an interparty agreement on
parliamentary elections that was facilitated by the
then Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for West Africa, Said Djinnit. The team held public
meetings with local political leaders and helped train
election monitors.

In Burundi, the Peacebuilding Commission and
the country team supported the efforts of the United
Nations Office in pursuit of a more inclusive political
environment. They did this by facilitating broad
consultations with political parties and civil society.
That led to the adoption of a new electoral code and a
code of conduct for the upcoming elections.

Secondly, strong and well-functioning institutions
that are central to peacebuilding must based on effective
and inclusive political agreements. Such agreements
provide legitimacy and support for instititional
development and reform. Without inclusive agreements,
political divisions may persist and control of the State
may remain contested. Under such circumstances, let us
admit that nationally led peacebuilding strategies have
a limited potential. We have seen that in South Sudan,
where extensive investments in institution-building
were lost when weak and unstable political agreements
between different factions resulted in a tragic relapse
into conflict.

Thirdly, peacebuildingrequires sustainedinternational
political, technical and financial support. Regretfully,
we are seeing such gaps in several places, particularly
where the establishment of basic Government functions
and the provision of social services are required to
sustain peace. The Peacebuilding Fund can partially
address the financial gaps in the short term, but it
remains problematic to ensure the necessary larger-
scale and longer-term assistance and support. I
encourage the Peacebuilding Commission to continue
its efforts to mobilize the support of Member States for
the United Nations missions and mandates. Groups of
friends and contact groups can play an important role.
Also, compacts between post-conflict States and key
international partners can align international support
with national priorities, as they did in Sierra Leone and
Somalia.

Fourthly, regional actors and neighbouring
countries, working together with the United Nations,
can play a critical role in creating an environment
conducive to sustainable peace. The Peacebuilding
Commission can help support such efforts, as it has
done recently in the Central African Republic and
Guinea-Bissau, by convening meetings with regional
organizations, neighbouring States and international
partners. This underlines how conflicts in today's
world are increasingly taking on a regional dimension,
which I am sure Council membes have noted in their
deliberations on many issues. That regional dimension,
in my view, should be better reflected in how we in the
future deal generally with both conflict-resolution and
post-conflict peacebuilding.

Fifthly, promoting inclusion means that we must
ensure women's equal participation in post-conflict
political and development processes. The Secretary-
General's report details innovative approaches on the
part of Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kyrgyzstan and Liberia,
including an initiative in Guinea called the Women's
Situation Room, which provided support to a network
of local women's organizations, enabling women to play
a crucial role as election monitors. It also facilitated
inter-party trust and strengthened women's political
participation. We need more initiatives like that, and I
should like to say that this could be very valuable this
year, as we mark the twentieth year since the holding
of the important Fourth World Conference on Women,
held in Beijing.

I would like to present the Council with some
reflections and thoughts on the important review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture that was
launched by the General Assembly and the Security
Council last month. As some here may recall - including
you, Mr. President, in your capacity as Permanent
Representative ofChile at the time - it was my privilege,
as President of the General Assembly 10 years ago, to
be part of the creation of the peacebuilding structures:
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding
Fund and the Peacebuilding Support Office. Council
members may recall that this work was in response
to the troubling phenomenon at the time of frequent
relapses into conflict.

Since then, we can see that peacebuilding efforts are
more necessary than ever. In the recent past, the Central
African Republic and South Sudan have tragically
fallen back into conflict. The three Ebola-affected
countries - Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone - are
all on the Peacebuilding Commission's agenda. In
addition to the large and tragic loss oflife, the epidemic
has also had a dramatic impact on social cohesion and
State institutions. As the Peacebuilding Commission
noted in its early meetings on the epidemic, there is a
need for comprehensive support that would ensure the
resilience of state institutions and rapid recovery.

The United Nations involvement in peacebuilding
has evolved considerably since 2005, with broader
mandates and more actors working in ever more
difficult environments. Our peacekeepers and special
political missions are often in these situations called
upon to support inclusive political processes and to
build effective rule of law and security institutions,
together with United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes.

The Peacebuilding Commission was intended
to be a diverse, flexible and dynamic political forum
that would focus sustained international attention on
the challenges facing countries at risk of relapse into
violence. Although the Commission has made some
important progress, many now agree that its structure
and working methods need review, improvement and
adaptation to a rapidly changing environment. In that
regard, I should like to commend the efforts of the
Permanent Representative of Brazil, Ambassador
Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, who, as Chair, of the
Peacebuilding Commission, has set the direction
in a very positive way, as have the new head of the
Peacebuilding Support Office, Mr. Oscar Fernandez-
Taranco, who is present behind me, and his predecessors.
We are on the right track, and I think we need to go into
this work with an open mind.

We need a forum that can act quickly to mobilize
the collective support of Member States for the
United Nations mandates and missions. We also
need to consider the circumstances in which the
Peacebuilding Commission can be particularly useful.
A more flexible, dynamic and strategically oriented
Commission could be more relevant to a broader range
of situations in today's world. These and other ideas
are included in the United Nations system's input to the
review. I hope Council members will give them their
serious consideration. The United Nations system is
committed to increasing its support to and engagement
with a dynamic, flexible and focused Peacebuilding
Commission.

The Council's review will coincide with the
Secretary-General's review of peace operations and
the global study to assess progress in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). The work and outcomes of
these three reviews and their follow-up should be
complementary and, in my view, mutually reinforcing.
These reviews come at a time of complex threats to
peace, security and development. They provide us with
an important opportunity to sharpen and reshape our
thinking and our actions.

We owe it to the people we serve to ensure that
we are bold, ambitious and, above all, effective in
our approach to modern-day peacebuilding. I urge
Member States to be open, candid and constructive in
their assessment of the peacebuilding challenges and
potentials. I would add that, when we look at the life
of a conflict, we have a tendency to focus on its middle
section * when it is in the CNN stage, the stage of
suffering, when urgent decisions are being taken on
peacekeeping operations. I think we all need to consider
extending that attention to the pre-stage and the post-
stage. In the life of a conflict, we should start to act
when we discover the first vibrations on the ground.
And then, at the end of the conflict, with ceasefires
and so forth, as with a convalescing patient we need to
know that there is post-conflict work to be done so that
we do not relapse into a vicious circle.

We need a solid commitment from all sides to fulfil
the original vision for the peacebuilding structures
and to improve the United Nations system's support
for countries emerging from conflict. This could make
the crucial difference between peace or continuing
conflict for millions of people around the world. This is
an opportunity that the United Nations and its Member
States should not miss.

