Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I want to join you, Sir, and
the representative of Italy in expressing our solidarity
with Chad and in condemning the terrorist attack in
northern Mali. What took place highlights the reason
why the mission went to the region. It also highlights the
need once again for robust international cooperation.

I wish to express our deep appreciation to the French
presidency for its initiative to organize the Security
Council mission to States of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-S Sahel). The visit to three of the G-5 Sahel
countries - Mali, Mauritania and Burkina Faso - was
not only very successful, but also an eye-opener. In our
view, the visit undoubtedly has helped confirm the
value of Security Council missions. In fact, we already
knew the extent to which the situation faced by the G-5
Sahel States was grim, but seeing is believing. It is
impossible to deny the particular and critical challenges
that some of the countries are facing. What is needed is
an urgent response, both from the Security Council and
the international community, before the tipping point
is reached.

The margin between where they are now and the
tipping point is razor-thin. What could give relief to
the G-5 Sahel countries is a holistic approach with a
purview covering climate change, environmental issues
and general development matters. There is simply no
gainsaying the fact that the absolute prevalence of
insecurity caused by terrorism and trafficking in
drugs and persons, which fuel terrorism, have become
scourges that those countries are hardly in a position
to contain, let alone reverse, without the support of the
international community. Therefore, the fact that there
is an urgent need for practical solidarity with those
countries is self-evident. Failure to come up with an
appropriate positive response would be disastrous and
have huge implications for the international community,
and that is also obvious.

The readiness of the G-5 Sahel States to do their
share and discharge their responsibilities is also
undeniable. In all three countries, the Security Council
mission was received with open arms and was able
to talk with the relevant officials, including their
respective Heads of State and Government, who were
not frugal with their time.

I should like to turn to the last leg of the trip, in
Burkina Faso, which I had the privilege of leading. It
was very symbolic ofthe purpose of our mission that we
headed for Ouagadougou from the governorate of Mopti,
in central Mali, where our last meeting was held with a
representative of civil society. It brought home to us, in
a very saddening manner, the extent to which the people
of the region feel that they have no security - even
when going to the market. The Government of Burkina
Faso made the point of highlighting why we were there
by taking us immediately upon our arrival to the site
of the 13 August terrorist attack, in which 19 people
were killed and 22, including security personnel, were
wounded. The Homeland Security Minister received us
there and subsequently stayed with us until the end of
our visit.

Although the initial plan was to directly hold
discussions with the President of the Republic, we had
an opportunity to interact with his Cabinet Ministers,
which was coordinated by the Foreign Minister. The
Cabinet Ministers briefed Council members on how the
security crisis in the neighbouring Republic of Mali to
the north is affecting social and economic development
in the already long-neglected part of Burkina Faso.
They recounted the deliberate and targeted burning of
schools and the killing and intimidation of teachers by
terrorists and transnational criminals. We were told that
13 schools and two higher-level training institutions
were not able to provide services because they were
either totally destroyed or burned down. Terrorists, they
said, were working around the clock to end the presence
of service providers with the objective of undermining
State authority.

The Ministers also emphasized that terrorist
attacks had been increasing in frequency during 2016
and 2017, including through the use of improvised
explosive devices as well as other makeshift mines,
which are usually very difficult to detect. They told us
that more than 100 people had been killed in about 18
attacks in different parts of the country, mostly in the
North. They underlined the fact that more than 85 per
cent of those attacks came directly from Mali. The
Minister of Homeland Security described the Burkina
Faso, Mali and Niger border triangle, in particular, as
highly volatile.

One salient matter that should not be overlooked
is how well organized and methodical the Burkinabe
leadership is. It has a strategy for addressing the
challenge that the country and the region are facing.
Council members were briefed on what the Government
is doing to address the menace of terrorism, including
through efforts to eliminate conditions that are
conducive to terrorism and the activities of traffickers
and transnational criminals, with a focus on the
Sahelian region of the country. In that connection, the
Minister of Economy stressed that a separate policy
and socioeconomic development strategy and plan
are being prepared to address the crushing inequality
in the Sahelian region. She also emphasized that as
far as its resources allowed, the country was building
the capacity of its security forces by ensuring access
to adequate equipment and training and providing
reasonably effective administrative services in every
part of the country, with special focus on the remote
northern and north-eastern border areas. However,
she also said that the burden has been too heavy, the
negative impact on the economy has been huge and the
need for international cooperation is critical.

Council members then held a fruitful interactive
dialogue with the President, who said that the only way
that they will be able to succeed in the fight against
the challenges of terrorism is through coordination
with other countries of the region. He emphasized the
importance of the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel and
how critical it has become to their efforts, the same
narrative that we heard both in Mali and Mauritania.
He also informed us that his Government was actively
participating in establishing strategic security corridors
based on the shared objective of defeating terrorism.

With respect to the four options forwarded by the
Secretary-General, the President made it clear that his
choice is option one. He argued that after the Force's
operationalization they would need sustainable and
determined support. In terms of the challenges his
country faces, he emphasized that every country of
the region, not just his own, suffers from the generally
porous borders, which have become convenient for
terrorists and criminals. He said that there was no
alternative to the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel, urged
for its speedy deployment and appealed to the Council
for meaningful support as soon as possible. He
underlined the importance of establishing a sustainable
funding mechanism and creating a dedicated support
office to be financed through United Nations assessed
contributions. He reminded Council members that the
problem of the Sahel region is an international crisis
that should receive international attention and an
international response.
In conclusion, as I said at the beginning, the visit
was both timely and very necessary. The countries of
the Group of Five for the Sahel have shown that they
are determined to carry the burden of the problem as
far as their capacity allows. Each has already made a
first contribution of €10 million. Our visit to the Force
headquarters in Sevare showed us the degree of its
readiness to get up and get going. The infrastructure
there is ready, but there is a great need for support,
and there can be no arguing that it is a need that the
Security Council and the international community
have a responsibility to respond to. I should add that we
constantly reminded our interlocutors of the value of
ownership and action on their part, in line with what is
stated in the Mission's terms of reference.

