Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I would first like to
welcome your presence, Mr. President, at this debate
and to congratulate you on your assumption of your
duties as President for the month of January. I wish you
every success in your tenure. In that regard, I would
also like to congratulate you for your innovative choice
of this particular item for an open debate. I would also
like to take this opportunity to welcome the Foreign
Minister of Haiti to our deliberations, as well as to say
that I look forward to a fruitful discussion and
conclusion of our meeting today.

Greece fully associates itself with the statement
to be made later in the debate by the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union.

On the surface, it would appear that there is not
much that links Greece and Haiti together; one would
be forgiven for thinking that the two countries are
worlds apart. However, I would like to draw the
Council's attention to the fact that Haiti was the first
country to recognize the Greek revolution and the
creation of the modern Greek State nearly two
centuries ago - something which the Greek people
remember to this day. It is only fitting, therefore, that
the very first day of Greece's membership of the
Security Council - 1 January - coincided with
Haiti's national day, and that Greece is addressing the
Security Council at a public meeting, for the first time
as a non-permanent member, on the situation in Haiti.

Haiti has been through much in recent years and
has endured a great deal of suffering, not least as a
result of the natural disasters that have hit the island.
The international community has shown - and I
believe it will continue to show - support for the
Haitian people so that they may realize their
aspirations in a secure and stable environment.

The Greek Government expresses its support for
the efforts of the Transitional Government in
supporting the political process of national dialogue
and reconciliation. It is important that this dialogue
continue unhindered, with the participation of all sides,
so that a substantial proportion of the electorate can
participate in the forthcoming local, legislative and
presidential elections.

The priority should be to improve the security
situation on the ground. That will not only have
beneficial results with respect to the disbursement of
economic assistance, but also pave the way for long-
term development, which is currently facing obstacles,
and help to minimize human rights violations. A
positive step towards improving the security situation
would be a more vigorous approach on the part of the
Transitional Government of Haiti in pursuing the goals
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and
in setting up the relevant national commission without
further delay. The melange of criminal gangs, local
militias and disbanded army and other groups still
rampaging through the streets of Haiti must come to an
end. We encourage the Transitional Government to
promote the rule of law and good governance, as well
as to put an end to impunity. We also believe that
Haiti's constitution must be respected and preserved.

It is imperative that the United Nations stand
firmly by Haiti's side in the crucial months ahead so as
to ensure that a credible and viable process of political
and economic rehabilitation is put in place, starting
with the installation of a democratic Government
elected after fair and free elections.

Long-term involvement is also essential for the
success of United Nations efforts in the country and, in
that regard, Greece welcomes the efforts of the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for Haiti,
Ambassador Valdes. I thank him for the clarity of his
briefing this morning.

Greece also extends its appreciation to the
countries participating in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and notes
with satisfaction that both the military and the civilian
police components have already reached their full
strength. MINUSTAH should now be in a better
position to implement its mandate. Our appreciation is
also extended to each and every individual
participating in the Mission. We utterly condemn all
attacks against MINUSTAH and other international
personnel, especially those carrying out humanitarian
tasks.

The long-term prosperity of Haiti cannot be
achieved without addressing the root causes of human
suffering in the country. Poverty continues to plague
the great majority of the population, and the only way
to reverse the situation is by promoting long-term
economic development. In that regard, Greece
welcomes the reactivation of the Economic and Social
Council's Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti. Likewise,
we welcome the creation of the Core Group. We also
thank the Organization of American States for its
involvement, especially in the field of voter
registration.

In the same context, we are encouraged to see
that the donors conference, which took place in
Washington in July 2004, has so far generated over $1
billion in reconstruction aid.

Greece is doing its part within the European
Union context. In addition, Greece has recently
pledged bilateral assistance to Haiti in an effort to help
the country face its most immediate needs.

Nevertheless, it will be even more encouraging to
see the timely disbursement of donor funds to a people
much in need. We therefore call upon those involved -
the donors, the international financial institutions and
the Transitional Government - to put forward, as soon
as possible, plans for specific projects that will benefit
from the donors' generous contributions.

In closing, I would like to assure the Foreign
Minister of Haiti that Greece stands ready to assist
Haiti on its path to stability and normalcy, both on a
bilateral level and through multilateral forums, such as
the United Nations and the European Union.

