Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): The Permanent
Representative of Pakistan, Ambassador Munir Akram,
apologizes that he has not been able to participate
personally in this important debate. He has requested
that I make this statement on his behalf.

The delegation of Pakistan would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this timely debate on
the situation in Afghanistan. We are very happy to see
Ambassador Brahimi with us once again. His
comprehensive briefing provides the Council with an
objective and a clear basis on which to consider the
evolving situation in Afghanistan. Pakistan deeply
appreciates Ambassador Brahimi's efforts in and for
Afghanistan. We assure him of our continued full
support and cooperation in the discharge of his
challenging and important mandate.
The Secretary-General has observed that the
Bonn process is just that: a process, and a long one. We
are satisfied that this process has continued to move
ahead and that the steps envisaged therein have thus far
been implemented in a timely manner. The fact that the
Bonn process has remained on track during these six
short months is in no small measure due to the energy
and the perseverance of Ambassador Brahimi. It is also
the accomplishment of the Afghan people. It is
Pakistan's hope that this process will continue to
advance despite the challenges that are being
confronted.

In this context, we welcome the most recent
landmarks: the convening of the Emergency Loya
Jirga, the establishment of the Afghan transitional
Administration and the election of President Hamid
Karzai as its head. Pakistan fully supports President
Karzai's Government and its efforts to restore peace
and stability to Afghanistan, as well as to the region.

The people of Pakistan, who share so much with
Afghanistan, also share their hope for a better future.
Despite the twists and turns of history, the bonds
between the people of Pakistan and the people of
Afghanistan remain unbreakable and irrevocable. We
will continue to work with our Afghan brothers for the
restoration and promotion of peace and for the
reconstruction and rehabilitation of Afghanistan.

Despite its resources constraints, Pakistan is
trying to do all that it can to help in the reconstruction
and rehabilitation of Afghanistan. We pledged $100
million for Afghanistan at the Tokyo Conference. Some
of the financial assistance has already been extended.
The bilateral cooperation between Pakistan and
Afghanistan in various fields, including road
construction, telecommunications, postal services,
media development and power generation is continuing
and expanding.

Within the cooperative process initiated by the
international community, Pakistan has offered facilities
and equipment to train the Afghan army and police, as
well as to strengthen Afghanistan's judicial system and
narcotics control mechanisms. We have also offered
special training in the field of demining.

We fully understand that a priority goal of the
international community remains the elimination from
Afghanistan of Al Qaeda and related terrorists.
Pakistan supports the ongoing operations of the
international coalition towards that end. We regret that
accidental civilian casualties have occurred and
appreciate the corrective efforts undertaken. Pakistan is
engaged, with the cooperation of the United States and
other coalition members, in preventing the escape of Al
Qaeda and Taliban elements across the border into
Pakistan, and in tracking and capturing terrorist
elements who may have been able to cross the border.
We have had considerable success in this endeavour:
hundreds of Al Qaeda and Taliban elements have been
captured. The effectiveness of our operations is
obviously indispensable for the success of the
coalition's operations within Afghanistan. We hope this
operation will be successfully completed in the near
future.

In the war against terrorism, it is Pakistan that,
after Afghanistan, has made the greatest sacrifices in
blood and tears. Last week, in one operation alone in
our border region, Pakistan lost 10 men, adding to an
equal number of earlier casualties in clashes with
terrorist elements seeking to cross the frontier. Despite
these sacrifices and some anticipated domestic
difficulties, President Musharraf and his Government
have not flinched or faltered in supporting the
campaign to root out Al Qaeda and other terrorist
elements from Afghanistan and the entire region.

Pakistan's continuing contribution and
cooperation have been extended and sustained despite
the subversive endeavours of our eastern neighbour to
utilize Pakistan's preoccupation with the war against
terrorism for its own narrow objectives. Pakistan has
been obliged to deploy the largest part of its forces
along its eastern border and along the United Nations-
supervised Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir to
respond to the threat of war which has been held out
against Pakistan. Yet, even at the height of the eastern
tensions a few weeks ago, when war clouds hovered
over South Asia, Pakistan did not move its forces
engaged in the anti-terrorist operations along the
Afghanistan border. As soon as the eastern threat
subsided somewhat, Pakistan went ahead with the
planned operational reinforcements along the western
frontiers.

Indeed, the Pakistan armed forces are engaged in
a comprehensive operation to evoke full local
cooperation in Pakistan's tribal areas in tracing and
eradicating any Al Qaeda and other terrorist elements,
including, through steps to enhance the road and
communication networks and to implement related
development projects.

While we, in Pakistan, share the hopes and
dreams of the Afghan people, we also share some of
their most serious concerns. These concerns have been
voiced repeatedly by Secretary-General Kofi Annan as
well as by Ambassador Brahimi. Everyone
acknowledges that security is key to promoting peace
and stability in Afghanistan, to enabling the delivery of
humanitarian relief to displaced and destitute people in
Afghanistan, to encouraging the early return of Afghan
refugees and to implementing plans for the economic
and social reconstruction of Afghanistan. Without
adequate security there can be no peace, or stability, or
prosperity. It must be admitted that it has not been
possible so far to offer conditions of security to all
parts of Afghanistan. Several regions are visibly
insecure, infested with bandits and outlaws. Tens of
thousands of fighters remain under arms across the
country. Most of them are loyal to various regional,
tribal or factional leaders. Such regional influentials
appear to have consolidated their grip on power in
recent months, denying the Transitional Administration
in Kabul the authority to maintain order or raise
revenues.

We welcome the determined efforts being made
by President Karzai to assert the writ of the central
Government and wish him continued success in that
important endeavour. According to various reports,
insecurity, especially in the north and the east, is
hampering the provision of relief and the return of
refugees. The recent barbarous attacks against relief
workers illustrate the nature of the environment.
Reports of continued fighting between rival factions in
various provinces are also cause for concern. The
tragic assassination of Vice-President Haji Abdul Qadir
was a vivid and tragic indicator of the fragility of the
security situation, even in Kabul. Pakistan once again
expresses its sorrow at the untimely demise of Haji
Abdul Qadir, a patriotic Afghan whose friendship for
our people was abundant and consistent. His death is a
severe loss for Afghanistan, for the Transitional
Administration and for the effort to secure orderly
implementation of the political process of balanced
governance envisaged in the Bonn Agreement.

We have before us two alternatives to address the
issue of security. The first is to expand the size of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and
extend its mandate at least to the other major cities of
Afghanistan. That option, which has been favoured by
Ambassador Brahimi and the Secretary-General, and
for which Mr. Karzai has also pleaded, deserves
renewed consideration in the context of the evolving
security environment in Afghanistan.

The second route, of creating an indigenous
Afghan army and police force, will no doubt be
indispensable in the long term to provide the Afghan
central Government with the ability to effectively rule
the country. However, the process of constituting the
national army and police force, a process to which
Pakistan is actively contributing, will take time. And
time may not be available to ensure that centrifugal
forces do not once again disrupt the process of
providing effective security to all parts of Afghanistan
and fully restoring the unity and territorial integrity of
the country. In that context, the ethnic resentments and
tribal rivalries which have recently become more vocal
and visible in practice indicate the shortcomings of this
option as a means to deal with immediate security
problems. If the expansion and extension of ISAF is
not considered feasible immediately, it is incumbent on
the Security Council and on the members of the
international coalition operating in Afghanistan to
consider other effective modalities to provide security
to all regions of the country. We believe that such
alternative modalities can be established, even on an ad
hoc basis, to ensure credible conditions of security for
all parts of Afghanistan.

Pakistan attaches singular importance to the
commitment in the Bonn Agreement to non-
interference in Afghanistan's internal affairs. Pakistan
has scrupulously observed this injunction. We believe
that other immediate neighbours of Afghanistan are
also living up to this commitment. It would be
unfortunate, however, if Afghanistan were now
destabilized by the continuing and blatant interference
of a country which is not Afghanistan's immediate
neighbour, but which sees new opportunities to fish in
troubled waters as a means to advance its tactical or
strategic objectives. That country does not seem to care
whether its partisan contribution erodes the process of
restoring peace and stability to Afghanistan as
envisaged in the Bonn process. We trust that the
Security Council will give adequate consideration to
ending such attempts to destabilize Afghanistan and to
poison its relations with one of its immediate
neighbours. Indeed, endeavours by any external Power
to sponsor its favourites in Afghanistan - and, much
worse, to use them against other regional countries -
must be opposed and eliminated, once and for all, by
the international community. It is time to build a
comprehensive structure of security for Afghanistan.

While we welcome the progress made in the
Bonn process, we must not forget the Tokyo process.
Insecurity should not contribute to donor fatigue.
Donor vigour should complement security
enhancement. The international community must fulfil
the pledges made at the Tokyo donors Conference, as
well as at subsequent meetings, in order to set the
people of Afghanistan firmly on the path of
development.

We agree with the concerns that Ambassador
Brahimi recently shared with donors in Geneva.
Without firm and sustained economic and humanitarian
support, it will be difficult for the Transitional
Administration to provide relief or reconstruction to all
parts of Afghanistan. While security is essential for the
provision of such relief and reconstruction, the revival
of economic activity and of employment opportunities
is equally vital to restore a climate of normalcy and to
create incentives for restoring peace and for supporting
the Bonn political process. Donors must continue to
support the Afghan Administration and to consolidate
the progress achieved thus far. This window of
opportunity may not be open indefinitely.

In addition to donor assistance, Afghanistan's
economic and social reconstruction can be significantly
advanced through regional cooperation. We welcome
the recent initiative of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) Administrator, Mr. Mark Malloch
Brown, to promote economic cooperation among
Pakistan, Iran and Afghanistan, as well as with other
Asian members of the Economic Cooperation
Organization. Pakistan believes that implementation of
the recent agreement concluded among Turkmenistan,
Afghanistan and Pakistan on a gas pipeline could
provide significant revenues and employment
opportunities for Afghanistan, within broader
progressive and cooperative regional development. We
urge the international community to extend its support
to a broader process of cooperative regional
development that can help to foster peace and security
as well as greater prosperity in Afghanistan and the
entire region.

We also urge the international community to
maintain its support for humanitarian relief and refugee
repatriation in Afghanistan, together with the
assistance being provided for Afghanistan's
reconstruction. Pakistan is gratified that more than 1
million Afghan refugees have returned home in recent
months. We hope that the trend of voluntary refugee
return will continue. We also hope that the financial
shortfall facing the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food
Programme and other international organizations will
soon be overcome. We certainly hope that the
international community will not forget the more than 2
million Afghan refugees who still remain in my
country. Pakistan has been supporting millions of
Afghan refugees for the past two decades from its own
meagre resources and without any appreciable
assistance from the outside world. Those refugees, now
more than ever, deserve adequate and sustained support
from the international community to enable them to
return to their homes in security and honour.

The people of Afghanistan and the international
community have come a long way in the past six
months. Once at war with itself, Afghanistan is now on
the road to peace and progress. The international
community owes a debt to those who have made that
possible, not least to Ambassador Brahimi and his
collaborators in Afghanistan. However, there can be no
room for complacency. The road to peace and stability
in Afghanistan is littered with hurdles and challenges.
The Secretary-General has observed that, as the peace
process moves forward, there are bound to be new
problems and perhaps even setbacks. Nevertheless, we
must continue to work together on all fronts with
patience and determination to ensure that peace is
consolidated and stability achieved. That will be no
easy task. It has been said that those who fail to learn
from history are bound to repeat it. We must not let that
happen in Afghanistan. The international community
must not walk away from Afghanistan after the task of
eradicating terrorism is completed.

