Ms. Lind (Estonia): First, I want to warmly
thank today's briefers and, in particular, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui, for her briefing and her tireless efforts. We
also thank the Malaysian presidency for organizing this
important debate.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

We would like to thank the Secretary- General for his
report (S/2015/409), which provides a solid - although
deeply concerning - basis for today's debate.

It is extremely worrying that violence rose to
unprecedented levels in 2014, leading to a dramatic
increase in grave violations against children. Last
year was full of challenges for the protection of tens
of millions of children growing up in, among other
countries, the Central African Republic, Iraq, Nigeria,
South Sudan, Syria and, most recently, in Yemen, where
the security situation has deteriorated.

We strongly support the initiative of Malaysia to
introduce the abduction of children as an additional
criterion in the annexes to the Secretary-General's
reports on children and armed conflict. The abduction
of children is unfortunately indeed a prevalent feature
of contemporary armed conflict. It is used as a tactic of
war to terrorize, suppress and humiliate communities.
According to the Secretary-General's report, in Iraq
and Syria alone, more than 1,000 girls and boys were
abducted by the Islamic State in the Levant in 2014.
In that regard, we welcome the adoption of resolution
2225 (2015) in the Council today, which adds abduction
as a trigger for listing. As a next step, we need to ensure
that child-protection provisions are incorporated in the
most efficient way into peace processes, negotiations
and ceasefires.

A considerable number of violations against
children are carried out by non-State armed groups,
which was one of the focuses of our previous debate
on the subject (see S/PV.7414). We commend the
work of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Zerrougui in addressing the challenging task
of engaging with armed groups, and the case-by-case
approach aimed at ending the recruitment and use of
children. However, more needs to be done by all those
concerned.

I would also like to draw attention to the situation
in Ukraine, as 1.7 million children there are affected
by the conflict. Over 68 children had been killed and
176 wounded in eastern Ukraine as of the end of March
2014, and the actual numbers are probably higher. We
would ask the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict to look into
those grave violations against children in Ukraine.

We see impunity as clearly one of the main reasons
for the recurrence of those grave violations against
children. It is only by consistent prosecution that we
can deter the commission of such crimes. In order to
achieve that, we reiterate the important role of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in situations where
States are unable or unwilling to bring perpetrators
to justice domestically. In order to make good on
its commitment to deal effectively with persistent
perpetrators, the Council could increase pressure on
them by including violations against children in the
mandate of all sanctions committees and by including
individuals sought by the ICC on sanctions lists. In
the context of today's discussion, we also welcome
the Court's efforts in preparing a policy paper on the
protection of children. However, when talking about
accountability, we should not close our eyes to actions
committed by the United Nations system personnel. All
Violations by United Nations staff and United Nations
peacekeeping troops need to be addressed.

Finally, allow me to mention Estonia's contribution
to the advancement of the children and armed conflict
agenda. We recently supported UNICEF's work in South
Sudan, the Central African Republic, Gaza, Syria and
Somalia. I am glad to announce that Estonia will support
the Office of the Secretary-General on Children and
Armed Conflict this year with a contribution of€30,000.
Children deserve a safe and happy environment to grow
up in. If the Organization - and by that I mean us,
its Members - can do something to ensure that goal,
we should not hesitate to seize every opportunity to do
so. I hope that today's debate represents a tangible step
forward in that regard.

