Resolution 1325 (2000) symbolizes an important milestone in the United Nations recognition of the role that women should play in decision-making and shaping policy, both nationally and internationally, in matters regarding peace and security. By urging Member States to increase the participation of women at all levels of decision-making, the resolution took an important step towards gender equity. But just as importantly, it took an important step towards fulfilling the United Nations mandated purpose of promoting peace and security. There can be no real security or sustainable peace without women's direct involvement. Much has been written about the strong correlation between inclusiveness and creating long-lasting, sustainable peace. Women must be a part of the prevention of conflicts, dispute resolution, peace processes and negotiations, peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction. It is imperative that we use all the tools in our collective box to assure the success of peace efforts. This includes the meaningful inclusion of women in these efforts. The resolution and the progress that it has produced over the past 20 years should serve as a model for the way all decision-making bodies should be shaped. Women add a unique and important perspective on all aspects of society. Hearing and including women's voices and views leads to better and more inclusive policymaking and the adoption of decisions and laws that are better for everyone. Ensuring that all countries implement the resolution is a first, important step. The next step is ensuring that all countries embrace its spirit as well. The participation of women in peace and security is not enough. Their voice must be heard everywhere. In Israel, female leadership is prevalent across all decision-making bodies. Women serve as generals and top security officials in our defence forces, as ministers in our Cabinet and members of our Parliament, and as executives in our boardrooms. Israel has achieved gender parity in its judicial system, with 51 per cent of the judges being women, including Israel's Chief Justice. We are also proud of Israel's achievements on gender issues on the legislative front. Just recently, in October of this year, our Cabinet adopted a decision setting a goal that 50 per cent of senior positions in civil service should be occupied by women by the year 2023. Israel was the first country to adopt domestic legislation based on resolution 1325 (2000), calling for increased representation of women from the various diverse sectors of Israeli society in public committees and teams that receive Government funding. In Israel and around the world, women serve on the front-lines of our response to the coronavirus disease pandemic. They serve as officers in top ranks of the Israeli military unit tasked with fighting the pandemic, as doctors and nurses and as local leaders, psychologists and social workers, and as educators. The participation of women in forming our national response plans is critical to ensuring a sustainable and effective recovery. In the same way that resolution 1325 (2000) has paved the way towards the increased inclusion of women in peace and security over the past 20 years, it must inspire a change in the way that we make key decisions that will shape our societies over the next 20 years.
