Ms. Meitzad (Israel): As I take the floor for the
last time, I would like to thank my colleagues for
the important discussions and the exchange of views
in this forum. I would like to respond to some of the
comments made earlier here today and make some
general observations.

For the past three years. I have listened closely to
the representatives of certain States Members, who
have repeatedly taken the floor during open debates on
the Middle East, to reiterate inaccurate and fabricated
data or perpetuate the biased talking points embellished
with false accusations. As it is important to maintain
open dialogue to better address real pressing issues
that present challenges for every one of our countries,
such biased and, at times, hateful statements, as usually
exemplified by Iran, only erode this institution's
founding principles and values. Regrettably, throughout
my time here, the open debate on the Middle East has
not been used as a platform for any real discussion
involving honesty or self-awareness, especially when
certain representatives from the Middle East region
take the floor.

During the past three years, I have witnessed
the musical-chair games in which some delegations
claiming to be in favour of a diplomatic solution have
refused to be seated next to an Israeli representative
at the Security Council table. How can we take this
debate seriously when some ban the concept of sitting
together at the same table? Throughout my time here,
I have always been puzzled by those Security Council
members who believe they know best and what is good
for the region without discussing it with Israel even
once. I wonder what is so intimidating about hearing
Israel's views. What do they gain from ignoring Israel's
opinion and stance, unless such initiatives were never
meant to bring about a real solution? For me, it is
common sense that if one seeks to take real initiative,
one should first and foremost reach out to the other side
him or herself.

Israel believes that any agreement must originate
from bilateral and direct negotiations between the two
sides. The Security Council cannot act as a substitute
for the sides. Therefore, those who wish to truly
move the political process forward should call on the
Palestinians to return to the negotiating table instead of
supporting these profoundly ineffectual open debates.
I know that many in this Chamber share the view and
understanding that these debates do not strive to reach or
promote a real peace agreement, serve the Palestinians
real interests or bolster the United Nations reputation. I
hope that the day will come when these representatives
will speak up and that this debate will cease to be
guided by double-standard principles with regard to
Israel. Only then will a real constructive debate be able
to take place - a debate that will actually promote a
solution for both sides.

The meeting rose at 3.30pm.
