Mr. Fall (spoke in French): Members of the
Council will recall that on 10 April, following the
Mission I had the privilege of leading to West Africa, I
had a first opportunity to brief the Council on that
Mission and to share the details of its terms of
reference, its planning, its unfolding, and its major
findings.

We have often described the West African project
as consisting of three essential aspects: the Mission
itself, the report and, finally, the implementation of the
recommendations. We could say that today we are at
the most critical phase of this three-part project. That
is, the time has come to implement the
recommendations contained in the report.

This is why the Task Force that was set up by the
Secretary-General even before sending the Mission to
West Africa is in the process of continuing to meet and
reviewing the practical ways and means of
implementing the recommendations. This is also why
we have been in communication with the major
potential partners and have sought their viewpoints on
the implementation of the recommendations so that
from the outset there can be a dialogue with all those
involved in implementing the Mission's
recommendations.

The recommendations that have been submitted
to the Council cover several aspects. Some of them
come within the direct purview of the Security Council,
and today I would like to focus my briefing on the
recommendations that are of direct interest to the
Security Council. Our departments, services and
agencies are currently identifying who can be
responsible for which recommendations, in accordance
with what timetable and on the basis of what practical
modalities.
In this connection, I would like to emphasize
three categories of recommendations that are of direct
interest to the Security Council. The first is
recommendations on the impact of conflicts on four
West African countries, most of which are to be found
in the Mano River Union. Thus, I think that these
recommendations are complementary to the briefings
just made by my colleagues. The second category of
recommendations includes institutional arrangements
made by the Inter-Agency Mission. Finally, the third
category of recommendations relates to issues that
transcend borders and that call for the Security
Council's special attention.

The first category relates primarily to the current
deadlock in the dialogue among the various heads of
State in the Mano River subregion. The Council will
recall that, as Under-Secretary-General Guehenno has
just said, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) recently held a summit in Abuja,
and it established a mediation committee at the level of
heads of State, including those of Mali, Togo and
Nigeria. These heads of State were chosen because
