Mr. Baja (Philippines): We join colleagues in
expressing our condolences and sympathy to the
Russian Government and to the victims of the terrible
act of terrorism in Grozny.

We thank Mr. Kamalesh Sharma for his
comprehensive briefing.

This is a crucial period for Timor-Leste. Much
has been achieved by the people in building their
nation, with the help of the international community.
However, much remains to be done. After all, nation-
building requires time, efforts and commitment in
order for the process to bear fruit. As the mandate of
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) expires on 20 May, that is foremost in our
minds.

In defining the new mandate of UNMISET, the
Secretary-General's report (S/2004/333) provides us
with important factors to consider. In the report, the
peace and security situation in Timor-Leste is
characterized as having remained generally "calm and
peaceful during the reporting period" (para. 45). The
proposal for a military component has been justified as
responding to exceptional situations that exceed the
capacity of Timor-Leste security agencies to undertake
preventive action to promote public order and to assist
in the provision of security to United Nations premises
and personnel there. On the basis of those
justifications, my delegation fully supports the
Secretary-General's recommendation to extend
UNMISET for a further one-year consolidation phase.

The Philippines agrees with the three main
elements of the role of UNMISET during that
consolidation phase: support for public administration
and justice in Timor-Leste; support for the
development of law enforcement; and support for the
security and stability of Timor-Leste. As a country
contributing to UNMISET, my country stands ready to
provide support in the areas identified as requiring
UNMISET's support in the consolidation phase.

The Timor-Leste authorities and the Timorese
have always demonstrated their commitment to
fulfilling their responsibilities in nation-building,
notwithstanding their very limited capacities. The
presence at this meeting of the Council of Senior
Minister Ana Pessoa further mirrors that commitment.
My delegation is confident that the extension of
UNMISET under the Secretary-General's proposed
plan will contribute substantially to bringing Timor-
Leste closer to self-sufficiency and to ensuring
sustainable peace and stability in the country. However,
my delegation's optimism is tempered by the realistic
assessment that even after a one-year extension of
UNMISET for a consolidation phase, many areas will
still need further support and assistance.

Therefore, my delegation particularly appreciates,
and wishes to invite attention to, the very forward-
looking component of the report on the requirements
remaining after May 2005. It may be timely to bear in
mind at this point that peace in Timor-Leste - as in
any other country - is predicated on just social and
economic development. The report notes the limited
revenue and widespread poverty in Timor-Leste,
circumstances which continue to pose severe
constraints on the country's social and economic
development. While the forthcoming conference of
development partners, to be held in Dili on 19 May,
could provide some donor assistance, Timor-Leste's
development should be pursued by generating more
revenues from its own natural resources and industries.

All the efforts made and gains achieved by
UNMISET and the international community in ending
the conflict and in nation-building in Timor-Leste
would be for naught if, in the end, Timor-Leste's self-
sufficiency could not be assured or sustained. Timor-
Leste's immediate neighbours and the other countries
in the region, the Philippines included, should be ready
to go the extra mile in providing the appropriate
support to Timor-Leste, not only to preserve but also to
further the dividends of peace in the country.

The essential role of Timor-Leste's partners in the
country's long-term development and the entire
region's stability is a crucial one. When we consider
the situation there, it may be relevant to note that some
of the lessons learned have been applied and could be
applied to other United Nations operations. United
Nations involvement and regional leadership there
were successful because they had wide domestic
support. United Nations efforts were focused on getting
the cooperation of Indonesia, and the accent was on
persuasion and underscoring the realities on the
ground.

The Timor-Leste experience is one of the best
examples of consolidated action among the Council,
the Secretary-General, regional players led by the
Association of South-East Asian Nations, Australia and
Japan, and the international community at large. We
recognize Ambassador Sharma's role in that regard. As
the Security Council's involvement recedes, the rest of
the United Nations system will need to take up the
challenge of ensuring successful post-conflict recovery
in Timor-Leste.

