The President (spoke in Russian): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and of Germany in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, With the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the consideration of the
item without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) and Mr.
Matussek (Germany) took seats at the Council
table.

The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Javier Solana,
High Representative for the Common Foreign and
Security Policy, Secretary-General of the Council of
the European Union.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Javier Solana to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr.
Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
2

Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr.
Ibrahim Gambari, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

On behalf of the members of the Security
Council, I should like to welcome the participation in
today's meeting of Javier Solana, High Representative
for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the
European Union, Secretary-General of the Council of
the European Union, and to wish him every success in
his important work during 2007.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains a focus of attention for the Security
Council. The country's first democratic elections in 40
years have resulted in the election of a President and
the formation of a representative National Assembly.

A new chapter is beginning in the history of the
country. On the agenda now are local elections, which
should take place by the end of 2007. All of these
positive changes are the result of coordinated efforts on
the part of the international community, first and
foremost by the United Nations and its Security
Council, the African Union, the European Union and
other regional organizations.

An important contribution to the success of the
Congolese peace process was also made by the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC). Working jointly
with the European Union, which was authorized by
Security Council resolution 1671 (2006) to deploy a
force in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
MONUC has assisted the Government in its efforts to
ensure safety and security and the rule of law in the
country.

At this meeting, we will hear briefings by Mr.
Javier Solana, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno and Mr.
Ibrahim Gambari.

Prior to those briefings, I shall first invite the
representative of Germany to take the floor.


