Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): First of all, I thank those members of the Security Council who have expressed their strong solidarity with Ukraine in the face of the ongoing Russian aggression. I also express our appreciation for the informative briefings today. When the Russian Federation called for a Council meeting on the occasion of the fifth anniversary of the package of measures, the third component of the Minsk agreements, one might have believed that Russia finally planned to report to the Council that it was going to honour the agreements made in this very Chamber in 2015. Although not adopted under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, resolution 2202 (2015) has been a very important message from the Council to all parties to implement the agreements, most importantto respect a comprehensive ceasefire. Would it make any difference if the Council then, in 2015, had legal grounds to adopt a mandatory document under Chapter VII? If the document had been endowed with a different legal nature, would that be a compelling enough reason for the Russian Federation to implement it? I have no time to dwell hereon the recent constitutional amendments, as proposed in Moscow, that effectively nullify the mandatory nature of international law and international treaties in the Russian Federation. We continue to believe that the Minsk agreements should be implemented, including by the Russian Federation, which so_ persistently dissociates itself from the agreements. Where do we find ourselves today? It looks as if the answer was given at 6 a.m. local time, when our positions were attacked. The attack carried out today, on the fifth anniversary of the Debaltseve tragedy, is particularly cynical. The Ukrainian armed forces provided an adequate response to that offensive - carried out by the Russian occupation forces with the use of Minsk- proscribed weapons - in the exercise of Ukraine's inherent right to self-defence. It is clear that the Kremlin continues to pursue a strategy of escalation in Donbas, in flagrant violation of Russia's obligations, which they have undertaken as a party to the Minsk agreements. As Ukraine's President, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, said earlier today, "This is an attempt to disrupt the peace process in Donbas, which has started to move forward by small yet incessant steps". The Ukrainian leadership has confirmed that our commitment to ending this war and to adhering to the agreements reached remains unshaken, as does our resolve to repel any acts of armed aggression against Ukraine. In total disregard of the agreements reached in Paris in December last year by the leaders of Ukraine, Russia, France and Germany, over the past two months our positions have been shelled more than 400 times. Since the beginning of the year, 13 Ukrainian servicemen have been killed and almost 60 wounded. Can anyone call this a frozen conflict? Or, perhaps, a low-intensity conflict? It is a war - the only ongoing war in Europe. It is a full-scale war waged by Russian troops and Russia's mercenaries, with weapons and ammunition supplied by the Russian Federation. That is exactly why the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission, as we have learned from Mission reports, is still restricted in terms of freedom of movement and deprived of proper access to the Russian- Ukrainian border. Whenever reminded ofits own Minsk commitments, Russia immediately points a finger at Ukraine, saying that it is we who should hold a so-called direct dialogue with the representatives of two so-called local authorities in the temporarily occupied part of Donbas. But what are they? How local is the recently appointed so-called acting head of government of Donetsk, Vladimir Pashkov? This citizen of Russia, born in Siberia, graduated from the Russian Military Pacific Navy School and, until recently, was the Vice-Governor of the Irkutsk region of Russia. Would members like to know how close Irkutsk is to Donetsk? An insignificant 6,000 kilometres. Still, he is local enough, in the opinion of Moscow, to rule in Donbas and to be involved in talks about Donbas's future. There is no justification for someone from Siberia to be telling us Ukrainians what to do on our own territory. The unfortunate experience of Georgia and Moldova with direct dialogue with the Kremlin's puppets proves that in the best-case scenario this is a road to nowhere; most probably it is a highway leading directly to a trap. As has happened before, Russia is trying to present the victim of its aggression as the perpetrator thereof. That is one of the hallmarks of its information war against Ukraine. Such vain attempts to twist the truth could have been viewed as pathetic and even laughable were it not a cynical insult to the memory of the thousands of my compatriots who have lost their lives defending their land. I pay tribute here to the memory of those protesters who were gunned down in cold blood in Maidan exactly six years ago, on the night of 18 February, which is now often called the Night of the Apocalypse; to the memory of heroes such as Sergiy Kokurin - ethnically Russian, by the way, a father of two, the first Ukrainian citizen killed in Crimea by a Russian sniper on 18 March 2014, during the military phase of the attempted annexation of the peninsula; to the memory of Klavdia Sytnyk, a young single mother, a paramedic who lost her life on the first day of this month under a barrage of Russian mortars while delivering medications to the wounded; and to the memory of 22-year-old Maxim, who waskilled today by bullets supplied by the Russians. My son is about the same age. We should not lose sight of the broader context of the Russian armed aggression against Ukraine. Six years of Russia's military invasion in Donbas have killed more than 13,000 people and wounded more than 27,000. More than 1.4 million residents of Donbas are now internally displaced persons. The areas seized have turned into a land of fear and terror, with local economies destroyed and equipment belonging to enterprises wrecked or moved to Russia. More than 3.4 million people are in need of humanitarian assistance this year. In addition, this territory, according to the United Nations, has already become one of the most mine-contaminated in the world, as has been repeatedly mentioned today. The Russian Federation continues to supply its occupation forces with weapons, regular troops and mercenaries, to the extent that now they dwarf many European armies, with approximately 500 tanks, around 1,000 armoured combat vehicles and almost 800 artillery systems. Just last year, the Russian Federation sent more than 4,000 tons of weapons and munitions into the occupied territories of Donbas. As if that were not enough, Russia is also pursuing illegal passportization in the temporarily occupied territories of Donbas, which has now reached an industrial level - more than 125,000 persons were issued Russian passports there. The east is not the only front line in Ukraine. In the south, as a result of Russia's attempted annexation of Crimea, the peninsula has been turned into a human rights ghetto and a huge military base, upending regional security, as Russia uses it also for its Syria interventions. The number of political hostages has skyrocketed, and Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars have been repressed. A wall of silence has been built around the peninsula, repelling any international scrutiny, in violation of General Assembly resolutions. According to the Secretary-General's report on Crimea and regular reports by the United Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine, Russia is pursuing covert demographic change, bringing in more than 130,000 military and civil servants in and pushing the local population out. The militarization of occupied Crimea is in full gear as Russia is bringing in additional troops and sophisticated weapons. By launching the so-called Crimean bridge, Russia has not only grossly violated international law and its bilateral treaty obligations; it has created huge economic losses for Ukraine and an exponential environmental threat to the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov. Against all odds, Ukraine is working for peace. Achieving peace was a major motivator for Ukrainians who cast their votes in last year's presidential and parliamentary elections. Another demand of the voters continues to be the return of those who have been illegally detained in the occupied territories of Ukraine and in Russia, who have been held in inhumane conditions and frequently tortured for many years. There are still more than 200 Ukrainians held in uncontrolled parts of Donbas, as well as more than 100 Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars in Crimea and Russia. The Ukrainian side successfully initiated two major mutual releases of detainees with Russia and work is ongoing to ensure their "all for all" release. I take this opportunity to call on colleagues to join me in our appeal to the Russian side to stop preventing unhindered access to detainees by the International Committee of the Red Cross and its search for missing persons. We believe that the agreements reached in Paris in December should expedite the resolution of the conflict. A full and comprehensive ceasefire and unhindered access 24/7 for the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission throughout the entire occupied territory would facilitate the process. While the Russian Foreign Minister gives an endless list as to why the next Normandy summit is not feasible, we are working hard and doing our best to make it possible, as agreed by the leaders of the four countries. As President Zelenskyy stressed only a few days ago, we are fully committed to that endeavour, as evidenced by the new initiative on sectoral disengagement, where the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission will play a key verification role to ensure that a given sector is free from illegally armed groups, foreign armed formations and military equipment. We look forward to holding local elections throughout the territory of Ukraine, including its temporarily occupied parts, once the security and political conditions allow it in accordance with Ukrainian legislation and the Copenhagen document of OSCE and under Ukraine's control of its internationally recognized borders.We are working hard to finally bring this Russian- Ukrainian war, which was not started by us, to an end no matter how hard the other side tries to prolong it in order to bleed Ukraine dry. We will continue to achieve sustainable peace exclusively through peaceful diplomatic means in accordance with international law. This can be done only together with the Council, including those members present here who are genuinely interested in bringing about peace in Europe as we are about to celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the end of the Second World War and of the creation of the United Nations. Otherwise, our anniversary gathering in New York this autumn will be a gruesome memorial service rather than a celebration of global peace and security. Today's discussion does not cover all the essential elements for putting an end to Russia's war against Ukraine and, in particular, Russia's temporary occupation of parts of our territory, including Crimea. It was therefore decided that the day after tomorrow the General Assembly will consider the agenda item "Situation in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine", namely, Donbas and Crimea, as it is fundamentally important that the liberation of Ukrainian territory cannot be said to be complete until the last Russian soldier has left the peninsula. I ask members to join us on Thursday in the General Assembly Hall. (spoke in Russian) To conclude my statement, I will speak in Russian so that the Russian people who are not indifferent to the present and the future of their country can hear me. Given that today there was a discussion of a new leader of Donetsk - who is from Irkutsk and who was mentioned by Ambassador Heusgen, among others - I wish to recall the fact that some 90 years ago in a small Siberian town in Irkutsk Oblast with the romantic name Zima a son was born to the family of the Baltic German Alexander Gangnus, son of Rudolph Gangnus. In the context of today's discussion, it is worth noting that he was the poet who, returning from a trip to the West at the height of the Cold War, wrote the well-known poem "Do the Russians Want War?". I think that many have already guessed that I am talking about Yevgeny Yevtushenko, also known as Yevgeny Gangnus. "O, do the Russians long for war? Ask of the soldiers who now lie Beneath the birch trees And let their sons tell you Whether the Russians long for war." I say to the Russian representative that I think that the answer to the question as to whether the Russians want war in the context of today's Russia will be the parade in Red Square on 9 May, when we will see whether parade participants will carry portraits of Stalin - that same Stalin who has been taken out of the mausoleum and seems is not out of people's minds. "But how to root out Stalin's heirs, said Yevtushenko in 1962. He continued: "Let some repeat 'Compose yourself!' over and over again: I shall never find rest. As long as Stalin's heirs exist on earth, It will seem to me That Stalin is still in the mausoleum." Today, when the glorification of Stalin, whose name is being whitewashed, is gaining traction in the Russian Federation, the memorials to that murderer, dictator and perpetrator of the 1930s genocide of the Ukrainian people are burgeoning. I wish to conclude my statement with a question to the Russian representative: Indeed, do the Russians long for war?
