Ms. Gawanas: Allow me to congratulate South
Africa on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I am grateful for
the opportunity to brief the Council on the important
agenda item of peace and security in Africa on the
theme of mobilizing youth towards silencing the guns
in 2020.

At the outset, I would like to emphasize that the core
aspects of that theme, "Mobilizing youth and silencing
the guns in 2020", are not a choice but an absolute
necessity. As a matter of fact, they constitute a crucial
pathway towards the realization of our shared goal of
leaving no one behind and achieving the conflict-free
Africa that we want.

Africa is one of the world's youngest continents.
As is well noted in the concept note for this debate
(S/2019/779, annex), nearly 20 per cent of Africa's
population of 1.2 billion people - approximately
220 million people - are between the ages of 15 and
24. That number is projected to rise to about 350 million
people in the next decade. It is therefore imperative that
Africa harness that demographic divided in silencing
the guns; combatting threats to peace and security,
including radicalization, Violent extremism, terrorism,
sexual violence, xenophobia, cyberinsecurity, organized
crime, forced migration, the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons and politically aligned militias; and
addressing the root causes of those problems, including
exclusion, inequality, high unemployment, poverty and
climate change.

As the main findings of the 2018 study The Missing
Peace: Independent Progress Study on Youth, Peace
and Security highlighted, perspectives on youth are too
often distorted by rampant stereotypes that associate
young people with Violence and conflict. That myth
has triggered a policy panic, producing unnuanced
policy responses and involving hard-fisted security
approaches that are counterproductive and not cost-
effective.

However, it must always be recognized that, in
reality, the large majority of young people in Africa are
peaceful and enterprising. They are agents and partners

of peace. They are the connective tissue of Africa,
and they have a critical contribution to make at the
national, regional and global levels, bridging the silos
of development, human rights, humanitarian issues and
peace and security.

If the right investments in young people are made
and if their social, political and economic engagements
are recognized and nurtured, societies may reap a
peace dividend. For that reason, the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and resolution 2250 (2015)
collectively recognize the important and positive role
that young people play in maintaining and promoting
international peace and security and in advancing
sustainable development.

Similarly, at the continental level, the African
Union Agenda 2063 and the African Youth Charter
recognize the creativity, energy and innovation of
youth as a driving force for the continent's political,
social, cultural and economic transformation. The
onus rests on Governments and their development
partners - including the private sector, civil society
and the United Nations - to work together with youth
to implement those normative instruments in a manner
that is truly meaningful and inclusive of Africa's young
women and men at all stages of conflict prevention and
resolution, peacebuilding, post-conflict recovery and
sustainable development.

For Africa's youth, the time for effective and
meaningful implementation of these instruments is
now. As we have seen across Africa, young people
are demanding urgent action and are making their
voices heard. In Algeria, Burkina Faso, the Sudan,
Tunisia and Zimbabwe, young people are at the centre
of pro-democracy movements, effectively mobilizing,
organizing, leading and clamouring for inclusive
and accountable governance, youth participation and
economic opportunities for all. For instance, in South
Sudan, youth representatives at the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development High-Level Revitalization
Forum secured a place for young people in the country's
broader governance structures through affirmative
quota systems.

On their part, African countries have taken
important steps aimed at removing structural barriers
that prevent or limit the inclusion and active engagement
of young people in peace and security, political
governance and socioeconomic development. Several
African countries have implemented the African Youth
Charter and a few African countries have established
laws and initiated campaigns to promote youth
political participation. Additionally, in several African
countries, peace education is being incorporated into
school curriculums.
At the regional and subregional levels, the African
Union, the regional economic communities and several
regional bodies and non-governmental organizations
are engaging youth in initiatives to silence the guns.
For instance, in the context of the implementation of
the African Union Master Roadmap of Practical Steps
to Silence the Guns in Africa by 2020, the African
Union has taken steps to address the bulging youth
unemployment crisis through the launch of its 1 Million
By 2021 initiative. This is consistent with the African
Plan of Action for Youth Empowerment. The African
Union is also encouraging the creation of platforms
for youth engagement in silencing the guns, including
through social media.

The United Nations system is working in strong
partnership with African Member States, the African
Union, the regional economic communities and other
regional and subregional bodies, as well as with the
African private sector and civil society, to support
meaningful youth inclusion and participation in
conflict prevention and peacebuilding processes. At
the subregional level, the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel supported the Economic
Community of West African States in organizing the
first annual regional youth forum on peace and security
in December 2018, in Ouagadougou.

However, more still needs to be done to bridge the
gap between policies and plans and implementation
to create impact. At the national level, Member States
must invest in protecting and promoting the rights of
children and youth. The commemoration of both the
thirtieth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and Africa Youth Day in November provides
Member States with an opportunity to recommit to
upholding the right of youth to meaningful participation
in peace and security processes.

Youth ministries and national councils should also

be leveraged to promote peace education and culture of
peace programmes in schools This can also be done at
the community level by encouraging youth, as well as
parents, teachers, non-profit organizations and religious
and community leaders, to support the establishment of
youth groups that facilitate dialogue and offer young
people a chance to formulate and voice their opinions.
Similarly, the private sector - especially information
and communication technology companies operating at
the country level - could be engaged to provide free
SMS-based platforms through which young people can
express their views on events in their localities and
contribute to conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
At the regional and subregional levels, the African
Union and regional economic communities should
meaningfully promote the inclusion and participation
of youth in their peace and security programmes and
processes. Building on this, the African Union Special
Envoy on Youth, who is currently sitting right across
from me, should proactively engage Member States
and the regional economic communities to better
understand what is being done, especially in conflict-
affected areas, to advance the youth and peace and
security agenda. I was truly privileged, not long ago,
to engage in an international dialogue with youth, and
I think that is what we should continue to promote.
We need to listen and to hear what the young people
are saying.

The United Nations system, through the country
teams, should ensure and promote synergies between
national plans on the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals and resolutions 2250 (2015) and
1325 (2000). To consolidate the advancement of the
youth, peace and security agenda, the Security Council
might consider creating an informal group of experts
on youth, peace and security that is comprised of a
diverse group ofyoung people and youth organizations.
This aligns with a recommendation contained in the
report "The missing peace: independent progress study
on youth and peace and security" (see S/2018/86).
On the side of the Office of the Special Adviser on
Africa, every May we organize the Africa Dialogue
Series and, next year, we will be organizing the Africa
Dialogue Series on the Silencing the Guns in Africa
by 2020 initiative. We hope that many Member States
will participate.

Lastly, as we fast approach the next African Union
Summit and the launch of the continental campaign on
silencing the guns in February 2020, the United Nations
and the international community should consistently
and systematically engage African youth in all efforts
that contribute to the Silencing the Guns initiative. In
this respect, the three clusters of the Interdepartmental
Task Force on African Affairs on support for the
Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative and the

socioeconomic nexus between peace and development
and security, humanitarian governance, awareness
and communication should devise specific modalities
to include and engage African youth. African youth
are telling us that it is good that we are fighting for
stability, but what they want to see and what we need to
give them are hope and prosperity.

