Mr. Dauth (Australia): Let me at the outset
welcome you, Sir, to New York and congratulate you
on the skill with which Norway, Ambassador Kolby in
particular, has guided the work of the Security Council
this month. Let me at the outset also associate myself
and the Government and people of Australia with the
expressions of regret from our colleagues today at the
appalling natural tragedy which has occurred in
Afghanistan. Ambassador Farhadi has the sympathy
and support of all Australians.

It is very timely and relevant to hold a meeting on
Afghanistan and to do so in a format that allows for the
views of interested Member States to be heard. We all
have a stake in seeing Afghanistan recover and we all
have a responsibility to do what we can to help.

The Secretary-General's report presents a
comprehensive picture of the situation in Afghanistan
and the challenges ahead. Australia agrees with and
welcomes the thrust of the report. We would like to
draw out three aspects which we feel will be important
to the success of the United Nations involvement in
Afghanistan.

First, as to the issue of security, there is for now
no greater risk to Afghanistan's recovery than a
possible lapse back into violence. Ridding Afghanistan
of the terrorist threat posed by Al Qaeda and Taliban
fighters remains the first priority. There can be no true
security in Afghanistan, and indeed beyond, until this
is achieved.

Unfortunately, this of course is not the only
threat. The impulse in Afghanistan to resort to violence
to achieve political and other objectives remains
dangerously real. This impulse can be and is being
dampened by the external military presence, but such a
presence is not the long-term answer. Ideally, one
might want to see the International Security Assistance
Force expanded numerically and extended
geographically. This is to be encouraged, as is an
extension of its mandate beyond the initial six-month
period, but planning also has to be based on realistic
expectations.

Consequently, the responsibility of Afghan
leaders to achieve political progress, as set out in the
Bonn Agreement, is all the greater. The successful
convening of the emergency Loya Jirga must be
pursued with utmost vigour. The risk of a return to
violence is inversely related to the authority and
legitimacy that the Loya Jirga and Interim
Administration achieve. Political progress is also
needed to underpin a unified national military.
Afghanistan's neighbours, including through the "six-
plus-two" group, can help foster a benign security
environment.

This brings me to my second point, and it is this:
political legitimacy does not emerge in a vacuum. It
requires resources and the intelligent deployment of
resources. The Tokyo Conference demonstrated the
willingness of the international community to support
Afghanistan. For its part, Australia has pledged over 40
million Australian dollars. We have also made a
contribution to the Afghan Interim Administration
Fund.

While the international support is welcome, it is
important that funds be made available expeditiously
and that programmes be coordinated. We therefore
fully support the Secretary-General's intention for the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) to have a unified, integrated structure under
the authority and leadership of Mr. Brahimi. It will be
important, too, that political objectives and relief,
recovery and reconstruction activities be mutually
supporting. All United Nations agencies need to work
towards common goals.

International assistance should build up the
strength and authority of Afghan institutions and not
substitute for them. UNAMA should therefore be a
lean operation with a light footprint and with a
decentralized structure to support regional activities.
The ultimate yardstick of UNAMA's success will not
be what it has done, but what it has helped Afghans -
including Afghan civil society and the private sector -
to do.

The third point I want to make also relates to
resources and legitimacy, but from a different
perspective.

The efforts of the international community can
and will be undermined if illegal sources of funds are
available to those who do not accept the authority of
the Afghan State. For this reason, among others, the
fight against the production and trafficking of illicit
drugs needs to be a very high priority. We welcome the
intention to build a strong drug-control unit in the
Afghan police. We also encourage the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme to work closely
with the Interim Administration.

Alternative sources of income need to be found
quickly to avoid a resurgence of criminal activity. Aid
needs to be creatively designed and speedily delivered.
Reconstruction must proceed together with relief and
recovery. The role of the private sector, small and
medium-sized enterprises and traditional trading
capabilities should be emphasized.

Finally, it must be said that no durable peace,
reconciliation and development is possible without
explicit attention to the rights and special needs of
Afghan women and children. These considerations
must be woven into all of UNAMA's activities. Women
should be fully involved in all decisions about
Afghanistan's future. Consistent with resolution 1325
(2000), a gender perspective should inform
Afghanistan's post-conflict reconstruction and peace-
building.

We Australians have no illusions about the
complexity of the task of rebuilding Afghanistan. The
Secretary-General's report does, however, provide a
realistic basis for planning how best the United Nations
can contribute.

