Mrs. Citaku: Let me initially express gratitude
to the Council for giving me the opportunity to inform
the Council firsthand about developments in the last
three months in the Republic of Kosovo, as well as
provide the Council with the observations of the
government of the Republic of Kosovo regarding
8

current political developments. I wish to congratulate,
in alphabetical order, the new Security Council
members: Colombia, Germany, India, Portugal and
South Africa.

I am addressing the Council today in this very
distinguished room, where history has unfolded and
where nations are protected, on the eve of the third
anniversary of the declaration of independence of
Kosovo, an event that marked the birth of a new
country in the European continent. I thank the
members of the Council, the Secretary-General of the
Organization and all his successive Special
Representatives, including Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for
the role they have played in helping our region achieve
long-lasting peace by strengthening the democratic and
multiethnic institutions of a free and democratic
Kosovo.

It is a suitable moment to remind ourselves where
we are today, three years after the democratically
elected representatives of the people of Kosovo came
together to fulfil the will of the people and declare
independence. Since that day, three years ago, the
Kosovo Government has implemented the critical
provisions of the Ahtisaari Plan, the comprehensive
proposal of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
in full accordance with the established international
law and Security Council resolutions, as was
determined by the landmark advisory opinion on the
legality of Kosovo's declaration of independence,
issued in July 2010 by the International Court of
Justice at the request of Serbia.

This was a giant final step in the long and
torturous process of defining Kosovo's final status, and
it came not a moment too soon, for it has not been easy
at all to be living in Kosovo in the last few decades.
We should never forget that Milosevic first began his
campaign of terror in Kosovo in 1989, and it is in
Kosovo that he ended, in the most tragic way
imaginable, his plan for a greater Serbia, taking the
lives of thousands of innocent people. This is now an
established historical fact, as the world has witnessed
and as finally documented in the verdicts of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia in The Hague, making us, the people of
Kosovo, the subject of quintessentially unjust rule for
decades.

All oppressed people and nations around the
globe know what the feeling of liberation, freedom and
11-23603
dignity is. Just to mention one prominent and
exemplary case, the people of South Africa know what
the feeling of freedom is, after apartheid. Therefore it
is easy to understand how we Kosovars were suffering
in those years and how we feel nowadays.

I am speaking here on behalf of the Kosovo
government, as we have always done here, in an open,
frank and transparent way. We have experienced
challenging times during the last couple of months. As
you may recall, the Constitutional Court of Kosovo
ruled that the former president, Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu, was
in breach of the country's Constitution, which made
him promptly resign, in full respect of the procedures
in place. This development affected the political
equilibrium and led to early elections.

Candidates for ministers of Parliament engaged
in a lively electoral campaign, sometimes at the edge
of fair play. Notwithstanding attacks against election
officials in the north of Kosovo, international monitors
reported a calm and remarkably peaceful campaign and
voting day. Furthermore, over 200 complaints were
submitted to elections bodies by all political parties
and civil society organizations, and those were
addressed in record time. Revotes were ordered in
several municipalities, including a manual recounting
of suspected ballot boxes where needed. All procedural
and legal steps were lawfully followed and respected,
in a system of checks and balances, in order to make
sure that complaints were properly addressed and the
will of the people respected. It is of paramount
importance to point out that throughout the entire
process, the system functioned: the state delivered its
services and the appropriate budgetary procedures of a
caretaker government were strictly observed.

We political representatives and leaders of
Kosovo have very attentively listened to and taken due
note of all critiques and suggestions made by our
friends and partner regarding the electoral process.
This represents an important moment of thoughtful
reflection in our endeavours to strengthen our
institutions and democracy. Above all, it should be
stressed that the citizens of Kosovo are firmly
establishing themselves as an energetic, stable and
forward-looking society where individual freedoms are
respected and institutions function in the interest of all
the citizens of Kosovo, irrespective of their ethnic or
religious background.

ll-23603
At the end of the process, all political parties in
Kosovo have accepted the final results. Yesterday, an
agreement to form a new Government was reached
among several political parties, including
representatives of the minorities, providing the
institutions of Kosovo with full political and legal
clout.

Another issue was current in the media during the
reporting period, which I would like to address clearly.
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe
recently approved a report written by a Swiss
parliamentarian, Mr. Dick Marty, alleging that senior
political leaders of Kosovo - but not only of
Kosovo - had engaged in organ harvesting. Free with
its imagination but failing to provide any proof
whatsoever, the Marty report further claims that senior
NATO, European Union (EU) member States and
United States officials had knowledge of and tolerated
this alleged wrongdoing.

Appalled, the Government of Kosovo has clearly
and firmly rejected the allegations in Mr. Marty's
report. Besides profoundly hurting the feelings of
every Kosovar, the report has also, regrettably, harmed
our international reputation. It is worth recalling that
the allegations in the report are not new. They have
already been subject to international investigation, in
particular by the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and, most recently,
by the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX). We welcome the input of
international experts, such as recent statements by
former ICTY Chief Prosecutor Sir Geoffrey Nice, that
question the legal arguments put forth by Mr. Marty.

That being said, the Government of Kosovo
wishes to reaffirm its official stance that, in the light of
the severity of the allegations, it will insist on a prompt
launch of a thorough investigation by EULEX
prosecutors on the ground. EULEX, entrusted by the
United Nations and the EU to support the local judicial
system, has the expertise, the resources, the
prosecutors and the judges to thoroughly investigate
the allegations put forth. We will give it our full
cooperation.

But no mistake should be made and no confusion
should be tolerated. The war in Kosovo did not happen
centuries ago. It happened 11 years ago, before the
eyes of the whole world. No report can change or
reconstruct artificially a well-known and clearly
documented situation between oppressor and oppressed.
Blurring that distinction does not correspond to reality;
it does not help truth; it does not serve the process of
justice and reconciliation. The people of Kosovo, more
than anyone, need and demand investigations since we
have nothing to hide. The same clear, firm and
unambiguous stance has been expressed by the
Government of Albania.

With regard to the integration of minorities into
Kosovo's society and institutions, we are happy to
report significant progress during the reporting period.
A substantial number of Serb voters participated in the
national elections. There was, for the first time, a much
higher participation of the Serb community in elections
organized by the Kosovo authorities than in those
organized by the Serb illegal structures. The Serbs won
over 10 per cent of all parliamentary seats, becoming
an essential part of the Government. The minority
communities won 25 seats, or over 20 per cent of the
seats in Parliament. For the first time in Kosovo's
young democratic history, a Serb politician will soon
become a Deputy Prime Minister.

The success of decentralization and the
acceptance by the majority community of the
constitutional mechanisms that protect minorities
represent a success that cannot be disputed. New
municipalities have been established and, with the help
of the international community, are being equipped to
serve their inhabitants with the newly decentralized
powers.

The Republic of Kosovo is in the process of
organizing the first population census since 1981, with
the help of the international community and the
support of Eurostat. The census will take place in April.
It is fundamentally important that we see the positive
trend of Serb participation in local institutions continue
and become active in the forthcoming census. Special
provisions and additional questionnaires have been
developed with the help of Eurostat to account for
Kosovar refugees from all communities who no longer
reside in Kosovo. We urge the international community
to call for the full participation of the Serb community
in the process. This is especially important in northern
Mitrovica, where we need to see legal and authoritative
bodies emerge out of democratic processes, with
institutions that operate within the framework of the
Kosovo Government.
10

Back in 2005, during months of talks in Vienna,
good will provided unprecedented local authority for
the Serb minority. They are now using these rights in
all of Kosovo, except in northern Mitrovica, where the
political landscape has become a hostage to parallel
structures that are involved, as is widely known and
recognized, in crime and smuggling. According to
United Nations estimates, we are losing at least
€40 million annually due to illegal smuggling across
border crossings 31 and 1. We expect Serbia to honour
its pledge to fight crime and corruption by assisting
EULEX and the Government of Kosovo in
re-establishing the same principle of integrated tax
collection operations in effect at Kosovo's other border
points with Serbia and its neighbours.

While we have taken note of the concerns
expressed by Special Representative Zannier regarding
the position of United Nations administration in
Mitrovica, we would like to remind everyone that
Kosovo taxpayers, through the Government of Kosovo,
currently pay well over 50 per cent of the entire United
Nations operational budget in Mitrovica, contributing
greatly to the United Nations presence on the ground
and acting as an important supporting pillar. We are
also insistent that the current status-neutral position of
the United Nations means exactly what it says - that
the United Nations does not exclude the right of
Kosovo to be called and recognized as a State.
Sometimes, this point is not clear on the ground.

I have an appeal to make to the Republic of
Serbia today. It is not what it would have normally
been if Serbia were mature enough to make the grand
gesture of complying with reality and recognizing
Kosovo, thereby ensuring the opening of a new chapter
in the Balkans. It is a much more modest appeal for
Serbia to respect the very framework under which
Kosovo operates as a State, including the Security
Council's resolutions.

For example, the United Nations Mission in
Kosovo has licensed two operators of mobile phone
services under the 2004 United Nations-promulgated
law on telecommunications. Any other operations run
by Serbian authorities are hence illegal under
international law. Serbia's insistence on keeping
mobile operations in Kosovo is in blatant disregard of
resolution 1244 (1999).

Similarly, Kosovar authorities have the inherent
authority to issue automobile license plates in the cities
ll-23603
of Kosovo. The Serbian authorities have not had that
right since 1999. Serbia simply cannot hope to
continue issuing, hundreds of miles away in Belgrade,
plates for vehicles in Kosovo's cities.

In the case of airspace, the Kumanovo Agreement
and subsequent decisions of the United Nations and EU
airspace regulatory bodies have given Kosovo full
rights of control over its airspace. All of Kosovo's
neighbours, barring Serbia, and all international
airlines accept that fact. Serbia continues to ban flights
originating in Kosovo from entering Serbian airspace,
again disregarding the majority of the main points of
resolution 1244 (1999) and the International Court of
Justice opinion.

There are many other points of discussion ahead
of us, for which we need the Serbian Government to
adopt a new and realistic approach. It must recognize
the basic truth that Kosovo is in fact a nation separate
from Serbia. It needs to establish many modes of
communication with Kosovo, as an equal partner, to
uncover the truth about the missing of the war and to
address such issues as the fight against crime, the
provision of health care, education, sports, culture and
heritage. The Government of Kosovo looks forward to
engaging in meaningful talks with the Government of
Serbia in the immediate future on all of those
important issues, with the facilitation of the European
Union.

The security situation in Kosovo is stable. As a
result of the steadily improving security situation, the
Kosovo Force has pursued its plan to reduce troop
levels, which will drop to a low of 5,000. When we
remember 1999 and the massive military-humanitarian
operation that involved over 70,000 international
troops and civilian personnel, we realize how far we
have come in turning Kosovo into a success story for
the United Nations and the international community.

Although Kosovo was confronted with the task of
having to prove the solidity of its institutions in
overcoming a political crisis and organizing early
elections, I am pleased to reiterate that it has not
affected the continuing international recognition of
Kosovo as an equal member of the community of
nations. Since my most recent report, five other States
Members of the United Nations have recognized
Kosovo as an independent and sovereign State. I take
this opportunity to thank the Governments of Kiribati,
Tuvalu, Qatar, Guinea-Bissau and Oman. This only

ll-23603
proves that the process is irreversible and remains the
only legal and politically sustainable way for all of us
to move forward with our agenda of development and
Euro-Atlantic integration.

Being so preoccupied with the bad news, we
sometimes forget that life continues in Kosovo and the
Balkans. We are no longer concerned with issues of life
and death, but rather with the more prosaic problems
typical of a society in transition. In fact, our reports to
international stakeholders are increasingly about issues
of true importance, such as electing better leaders,
having a free media, stopping corruption, fighting
organized crime and securing a social support network
for the neediest, and less about status and borders.
Therein lies the opportunity before us. Both Serbia and
Kosovo want to become members of the EU. We must
do so because our peoples are asking that of us.

The process of establishing clear, transparent and
measurable benchmarks for progress in internal
reforms and neighbourly relations will drive the
dialogue between the Republic of Serbia and the
Republic of Kosovo. We have already seen the
necessary adjustment when the Government of Serbia
submitted the new text of General Assembly resolution
64/298 accepting the opinion of the International Court
of Justice. The Kosovar Government will competently
and credibly advance our EU agenda and deliver on the
promises we made in the election campaign. We expect
the Serbian Government to take the necessary final
step and accept Kosovo as a partner on an equal
footing.

The upcoming dialogue affords Kosovo and
Serbia a unique opportunity. We in Kosovo see that
dialogue not as an end goal, but as an instrument to
establish a new foundation in the region. We cannot
and will not change history; it is unfolding. We cannot
and should not forget or erase the past, but perhaps we
can learn a lesson from it on what should never happen
again. We cannot change our geography. Kosovo and
Serbia will be living next to each other as immediate
neighbours for eternity. But we can change the future
and the legacy we will leave behind for our children. It
is in our hands now to make sure that they inherit from
us a peaceful and prosperous region. That will require
commitment and leadership in both countries. I am
here to assure the Security Council that Kosovo is
ready.
