We commend Estonia, under its presidency of the Security Council, for today's open high-level video-teleconference in the face of the extraordinary circumstances brought about by the coronavirus disease pandemic. The protection of civilians continues to be front and centre in the dialogue on peacekeeping operations. It is more than 20 years since an explicit mandate on the protection of civilians was established for the peacekeeping mission in Sierra Leone. Secretary-General Kofi Annan called for a culture of protection to permeate the United Nations system and the mindsets of those in the field. In 2015, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support, which we now know as the Department of Peace Operations and the Department of Operational Support, respectively, defined the protection of civilians around three tiers of protection: protection through dialogue and engagement, the provision of physical protection and establishment of a protective environment. In theory and practice, the protection of civilians has become a priority in nine United Nations peacekeeping missions where 95 per cent of peacekeepers are deployed. Nonetheless, the implementation of the protection-of-civilians mandate is beset by three key challenges. First, missions tend to implement the protection of civilians in a process-oriented way or based on activities; secondly, there is a disconnect between the protection of civilians and political strategy; and, thirdly, how to apply a whole-of-mission strategy - political, military/police and civilian - in order to pursue a protection of civilians mandate. As it should be, the mandate on the protection of civilians in peacekeeping, with an emphasis on the protection of children and combating sexual exploitation and abuse, is the standard by which the performance of United Nations peacekeeping is measured, giving it legitimacy and credibility. The Philippines earnestly subscribes to this view, and therefore strongly supports Security Council and General Assembly resolutions that underscore the principal concern of conflict prevention and the protection of civilians in areas of conflict. The Philippines submits the following views on the elements that make up the mandate of protecting civilians in armed conflict. First, comprehensive predeployment training forms the bedrock of effective peacekeeping operations. It should draw on existing policy, guidance and training resources to explain what the protection of civilians means in a given operational context, or mission theatre, defining the responsibilities, opportunities and constraints faced by peacekeepers deployed in that context. Drawing on its experience as a member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the Philippines supports the hosting of centres of excellence per region to deliver training packages to troop- and police-contributing countries consistent with United Nations standards. Secondly, the Philippines encourages the deployment of more women in United Nations peacekeeping operations, including in leadership positions. The Philippines has an all-female civilian-relations company from the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Philippine National Police, which assists with the rehabilitation and recovery of internally displaced persons (IDPs) of the Marawi crisis. The company complements peacekeeping operations by helping IDPs, conducting peace education and providing psychosocial debriefing among the traumatized, particularly women, children and young people. Thirdly, the Philippines supports the Vancouver Principles, especially the prevention of child recruitment in conflict areas. We commend the Security Council for establishing a framework to address the protection of children in armed conflict and the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual violence. Last year, His Excellency President Rodrigo Roa Duterte signed into law the Special Protection of Children in Armed Conflict Act, which declares children as zones of peace and criminalizes grave violations against children and attacks on schools, child development or day-care centres, playgrounds and recreation parks. Finally, the Philippines calls on the Secretary-General and Member States to promote unarmed strategies or unarmed civilian protection as a key complement to the protection of civilians toolkit. We are pleased to note that the 2020 report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations recommends "leveraging unarmed practices and capabilities of local communities to support the creation of a protective environment" (4/74/19, para. 132). The Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process of the Philippines acknowledges civil society's role as a partner in bringing peace to Mindanao. I mention, as examples, Ceasefire Watch, Spaces for Peace, Mothers for Peace, Tiyakap Kalilintad, or Care for Peace, and the International Monitoring Team (IMT). The IMT is a civilian-based ceasefire monitoring and response mechanism and is a model for other countries in conflict. Grassroots leaders from ASEAN members and some from Eastern European countries have travelled to Mindanao to learn more about how it works on the ground. In 2009, the Philippine Government and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front agreed to expand the mandate of the IMT to include civilian protection. The Philippines believes that an effective protection-of-civilians mandate must be anchored in human rights and international humanitarian law, particularly with regard to vulnerable groups, and should adhere to the principles of accountability, conflict sensitivity and peacebuilding.
