Mr. Aidid (Malaysia): Mr. President, I would like to join others in thanking the briefers and commend you for convening this open debate. floor to the representative Malaysia wishes to align itself with the statements to be delivered by the representatives of Azerbaijan and Bangladesh on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively. Barely more than a week ago, the Security Council debated on the importance of upholding the Charter of the United Nations (see S/PV.8699, S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1) and S/PV.8699 (Resumption 2)). It is fitting then that we are having this debate now, as the question of Palestine is intrinsically linked to respecting the principles of international law and the United Nations Charter. As we approach the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, it is regrettable that the question of Palestine remains unresolved. Although another decade has passed, the Palestinians continue to live under a brutal occupation and a repressive blockade. On a daily basis, they face discriminatory treatment and violations of their basic human rights. They are dispossessed of their homes and lands, deprived of natural resources and economic development, and restricted in their movements. Such enormous hardship and suffering continue to be inflicted on the Palestinians with impunity while the international community stands by, unable to alleviate the ongoing suffering caused by the occupying Power. Time and again we witness Israel's repressive policies and _ practices, which blatantly violate numerous United Nations resolutions and international law, including international humanitarian law and international human rights law. Malaysia joins theinternational community in condemning Israel's illegal settlements and its unlawful occupation of Jerusalem. Malaysia will continue to extend its support for the Palestinian people in their quest for basic rights, particularly their inalienable right to self-determination, as well as their right to sustainable development. In that regard, Malaysia will open its Embassy accredited to Palestine in Amman and is working with the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan to achieve that objective. Malaysia will also continue to extend its support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as it is the responsibility of the international community to protect and promote the dignity and human rights of the Palestinian people. Malaysia believes that a legitimate political process is the only way forward to end the illegal occupation of Palestine and address all final-status issues in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016). Serious efforts are needed for ending the illegal Israeli occupation and establishing an independent State of Palestine. The stalled Middle East peace process has served only to exacerbate the current situation in Palestine. Therefore, credible conditions must be created to revive the peace process as soon as possible. We continue to believe that it is the responsibility of the Security Council to strive towards a two-State solution, whereby the Palestinians and the Israelis can live side by side in peace, based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine. The international community, particularly the Security Council, has the moral and legal responsibility to immediately end the inhumane acts and injustice perpetrated by Israel against the Palestinians.
