Mr. Bylica: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The following countries align themselves with this
statement: Turkey, Montenegro, Serbia, Albania, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova
and Georgia.

In accordance with the President's request, the full
text of the European Union statement will be circulated
in writing, and I will deliver only a condensed
version now.

The European Union welcomes the timely,
unanimous adoption of resolution 2325 (2016), which
was co-sponsored by all 28 EU member States. The new
resolution reiterates the decisions and requirements
of resolution 1540 (2004) and re-emphasizes the
importance for all States to implement the resolution
fully and effectively.

The EU and its member States believe that resolution
1540 (2004) remains a central pillar of the international
non-proliferation architecture. The resolution must
continue to be the cornerstone of the global agenda
for stopping the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction to and by non-State actors. Resolution 1540
(2004) has become even more important in the current
context, which is characterized by acute and diffuse
threats, in which the distinction between international
and internal security is blurred. The future development
of the 1540 Committee should therefore take account
of new and emerging trends in nuclear, chemical and
biological security. We are pleased to see that the
comprehensive review on resolution 1540 (2004) and
the report prepared by the 1540 Committee, under the
able chairmanship of Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi
and his team, reaffirm the centrality, importance and
authority of resolution 1540 (2004) in the multilateral
non-proliferation architecture.

In June, the EU submitted to the 1540 Committee
a report entitled "European Union support to the
full and universal implementation of United Nations
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004)". That report
demonstrates the strong and consistent commitment by
the EU and its member States to resolution 1540 (2004)
over the past decade. That includes the very substantial
and long-standing EU support to the Global Trust Fund,
which is managed by the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs (UNODA). Earlier in 2016, the
EU and its member States carried out targeted outreach
towards the States that have yet to submit a first report
to the 1540 Committee. That EU outreach effort might
give rise to EU follow-up support action at the request
of the countries concerned.

The EU now stands ready to adopt in the coming
weeks a new, ambitious funding scheme designed to help
implement the outcome of the comprehensive review. It
will take the legal form of a European Council decision
under the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the
EU. Based on our fruitful cooperation in the past, we
will again ask the Office for Disarmament Affairs
to perform the role of implementing partner for that
project. We will seek to promote reinforced cooperation
between UNODA and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. We are also keen to foster closer
cooperation between EU-funded projects implemented
by UNODA and those implemented by the European
Commission through the EU Chemical, Biological,
Radiological and Nuclear Centres of Excellence. That
initiative is a capacity-building programme with
over 55 partner countries and eight regional Centres
of Excellence, and is financed under the Instrument
contributing to Stability and Peace, with a budget of
around €250 million for 2010-2020.

Another means of supporting the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) is the robust EU export-
control regime for dual-use items. The EU has
developed a dedicated export-control programme for
dual-use goods, costing €30 million, in order to help
the authorities in 34 non-EU States to strengthen their
export-control regimes and better comply with the their
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004).

At the international level, the EU and its member
States continue to support such treaties and regimes
as the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention,
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
We also continue to support the Group of Eight
Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons
and Materials of Mass Destruction and a number of
other initiatives.

The risk of non-State actors, particularly terrorists,
using weapons of mass destruction is a major threat
to global security. However, as the threat level
increases, so does the awareness and the international
community's response. Throughout 2016, in addition to
the comprehensive review on resolution 1540 (2004),
several other initiatives were taken, such as the fourth
Nuclear Security Summit, the work of the United
Nations-mandated Joint Investigative Mechanism,
which attributed the use of chemical weapons in Syria
to the Syrian armed forces and Da'esh, and last week's
International Atomic Energy Agency Nuclear Security
Conference, to name but a few. The EU participated
proactively in all those efforts.

The EU Global Strategy, issued in June 2016,
will provide the foundation for us to continue, and
even step up, our efforts in the coming years. We will
continue supporting the multilateral disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control treaties and regimes.
We will use every means at our disposal to assist in
resolving proliferation crises, as we successfully did on
the Iranian nuclear programme.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm the readiness
of the EU and its member States to implement,
in a proactive manner, the outcome of the 2016
comprehensive review as well as the new resolution.
We will do so in close cooperation with the 1540
Committee and its Group of Experts and the United
Nations Office of Disarmament Affairs, in partnership
with all United Nations States Members and with other
non-governmental stakeholders.

The use of nuclear or biological weapons by
non-State actors, particularly terrorists, would indeed
be catastrophic. Unfortunately, the Organization for
the Prevention of Chemical Weapons has already
concluded that a non-State actor has used chemical
weapons in Iraq, and the Joint Investigative Mechanism
has attributed to Da'esh at least one chemical weapon
attack in Syria. That is completely unacceptable, but
by working together we can succeed in preventing the
worst-case scenario from happening.

