Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi for a very useful briefing. It
is particularly good to see here today Xanana Gusmao
and Jose Ramos-Horta. For my delegation, it has been
particularly useful to hear at first hand their assessment
of the preparations for the elections in East Timor and
for independence. I should also, at this stage, associate
myself with the remarks that will be made later in the
debate by the representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union.

We very much welcome the Secretary-General's
report. We agree with his assessment that the security
situation remains uncertain. The military presence of
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) should therefore remain at its current
level until a security assessment shows that downsizing
is feasible. It may well be that this will not be possible
before the election.

But we should remain cost-conscious. There is a
need for the Transitional Administration to improve its
management of the budget, and we have noted in
particular the lack of progress in cost recovery - for
example, in terms of electricity and water charges,
vehicle registration and United Nations airport flight
charges. We understand, for example, that in the last 12
months about $10 million worth of electricity has
effectively been given away because electricity metres
have not been installed. It would be very interesting to
hear from Mr. Annabi whether consideration has been
given to alternative charging structures in the interim,
such as, for example, a flat-rate electricity charge for
households.

The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the conditions in West Timor. This issue was an
important focus of the Security Council mission last
year, and the situation is no less worrying now. I would
like to encourage the Indonesian Government to
conduct its promised registration programme without
further delay. It is most important that the refugees who
choose to return should have an opportunity to register
to vote in the elections. We also look forward to an
early mission of the Office of the United Nations
Security Coordinator to assess security conditions in
West Timor. Personally, I am sorry that it has not been
possible to send the mission before now, since it is a
key component in terms of looking at the possibility of
getting international agencies back into the West.

Nevertheless, we welcome the steps that have
been taken by the Indonesian Attorney General to
investigate fully the human rights violations and other
Violations committed in East Timor following the
consultation. We also welcome his intention to appeal
with regard to the, frankly, derisory sentences handed
down for the Atambua killings. I think Jose' Ramos-
Horta's intervention amply demonstrates the feelings in
East Timor about this, and I know that there are very
similar concerns in the Council. Indeed, the Council
will need to continue to monitor this process closely.

We hope that the Indonesian Government will
complete arrangements for the ad hoc human rights
tribunal so that it can begin its work without delay. We
would also urge the Government of Indonesia to amend
the decree promulgating the decision to establish the
tribunal so that it extends also to crimes committed
before the August 1999 ballot.

Finally, we must look to the future. Later in the
summer the Council will have an opportunity to look
closely at the planning for a post-independence United
Nations presence. We strongly support the decision that
has been taken by the Secretariat to establish an
integrated mission task force to look at this issue.
Planning for the follow-on process must involve
relevant branches of the Secretariat and United Nations
agencies, as well as bringing in vital input from
UNTAET and Dili. It is important also that this
planning include provisions for a realistic exit strategy;
but the United Kingdom is convinced that the
international community must remain engaged in East
Timor for some years beyond independence.

