Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): First of all, I
would like to commend you, Mr. President, for this
very good initiative. This wrap-up session, and the fact
that you have invited the Presidents of the General
Assembly and of the Economic and Social Council to
take part in it, is indeed very commendable. I would
also like to say that the presence of the Secretary-
General among us is very indicative of the importance
of the topics we are discussing this morning.

The subject we are considering is of very
particular interest to the international community, with
post-conflict situations in Africa, Asia and, more
recently, Iraq. This is therefore a topic of great
relevancy and, in particular, of great currency.

My country, Angola, is probably the only member
of the Council that is fully involved in a post-conflict
situation. We have had a long-standing and important
relationship with the United Nations, which continues
to play a fundamental role in the prevailing post-
conflict situation.

The assistance provided by the international
community during Angola's period of national
emergency caused by war saved millions of Angolan
lives from starvation, disease and the most appalling
conditions of misery. The solidarity of the international
community, in particular the Security Council's stance,
was very instrumental in bringing the war to an end.
Fortunately, the war is over and Angola is facing the
future with confidence, assured of the continued
support and assistance of the United Nations. We are
attentive to post-conflict experiences. The contribution
of this meeting is therefore very relevant to us.

The Angolan Government has pledged to
complete the peace process, in particular the social re-
insertion of demobilized and displaced persons and
refugees, and to promote a policy of tolerance to pave
the way for the holding of general elections and the
consolidation of democratic institutions.

We believe that the assistance of the United
Nations is a vital factor in the consolidation of the
peace process and in assisting with the return of
demobilized soldiers, internally displaced persons and
refugees to their places of origin. That process, which
is the most important goal of the current phase of
Angola's recovery programme, is directly linked to
emergency rehabilitation and to the reactivation of the
basic social services and local capacities necessary to
address the most pressing needs of vulnerable
populations in the areas most affected by the war.

The World Bank is engaged in Angola's post-
conflict reconstruction, particularly by approving a
transitional assistance strategy in support of the
Government's programme for the demobilization of
former combatants and the resettlement of displaced
peoples. That support will result in the recovery of the
rural economy and provide a permanent contribution to
reducing poverty. The World Bank and UNDP are both
providing assistance to the Government in building its
capacity to provide coordination and support for both
humanitarian and development activities.

United Nations agencies and other international
organizations including UNICEF, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the Food
and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the World Food
Programme (WFP), the International Labour
Organization (ILO), the World Health Organization
(WHO), UN-HABITAT and the International
Organization for Migration (IOM), are all involved in
the development of specific programmes that are part
of the transition towards reintegration, rehabilitation
and reconstruction for development.

The other very important component of the
governance strategy for the transition period in which
the United Nations system is involved is related to the
building of institutional capacity, particularly State
administration, in areas that have been, for years,
outside political control. Priority is given to the
municipal levels in which UNDP is involved.

Macroeconomic reforms are another component
of the strategy for the transitional period, and the
Government of Angola is currently engaged with the
IMF in negotiations on an appropriate institutional
framework. The World Bank is implementing a project
which provides technical assistance for economic
management. This project is designed to help the
Angolan Government increase financial transparency
in the State sector and upgrade the existing policy and
institutional framework. It is our expectation that this
project will be a decisive contribution to motivate
again the donor community to provide the needed
resources to allow the United Nations system to play
the essential role in the consolidation of peace and the
country's development.

Angola is committed to work with the United
Nations and all countries willing to contribute to its
economic and social recovery. The donor community is
a fundamental partner with the United Nations and the
Angolan Government in that endeavour. In various
instances, financial and human efforts that the
Government has invested in the immense task of
rebuilding the country have been recognized, and we
look forward to the United Nations playing a pivotal
role in materializing these objectives.

