Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the Secretary-General's report, as well as
Mr. Annabi's briefing. We also welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, Mr. Goran Svilanovic.

Between 16 November last, when we had Mr.
Bernard Kouchner with us, and now there have been
some developments that deserve to be highlighted. The
opportunity recently offered to relatives of Kosovar
Albanians detained at Belgrade's main prison to be
able to visit them is a decision we appreciate. We hope
these visits will be continued and that they can be
extended to other detention centres in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. The decision of the Yugoslav

S/PVAZA')

 

authorities to begin to transfer the detainees in
Posarevec and Nis to upgraded detention centres is also
worth noting. While we appreciate these measures, we
believe that, for the sake of peaceful coexistence in
Kosovo, it is important that the Belgrade Government
try to provide a lasting solution to the problem by
freeing the Kosovar Albanians detained in Serbia. This
gesture would also allow the Belgrade Government to
win the trust of the people of the province.

The decision to expand representation on the
Kosovo Transitional Council, with the participation of
political parties that won a minimum number of votes
in the elections last October, as well as the first
meeting held by the directors of the Joint Interim
Administrative Structure, also deserve to be
highlighted because they show that, despite the
difficulties, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) continues to carry out its
mandate in a firm and sustainable manner.

While there have been these positive
developments, we must also mention the deep concern
caused by the escalation of violence in Kosovo
following the elections. UNMIK and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) must spare no efforts to detain and bring to
justice all who attack the peace process in Kosovo. We
should also bear in mind that an insecure climate is not
the most propitious environment for stimulating private
investment.

The situation in the Presevo Valley constitutes a
grave threat to Kosovo and can become a regional
destabilizing factor. All who are nourishing separatist
ideas and who think they can achieve such goals
through a false confrontation between the Belgrade
Government and UNMIK and KFOR should be very
clear about the fact that the international community,
which celebrated the installation of a new Government
in Belgrade, continues to give its full support to
UNMIK and KFOR and that it will not tolerate the
resurgence of terrorist activities.

Finally, we express our deepest gratitude to Mr.
Bernard Kouchner for the great work he has done with
so much energy and enthusiasm in particularly difficult
circumstances. We wish his successor, Mr. Hans
Haekkerup, success in his new post, which he will
assume in January 2001.

