Ms. Laj (Denmark): At the outset, I should like
to thank the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Nambiar, and Under-Secretary-General
Jan Egeland for their briefings. Denmark, too, aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered later by the
representative of Finland speaking on behalf of the
European Union.

Last week, I expressed to the Council Denmark's
concern that the prospects for lasting peace in the
Middle East were fading. Today, those prospects seem
more remote than ever. The biggest challenge facing
the Council, the United Nations and the broader
international community is to work with the parties
involved to bring about lasting peace and stability in
the Middle East and to bring back hope to the people of
the region.

Last week, we condemned in the strongest terms
those behind the kidnapping of the Israeli soldiers and
the firing of missiles into Israel. We stressed that such
actions are simply irresponsible and unacceptable.
Without a doubt, Hizbollah bears full responsibility for
those deadly crimes. But I want to reiterate another
critical point: These extremist elements, and those that
support them, are equally responsible. What we have
seen and heard over the past few days has only
confirmed that those behind the actions are opponents
of stability and lasting peace.

Being attacked, as Israel was, grants the right to
self-defence. However, defensive actions must be in
line with international law. Israel must ensure that its
response is proportional and measured and is carried
out with full respect for a State's obligation to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure in times of war.
Denmark is gravely concerned about the mounting toll
of civilian casualties and the extensive damage to the
civilian infrastructure. Israel must show utmost
restraint and avoid disproportionate action.

Also, Denmark stands firmly behind Prime
Minister Siniora's Government in Beirut. A failure of
his Government could result in further polarization and
radicalization. The overall challenge is to avoid the
strengthening of extremism in general in the region.

Trapped in the middle of these grim hostilities are
the Lebanese people and other countries' citizens.
Their democratically elected Government is struggling
to cope with the burden. The humanitarian crisis is
deepening with each passing hour. Under-Secretary-
General Jan Egeland's gripping assessment of the
gravity of the situation underscores the urgent need for
international action. We therefore strongly hope that
agreement can be reached urgently to create
humanitarian corridors to provide desperately needed
assistance to those under siege and to other countries'
citizens. My Government is ready to respond
immediately to the United Nations flash appeal that is
being prepared.

Denmark agrees that there is an urgent need to
stop hostilities and return to the political process. At
the same time, there can be no return to the status quo
ante. We strongly support the Secretary-General's
efforts and hope that all relevant parties will engage in
the process and support it. The concrete proposals are
still being studied carefully.

The best solution lies in supporting the Lebanese
Government's efforts to restore full sovereignty over
all its territories and to exercise the sole right to use of
force on that territory. That is essential if Security
Council resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006) are
to be fully implemented.

We agree that a stabilization force will be needed
to assist the Government of Lebanon in that
considerable task. Such a force can be effective only if
all relevant parties agree with its deployment and
mandate. We pledge to work with the Council and the
Secretary-General to develop the concept of such a
force.

In my statement today, I have not mentioned the
worrying developments in Gaza, since I did that last
week. But a lasting solution must thoroughly address
all of the outstanding issues in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, in order to be
viable.

In conclusion, I would like to repeat that it is of
paramount importance that all parties involved in the
conflict refrain from any action that would inflame an
already critical situation.

