Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
United States has again abused this Council's agenda. It
focused on Iran's children. That is not surprising. Like
its addiction to imposing sanctions, America is addicted
to disinformation, fabrication and deception. In doing
so, it has tried to cover up its own shameless, illegal
acts against the Palestinians, including recognizing
Jerusalem as Israel's capital, and to distract attention
from Israel's crimes, including its brutal killing of
Palestinian children. But the bullets and bombs that
kill them are either directly supplied or funded by the
United States. Therefore, that country is an accomplice
in all crimes committed by Israel.

With respect to Iranian children, the United States
representative portrayed herself as more royalist than the
king, but what is the truth? Hundreds of Iranian children
were killed by Saddam's chemical weapons, which
were mostly supplied by the United States. Hundreds
of Iranian children were killed by the Mujahidin-e
Khalq Organization, a terrorist organization that was
de-listed by America and now has the United States as
its safe haven.

In 1988, the American forces in the Persian Gulf
deliberately targeted an Iranian civil aircraft and killed
all 290 people on board, ofwhom 66 were children. The
United States illegal sanctions hurt and harm children
more than others. That is how they help Iranian children.
Recently, the International Court of Justice ordered the
United States to remove all such sanctions. They must
implement that ruling.

My last point is that the kingdom of terror, Saudi
Arabia, is not eligible to talk about "our islands" in
the Persian Gulf. Yes, it is the "Persian Gulf" and not
any other fake name. Instead, the Saudis should stop
exporting terrorists to Syria and elsewhere, killing
Yemeni children in school buses and targeting wedding
ceremonies, and end Yemen's occupation.

Last but not least, I salute Hossein Fahmideh,
my hero and the hero of all Iranians, from the
Council Chamber.

The meeting rose at 6.25 pm.
