Mr. Matuszewski (Poland): As my delegation
associates itself with the statement to be made by the
representative of the Netherlands on behalf of the European
Union, I will take the liberty of emphasizing only certain
elements of my country's position with regard to the
situation in Afghanistan.

The delegation of Poland continues to hold the view
that the Afghan crisis constitutes a serious threat to
international peace and security and, in particular, to
stability in the region of Central Asia. The perennial lack
of normalization in Afghanistan is the source of tensions
which persist around its perimeter. The continuation by the
warring parties of their attempts to resolve the conflict by
military means only perpetuates the present ordeal and
aggravates the catastrophic humanitarian situation of the
civilian population in Afghanistan. It may ultimately
threaten the sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of
Afghanistan, with all the ensuing consequences for the
whole region.

As on previous occasions, the Polish delegation
expresses its strong belief that only genuine national
reconciliation and respect for the interests of all ethnic
and religious population groups in Afghanistan, as well as
the long-standing tradition of Afghan statehood, can
provide a true basis for a peaceful settlement of the
conflict. The warring factions in Afghanistan should
finally acknowledge the fact that their country is the
common heritage of all Afghans and that the development
and reconstruction of Afghanistan can be enhanced only
through the participation of all ethnic groups and political
factions in the affairs of the country.

We reaffirm our view that the parties concerned
throughout Afghanistan should respect the human rights
of their people and should demonstrate tolerance and
moderation in the exercise of control, in all its
dimensions, over the various parts of the Afghan territory.
Humanitarian problems and human rights abuses resulting
from the protracted armed struggle among the parties
constitute an additional destabilizing factor in the overall
situation in Afghanistan. Persistent unrest and upheavals
in Afghanistan bring about the continual displacement of
an increasing number of people in various areas of the
country. The deterioration of the social and economic
status of women in Afghanistan, in particular with regard
to their restricted access to education and employment,
which contravenes the provisions of relevant international
instruments, remains a source of deep concern.

A political settlement and peace in Afghanistan can
have real impact on the humanitarian situation of
civilians, who bear the brunt of the conflict, as well as on
the results of the humanitarian work undertaken by aid
agencies. It is commendable that, in spite of continued
instability and ongoing hostilities, humanitarian activities
are being carried out by United Nations agencies and non-
governmental organizations throughout Afghanistan. It is
also encouraging that as a follow-up to the International
Forum on Assistance to Afghanistan, convened in January
1997 at Ashgabat, efforts are currently under way to
develop a strategic framework which will address
immediate relief as well as the longer-term rehabilitation
and development needs of Afghanistan. Yet it must be
stressed again that the cessation of armed hostilities and
political stability in Afghanistan are indispensable if
reconstruction measures are to have a lasting effect.

 

The Polish delegation is still of the opinion that the
United Nations has an important role to play in bringing
about the end of the civil war in Afghanistan and in
achieving a peaceful settlement of the Afghan conflict. In
our view, the fundamental role of the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan in assisting the Afghan
parties to negotiate a broad-based settlement cannot be
overestimated. We fully support the diplomatic efforts of
Mr. Norbert Holl, the special representative of the
Secretary-General in Afghanistan, to bring the parties
together to negotiate a cease-fire and initiate genuine
political dialogue leading to the creation of a fully
representative mechanism for national reconciliation. We
are also encouraged that the great majority of Afghans want
the United Nations to play a central role in the search for
a peaceful solution.

Unfortunately, in recent months, just as before, the
United Nations peace effort has been making little progress,
as the Afghan warring factions have remained intransigent
and have not heeded the repeated appeals for a negotiated
settlement, continuously pursuing military options without
regard for the suffering of the civilian population.

The military situation remains precariously volatile
and, according to the Secretary-General's latest report on
Afghanistan (S/1997/240), it may soon deteriorate further
with the onset of the spring thaw. In view of the grave
consequences of a possible intensification of military
confrontation, the Polish delegation shares the View
expressed by the Secretary-General in his report that it is
necessary to increase and coordinate international efforts to
impress upon the Afghan parties the need to solve the
conflict in a peaceful way, that is to arrive at a lasting
political settlement with the participation of all segments of
Afghan society.

It must be reaffirmed today that, without the political
will of the parties, an end to the Afghan civil war and the
implementation of a comprehensive peaceful settlement as
outlined in relevant United Nations resolutions, will remain
unattainable.

The Polish delegation is seriously concerned at the
prospect of continuing military hostilities in Afghanistan.
We reaffirm our conviction that the cessation of foreign
interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan through
the supply of arms and military equipment to the warring
factions is one of the principal conditions of a resolution of
the armed conflict in that country.

We are of the view that the international community
should persist in expressing its strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
national unity of Afghanistan. This sentiment was
reflected in the last Security Council resolution on
Afghanistan and it also needs to be reaffirmed today.
Allow me reiterate our position on the necessity for
a negotiated settlement of the Afghan crisis. We underline
the importance of implementing the principles enunciated
in the relevant United Nations resolutions in this regard,
bearing in mind the right of the Afghan people to
determine their own destiny.

In conclusion, we wish to call upon all States, and
especially those with influence in the region, to assist the
people of Afghanistan in searching for a peaceful future
for their country in coordination with the activities of the
United Nations Special Mission in Afghanistan.

