Mr. Queta (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): I would like first to take this opportunity to thank
you, Mr. President, for proposing this enlarged meeting of
the Security Council in order to discuss the political
situation in Somalia. We think that enlarged meetings are
useful, making possible the participation of a number of
representatives, who will no doubt make their contribution
to the quest for peace and national reconciliation in
Somalia.

The international community - in particular, the
United Nations, the Organization of African Unity, the
League of Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and international humanitarian
organizations - are making efforts to bring humanitarian
assistance to the population of Somalia affected by a civil
war which in our view has lasted far too long. We
continue to believe that as long as the warring parties
maintain their radical positions a negotiated solution will
not be possible in that country. We repeat our conviction
that the United Nations must not abandon the Somali
people and that it must continue to play an important role
in helping the parties to reach a compromise, with a view
to finding a comprehensive political solution and creating
a government of national unity.

My Government has always welcomed and
supported the efforts of the international community on
behalf of that country. We believe, however, that the
political leaders and factions and all the movements in
Somalia should seize the opportunity offered by this
international good will to set aside their differences and
restore confidence and security, because the ultimate
responsibility for national reconstruction and the
rebuilding of their country rests with the Somali people
themselves.

Guinea-Bissau is concerned about the lack of any
real progress towards national reconciliation in Somalia,
and deeply perturbed by the persistence of deliberate
obstruction of the delivery of food and medical supplies
essential to the survival of the population.

We hail the courageous efforts of United Nations
bodies and the dedication of the international
humanitarian organizations, and we ask them to continue
to help the people of Somalia to ease their sufferings and
avoid a new disaster, because, as we all know, an
epidemic of certain diseases has recently emerged in that
country. This will most certainly have serious
consequences for neighbouring countries that have already
been affected by the crisis in Somalia.

My delegation deplores the deaths of personnel of
international organizations in the course of their
humanitarian work. We urgently appeal to the parties to
the conflict to refrain from any attempt to threaten the

 

lives of people who are sparing no effort to help a
population that has been devastated by the civil war. We
ask them to take every step necessary to ensure the safety
of humanitarian personnel dispatched to the field to provide
humanitarian assistance.

We are concerned that, in contravention of Security
Council resolution 733 (1992), arms trafficking continues
in that country. We would remind States that they are under
an obligation fully to respect the general and complete
embargo imposed under paragraph 5 of that resolution in
connection with all deliveries of weapons and military
equipment to Somalia, since non-compliance with the
embargo only exacerbates tensions.

In conclusion, we pay tribute to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and to the European Union, the
Organization of African Unity, Somalia's neighbours and
other agencies for their efforts to find a comprehensive
political solution in Somalia. We ask the international
community to continue to provide humanitarian assistance
to the Somali people with a View to bringing the various
factions closer together and leading them to the negotiating
table in the search for such a solution in Somalia.

We ask the international community to continue to
provide humanitarian assistance to the people of Somalia so
as finally to banish the ever-present threat of war in that
country.

