Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): The
United States Government is gravely concerned over the
delays in the peace process in Burundi. We have seen an
upsurge in attacks on civilian targets and increased
suffering of the civilian population. Attacks in and near the
capital have taken place, and hard-liners who oppose the
peaceful resolution of Burundi's conflict are trying to derail
a broad-based negotiating process that offers the country's
best hope for lasting peace. There is a sizeable constituency
for peace in Burundi, and we need to use this opportunity
to ensure that the peace process goes forward. We
commend the peacemakers for their good will.

The United States shares the international community's
concern about the violence and its effect on the
Government and civilians and on the overall peace process.
Counter-insurgency efforts now include the so-called
regroupement of 340,000 people near the capital, an act we
consider to be a major human rights violation and a matter
of serious humanitarian concern.

We share the shock and the grief of the Secretary-
General and the international community over the recent
killing in Rutana Province of the head of the United
Nations Children's Fund in Burundi and of a World Food
Programme logistics officer. This outrageous act has dealt
a severe blow to humanitarian efforts carried out by the
United Nations and other agencies. Some agencies have
suspended operations in the wake of this incident. We urge
that those responsible be brought to justice.

The Security Council should endorse the immediate
resumption of the peace process under a successor to the
late Mwalimu Julius Nyerere. We all mourn his passing,
and in his memory we must recommit ourselves to his goal
of peace in the Great Lakes region.

The Security Council must condemn the violence that
undermines the negotiations. The United Nations must
reassert its leadership in protecting the rights of individuals,
and should provide guidance and direction for
non-govemmental organizations operating in Burundi.
However, United Nations field operations should not
resume without the necessary guarantees. It is absolutely
essential that all sides in the conflict respect the neutrality,
freedom of movement and security of United Nations and
other international workers.

The United States urges the Security Council to call
for the resumption of negotiations, with a facilitator
acceptable to those Burundian parties that have entered into
the process; affirm the Arusha process as the basic
framework within which all-party negotiations should
continue, recognizing that the process is best served by a
flexible, efficient approach acceptable to the Burundi
parties themselves; condemn continuing violence and
appeal to warring parties to come to the negotiating table;
affirm the urgent need for States of the region to do
everything possible to halt all cross-border insurgent
activity and to ensure that refugee camps are not used as
training and resupply bases for insurgent forces; call for
the dismantling of the recently established regroupement
camps and demand full and unhindered access of
international humanitarian workers and human rights
observers while this is taking place; and, finally,
recognize Burundi's desperate economic situation and call
for the donor community to expand economic assistance
and deliver needed help as soon as possible.

