Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I want to begin
by paying tribute to Ms. Power in her final appearance
in the Security Council. Throughout my time here,
she has been that hard pedaling dynamo that she
just described. She has been a tireless advocate, a
passionate campaigner, a trusted ally and a true friend.
She has shown an unrelenting personal commitment
to tackling the most troubling issues: Syria, Ebola, the
Central African Republic and human rights. And on
all those issues and so many more, she has grounded
our diplomacy in humanity, bringing the voices of real
people affected by those conflicts into the Chamber.
Turning to Iran, let me join others in welcoming
the second report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation ofresolution 2231 (2015) (S/2016/1136).
I thank our briefers for their remarks just now. I would
also like to welcome Mr. Cardi to his new role as
facilitator for resolution 2231 (2015). He takes on the
role at an important time. We have a significant year
ahead of us on the Iran nuclear dossier, but 12 months
on from implementation day, I think it is right to first
look back on how far we have come. We have seen
Iran remove 13,000 centrifuges, as well as associated
infrastructure, and eliminate its stock of 20 per cent
enriched uranium. We have seen the possibility of
Iran acquiring nuclear weapons disappear for over a
decade. We have seen Iran work with us and our E3+3
partners, in the Joint Commission and the working
groups established under the deal, and we are pleased
that the procurement channel, established for the
export of nuclear-related goods and services to Iran
is fully functional. Applications are being approved,
confidentiality is being respected and we hope to
receive applications from many more countries over the
coming year.

And in turn, we have also seen economic prospects
improve in Iran with United Kingdom exports, for
instance, to Iran growing by 42 per cent in just nine
months, last year. We remain committed to ensuring that
trade continues to grow to the tangible economic benefit
of the Iranian people under the joint comprehensive
plan of action (JCPOA). The second phase of sanctions
lifting, which will commence a maximum of eight
years after implementation date, provides a further
incentive for Iran to comply with the deal, but we
remain committed to ensuring that the sanctions that
remain in place, continue to be enforced robustly.

Away from the nuclear file, Iran continues to play a
destabilizing role in the region. That is most clearly seen
in Syria. Iran has failed to uphold its obligations under
international humanitarian law in Syria, for instance,
by failing to allow the delivery of humanitarian aid
into eastern Aleppo, as it was besieged. So we need to
recognize the fundamental tension in Iran's engagement
with the world. On the one hand, through the Iran deal,
they were part of an indisputable diplomatic success,
one that degraded a significant threat to the region,
and yet on the other, we need only look to the victims
of Aleppo to see how Iran's engagement in the region
remains, so often, misguided. Iran continues to provide

substantial military and financial support to Hizbullah
and the Syrian regime.
As the Secretary-General's report makes clear,
the leader of Hizbullah stated that Iran supplies all
their weapons and missiles. Senior Iranian individuals
listed under resolution 2231 (2015), continue to flout
the travel ban imposed by the Council, with Major
General Soleimani pictured in Aleppo in September, in
a show of support for the Syrian regime. Those actions
show that Iran chooses to complicate, not extinguish a
conflict that has persisted for far too long, and that is
simply not the way to build our confidence.

Iran must take clear steps to improve its
engagement in the region, this year. We welcome the
latest International Atomic Energy Agency report
(S/2016/983, annex), which confirmed that Iran continue
to comply, broadly, with its nuclear commitments and
we expect Iran to continue to do so, this year. But in
order to benefit fully from the lifting ofUnited Nations,
European Union and United States sanctions, Iran
must build that confidence among the international
community and show that it has changed its disruptive
behaviour in the region.

Therefore, it is vital that Member States continue
to enforce the sanctions regime by acting on and
reporting all suspected violations. We echo the
Secretary-General's call for all Member States to take
the necessary measures to prevent entry or transit of
Iranians subject to travel bans. We also urge Member
States to consider whether exporting arms to Iran is in
the best interests of the region. In addition, we remain
concerned by Iran's ballistic missile program, and
we urge all Member States to continue to enforce the
sanctions regime on ballistic missile technology and to
act on and report all suspected violations. As one ofthe
architects of the JCPOA, the United Kingdom remains
committed to ensuring that the Iran deal is a success.

