Mr. Skau (Sweden): Let me also begin by extending
our deepest condolences to our Chinese friends for their
tragedy at the nursery this morning. Our thoughts are
with those affected.

I would also like to begin by extending my thanks
to the briefers this morning - Ambassador Chergui,
Mr. Kaberuka and Chef de Cabinet Viotti - for their
very thoughtful and insightful briefings. I should also
like to thank my colleagues from Senegal, Egypt and
Ethiopia for having called for this timely meeting.

Sweden is a long-standing supporter of an enhanced
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in Africa. The
reasons for this commitment are many. Regional actors
have a better understanding of the issues at stake on the
ground; they are often more invested, and they carry
credibility at local levels. The African Union (AU) and
its regional partners can at times undertake operations
in working environments in which the United Nations
cannot and can often deploy quickly.

We therefore very much welcome the current
momentum and energy around the United Nations-
African Union partnership agenda. The first-ever
United Nations-AU summit just a few weeks ago and
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security,
which was signed on that occasion represent very
positive developments.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
pursuant to resolution 2320 (2016) (S/2017/454). We
welcome the thorough work that underpins this report,
and I want to pay particular tribute to the joint nature of
the efforts that have characterized its drafting.

We now have concrete proposals and options for
closer cooperation with the AU, including the process
for mandating AU peace-support operations. This
will no doubt help us move forward towards ensuring
more predictable collaboration and accountability. We
also thank the African Union for providing us with
an update on the progress on its side, including the
communique from the AU Peace and Security Council
meeting of 30 May. In particular, we welcome updates
on what has been done to strengthen work within the
realm of human rights and conduct and discipline, as
well as plans for addressing the remaining gaps.

We commend once again the AU summit's bold
decision on financing the African Union in an effort
to secure financing for peace in Africa, in line with
the recommendations made by President Kagame in his
report on AU reform.

We very much recognize the need for flexible,
predictable and sustainable funding of AU peace
operations, and we welcome the proposals pertaining
to financing contained in the report of the Secretary-
General. We look forward to continued discussions in
the Council on the various options and models, including
access to assessed United Nations contributions. Our
planned visit to Addis Ababa in September for the
annual consultations with the AU Peace and Security
Council would be an excellent opportunity to discuss
this matter further. We believe that the Peace Fund will
be a robust mechanism for cooperation and partnership.
We will consider channelling Swedish financial support
to the Peace Fund once it has been operationalized.
Moving forward on this agenda will require
substantial and sustained political investment from
the Security Council. While we are encouraged by the
commitment by the Secretary-General as well as by the
increased structure for cooperation at the Secretariat
level, it must now be matched by political engagement
from us as members of the Council. Let us utilize and
build upon the momentum we have.

