Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the convening of today's meeting. We also
thank Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Sahel, for her briefing.

At present, the situation in the Sahel region is
generally stable, with continuing economic growth and
steady progress in the implementation of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.

On the other hand, there are also multiple challenges

in the Sahel region, such as the fragile security situation,
development imbalances, the spread of terrorism and
the ever more serious threat of transnational organized
crime. The Sahel covers a broad area, with interrelated
traditional and non-traditional conflicts. China believes
that the issues in the Sahel region must be tackled
comprehensively at three levels: the national, regional
and international.

First, we should focus on the settlement of regional
hot-spot issues. At present, the political and security
situation in Libya is deteriorating. The national
reconciliation process in Mali is on a difficult and
treacherous road. The political transition in Burkina
Faso is also fragile. The international community
should therefore take targeted measures on the basis of
respect for the sovereignty of the countries concerned
so as to help the countries of the region to push forward
political processes aimed at improving the security
situation and promoting national reconciliation, with a
view to de-escalating tension in hotspot situations and
seeking lasting solutions.

Secondly, proactive support should be provided
to regional and subregional organizations in their
efforts to maintain regional peace and stability. China
appreciates the successful mediation efforts of the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States on the issues of Mali and Burkina Faso
and supports the African approach of the resolution of
African issues by the Africans themselves.

We welcome the development of collective
security mechanisms by regional organizations such
as the African Union and support the planning and
establishment of the rapid-reaction force for the crisis
in Africa. African regional organizations enjoy unique
advantages in resolving African issues and as such
deserve the support of the international community.

Thirdly, coordination and cooperation between
the United Nations and the international financial
institutions should be strengthened. The lack of
development and development imbalances figure among
the root causes of the conflict in the region. In the past
year, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, together with
the heads of the World Bank and other international
financial institutions, have visited the Sahel and raised
a large amount of resources for the countries in the
region, thus making important contributions to their
national development and poverty-reduction processes.

At the same time, a new model was launched
involving tripartite cooperation among the United
Nations, international financial institutions and regional
organizations, in a concerted effort to settle regional hot-
spot issues. Thereafter, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
together with the President of the World Bank, also
visited the Great Lakes region and the Horn of Africa,
with positive results. We hope that the United Nations
will continue with such visits and draw lessons from
successful experiences, so as to further promote the
economic and social development of the countries in
the region.

The Government of China attaches great importance
to our relations with Africa. Through bilateral channels,
it has made its utmost effort to provide assistance to
the countries concerned in the Sahel region. China
also proactively supports United Nations peacekeeping
operations in countries such as Mali. We are also
exploring with the African Union ways of providing
support to the rapid-reaction force for the African crisis.

China is ready to continue to make contributions,
together with the rest of the international community, to
promoting the settlement of hot-spot issues in the Sahel
region and help the countries in the region to achieve at
the soonest long-term peace and stability and security.

