Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Griffiths for his comprehensive briefing.

We welcome the process of consultations with
the parties to the conflict launched last week in
Geneva, which we consider to be an important step
towards relaunching a political process in Yemen. We
commend the fact that essential confidence-building

measures - including, among other things the
release of prisoners, the reopening of the Sana'a
airport and economic issues - were discussed with

the representatives of the Yemeni Government. We
also welcome and are encouraged by the holding of
consultations with a group of Yemeni women, and we
commend the Special Envoy's efforts to ensure that the
process is inclusive. However, while we regret that the
representatives of Houthis were not present in Geneva,
that should not be perceived as an obstacle for further
advancement of political dialogue.

Reviving the political process, which would lead
to a comprehensive and long-standing solution to the
conflict, is of paramount importance and must be a
priority for all stakeholders. Therefore, we expect the
parties to redouble their efforts to achieve that goal. We
urge them to continue to engage with Mr. Griffiths in
good faith and without preconditions and to show greater
flexibility toward his proposals. We look forward to the
continuation of the consultations in Muscat and Sana'a.

Despite the progress achieved on the political
track, the fighting in Yemen has become even more
intense in the past few weeks. We are alarmed by the
continued reports of attacks resulting in casualties
among civilians. Poland condemns all indiscriminate
attacks against the civilian population, which are in
clear violation of international humanitarian law. We
urge the parties to de-escalate and refrain from taking
actions that would lead to increased violence. We urge
the parties to abide by the principles of international
humanitarian law, including the fundamental principles
of proportionality and distinction in attack, and to
ensure the protection of civilians. We also expect them to
ensure that all Yemen's ports, including Al-Hudaydah,
Saleef and Ras Isa, are open and fully operational, and
that access for humanitarian deliveries across the whole
country is guaranteed.

Let me conclude by reiterating that there can only
be a political solution to the conflict in Yemen, and by
once again expressing Poland's full support for Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and his efforts to bring about
an inclusive political solution to that crisis.

