Over the course of the two years that South Africa has served on the Security Council, we have greatly valued the opportunity to closely follow the steady progress that the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) continues to make in its mandated task. We would like to thank the Special Adviser and Head of UNITAD, Mr. Karim Khan, for his briefing and express our appreciation for the work that is being done by him and his dedicated, a multinational team of experts from various specialized fields. Under Mr. Khan's able leadership, UNITAD continues to make great strides and is to be commended for having achieved such progress in the context of the severe challenges imposed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We note that UNITAD has been forced to adjust its operations to ensure business continuity and continued delivery on its mandate. We take note of and welcome the achievements described in UNITAD's latest report (see S/2020/1107), which include, inter alia, the provision of training and support to Iraqi investigative judges in building case files for the prosecution of members of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) for war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide; extensive efforts to create a digital repository of evidentiary materials; the development of the Shuhud digital platform, providing a digital platform for the secure submission of relevant information by witnesses and survivors; significant progress in formulating a common approach with the Government of Iraq to the sensitive matter of excavation of mass graves; and, importantly, the accompanying expansion of the necessary psychosocial care for survivors and affected family members. We also welcome UNITAD's renewed strategic vision, which is focused on ensuring that the evidence it collects and preserves can ultimately be used effectively before national courts through the structuring of its workflow in order to deliver outputs across three mutually supportive areas of that task. The close cooperative and collaborative relationship that UNITAD has cultivated and grown with the Government of Iraq has always been of critical importance to its success. UNITAD has assisted Iraq in closing a terrible chapter in the country's history through justice and accountability. That partnership that has also yielded an important additional benefit for Iraq, as a result of assistance in strengthening and modernizing aspects of its criminal justice system in line with international best practices and with the integration of cutting-edge technology. That constitutes a valuable legacy that will contribute to strengthening the country's efforts to rebuild its institutions and structures as it seeks to open a new chapter of peace and development after much suffering. South Africa believes that the close collaborative approach between UNITAD and the Government of Iraq, which has gone from strength to strength, is one that can serve as a model of best practice from which we might draw important lessons in other similar situations. We were also encouraged to learn of UNITAD's continued efforts to build on its engagement with Iraqi religious leaders in the framework of the interfaith statement on the victims of Da'esh, as well as civil society, in the establishment of the dialogue forum between UNITAD and non-governmental organizations. Such efforts can only bolster the important gains that UNITAD has made in establishing credibility in the fractured country. We would encourage it to expand upon efforts of that nature going forward. South Africa believes it is very important that the Security Council should continue to support UNITAD's important work, as well as that of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, as complementary and reinforcing pillars in Iraq's return to peace and stability. That will afford its people an opportunity to pursue prosperity with security and dignity, which is the right of all of humankind, and even more important given the various crises that the Government of Iraq is presently contending with in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, compounded by the significant pressure of early elections taking place in 2021. It is critical that we collectively marshal our full support for Iraq and its people at this delicate juncture in the country's history. We welcome the role that UNITAD continues to play in helping to bring healing to all of Iraq. We also commend those States Members of the United Nations that have supported UNITAD's work through financial means and otherwise.
