The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to make
a comment and to ask a question in my capacity as the
representative of Mexico.

As Mr. Morris has starkly shown, the food
situation in Southern Africa and in other parts of Africa
clearly leaves us perplexed in the light of a
commitment that the international community still has
not managed to fully meet. But food security, which is
a moral imperative and a colossal challenge, is also an
issue that must be resolved through profound changes
in the region.

It is clear that human beings have an inalienable
right to a healthy and balanced diet. To that end, an
immediate challenge is to increase sustainable food
production and, on that basis, make the benefits of that
production available to the most vulnerable sectors. In
Africa, that must be achieved in a particularly adverse
environment, where there is soil degradation,
desertification and, as Mr. Morris said, recurring
natural catastrophes, infections, violent conflicts, civil
disturbances - the legacy and effects of which are
passed from one generation to the next and are evident
in matters as simple as the existence of explosives and
landmines in agricultural fields - climate change and,
no less important, the HIV/AIDS epidemic and other
diseases such as malaria and tuberculosis, which also
undermine societies' ability to produce.

In these circumstances, and given the cited
combination of internal and external factors, the
international community has a commitment. Mr. Morris
pointed out that $1.8 billion is needed, which seems an
extraordinary figure but which is not, if we compare it
to today's worldwide military expenditures, which are
vastly greater than that figure.

Given all that, I would like to simply underscore
Ambassador Greenstock's question. From that point of
view and taking all the factors into account, what
would Mr. Morris say could be done right now by the
Security Council, beyond what has already been
established as an immediate task, in terms of donors
and in terms of the attention that the Security Council
should give this item? What does Mr. Morris think the
Security Council should do together with other United

Nations bodies to tackle a crisis of the magnitude and
dimensions that he has described to us?

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I call on Mr. Morris.

