The President: Under rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Canada,
Colombia, Croatia, Cuba, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Pakistan, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine and Uruguay to participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights; Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Herve
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; and Mr. Yves Daccord, Director-General
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome Ms. Pillay and
Mr. Daccord, who arejoining today's meeting Via video
teleconference from Geneva.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the Council's provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2013/689, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

I also wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2014/74, which contains the text
of a letter dated 3 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Lithuania to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note concerning the item under consideration.

I now give the floor to Ms. Pillay.

