The Secretary-General: We meet at a time when
events in Myanmar are attracting unprecedented world
2

attention. My Special Adviser, Mr. Ibrahim Gambari,
just returned from a short mission yesterday and will
brief the Council shortly. I asked Mr. Gambari to
convey to the senior leadership in Myanmar very clear
messages from me, on which Mr. Gambari will
elaborate in his briefing.

I am deeply concerned about the recent events in
Myanmar and the reports of continued human rights
violations. I must reiterate that the use of force against
peaceful demonstrators is abhorrent and unacceptable.
While I am relieved to hear of reports that some
military forces have been withdrawn and some
restrictions eased, the overall situation remains of
serious concern, especially with regard to the unknown
predicament of the large number of individuals who
were arrested without due process. I hope that those
detained will be released without further delay.

Now more than ever before, the Government of
Myanmar should take bold actions towards
democratization and respect for human rights. The
national reconciliation process must be accelerated and
made as broad-based, inclusive and transparent as
possible. A serious and comprehensive political
dialogue between the Government and the political
opposition is indispensable. One important outcome of
my Special Adviser's mission is the announcement by
the Government of a possible meeting between Senior
General Than Shwe and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. I
welcome that announcement and urge both parties to
meet as soon as possible. It is too early to measure the
impact of Mr. Gambari's visit or to label it a success or
a failure. It appears, however, that a window of
opportunity has opened, and it is vital that the
Government of Myanmar respond positively.

Advancing the cause of democratization and the
development of a peaceful and prosperous Myanmar
will require the sustained engagement of the United
Nations, with the active support of the international
community, including especially the countries in the
region. A united Security Council could play an
important role in support of the ongoing efforts of the
United Nations.

In that regard, I want to thank the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations and its members for their
support for my initiative, as well as for their own
interest and engagement in this issue. I trust that they
will remain seized of the situation in Myanmar and
actively engaged in finding a solution.
07-52995

