Mr. Cherif (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for calling this
meeting on the situation in Kosovo, and also to thank
Mr. Hedi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his statement, which has
brought us up to date regarding the latest events in the
field.

I will be concentrating on aspects of the issue that
seem to us to be of particular importance. My
delegation considers that the first stage of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) activities, urgent measures to re-establish
normality in Kosovo, has been implemented
satisfactorily. In spite of persistence of a number of
issues, most problems are less sizeable and less serious
now.

The return to normality seems to be setting in,
thus helping us move on to a new stage and ensuring
success. The preparations for the elections constitute a
crucial stage in the evolution of the peace process in
Kosovo. We believe that those preparations should be
multi-dimensional in order to give the elections every
chance of success.

We welcome the establishment of the electoral
lists, on which more than a million people are
registered, and UNMIK's efforts in this connection are
praiseworthy. However, we continue to encourage all
social sectors of Kosovo to participate in these
elections, which will lay the foundations of a multi-
ethnic society, the only guarantee of lasting
reconciliation for Kosovo.

We cannot stress too strongly the importance of a
peaceful run-up to the elections, and, here too, the role
of UNMIK is particularly important. The Mission
should ensure security for the electoral campaign so
that it takes place in a normal, non-violent atmosphere,
and should ensure as far as possible that the elections
do not serve as an occasion to exacerbate ethnic
divisions or to promote exclusion.

My delegation welcomes the appointment of new
judges and prosecutors. An effective, transparent and
impartial judiciary will help bridge ethnic divisions and
put an end to impunity.

Finally, we would like to pay homage to Mr.
Kouchner and all the members of UNMIK for their
dedicated fulfilment of the mandate entrusted to them
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.

