The President: Following consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and recalls its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The Security Council considers post-conflict
peacebuilding closely linked to its primary
responsibilities.

"The Security Council recognizes that intra-
State conflicts and States emerging from conflict
are among the most complex challenges facing
the international community and that responding
to these challenges in most instances requires a
coherent and integrated mix of peacebuilding and
peacekeeping activities, including political,
military, civilian, humanitarian and development
activities.
"The Security Council acknowledges that
serious attention to the longer-term process of
peacebuilding in all its multiple dimensions is
critically important and that adequate support for
peacebuilding activities can help to prevent
countries from relapsing into conflict.

"The Security Council underlines that
priorities in the post-conflict environment should
include, where appropriate: protection of
civilians; disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, reintegration and rehabilitation of
former combatants; security sector and economic
and social reform; the end of impunity;
establishment and re-establishment of the
institutions of government, the rule of law and
transitional justice, respect for human rights; and
economic revitalization.

"The Security Council recognizes the key
role played by the United Nations, including the
United Nations funds, programmes and
specialized agencies, in peacebuilding alongside
the international financial institutions, in
particular the World Bank, bilateral donors and
troop contributors. It also acknowledges the role
the private sector can play in countries emerging
from conflict. The Security Council underlines
that a successful outcome of post-conflict
peacebuilding activities depends on the sustained
commitment of all relevant actors to the process,
through the involvement of these actors and the
coordination of their activities in all phases from
planning through implementation. In this regard,
the Council also stresses the importance of
pursuing coherent policies and resource
allocation between these United Nations entities,
taking into account their respective mandates.
The Council recalls the report of 21 August 2000
by the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations
(A/55/305) and the recommendations therein, and
welcomes the progress made since the publication
of the report, not least as regards planning of
peacekeeping operations.

"The Security Council underlines that for

countries emerging from conflict significant
international assistance for economic and social
rehabilitation and reconstruction is indispensable.
In this regard the Security Council acknowledges
the role that the Economic and Social Council
plays, including in sustainable development, and
reiterates its willingness to improve cooperation
with United Nations bodies and organs directly
concerned with peacebuilding.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of national ownership of the
transition process from the end of a conflict to the
attainment of lasting peace and sustainable
development and the need for the international
community to support nationally owned
peacebuilding priorities. The Security Council
recognizes the positive role played by local
stakeholders and encourages dialogue between
the United Nations and relevant national actors.
The Council encourages capacity-building in
order to respond to the country-specific
circumstances of each conflict situation. One goal
of this capacity-building - and of peacebuilding
generally - should be to promote the
establishment of self-supporting national
authorities and thus the evolution of international
assistance from peace support to longer-term
development.

"The Security Council recognizes the
crucial role of regional and subregional
organizations in post-conflict peacebuilding and
their involvement at the earliest possible stage.
The Security Council realizes that a clear
regional perspective is necessary, as most
conflicts have interlocking political, security,
humanitarian and economic dynamics across
borders. The Council underscores in this respect
the need for enhanced cooperation and, where
appropriate, coordination between United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations in
peacebuilding, based on a more integrated
approach and with the aim of maximizing use of
available resources and capabilities.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of a comprehensive international and
regional approach to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants that is not limited to the political and
security aspects, but also addresses its social and

economic aspects, including special needs of
child soldiers and women.

"The Security Council stresses the special
needs of Africa in post-conflict situations and
encourages the international community to pay
particular attention to those needs. It welcomes
the ever-closer partnership between the African
Union, the African subregional organizations and
the United Nations in the area of peacemaking
and peacekeeping and stresses the importance of
extending this partnership to peacebuilding
efforts.

"The Security Council underscores the
importance of cooperation between United
Nations peacekeeping operations and the United
Nations funds, programmes and specialized
agencies. The Security Council stresses the
importance of ensuring that planning and
implementation of United Nations humanitarian,
peacekeeping, political and developmental
activities at country level are well coordinated
system-wide, including through the development
of shared strategic objectives. The Security
Council stresses that the United Nations should
function as one integrated entity at country level
under effective overall leadership in post-conflict
peacebuilding.

"The Security Council stresses the need to
ensure adequate and timely financing for
peacebuilding priorities at all stages of the peace
process, and stresses the need for sustained
financial investment in peacebuilding over the
medium to longer-term period of recovery. It
recognizes the importance of rapid initiation of
peacebuilding activities to meet immediate needs
and encourages the building of capabilities that
can be incorporated rapidly.

"The Security Council welcomes the
submission of the report of 21 March 2005 by the
Secretary-General 'In larger freedom: towards
development, security and human rights for all'
(A/59/2005) and of the report by the High-Level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change 'A
more secure world: our shared responsibility'.
The Security Council acknowledges institutional
gaps, identified in the reports, in the United
Nations institutional machinery with respect to
effectively, coherently, and comprehensively
helping countries with transition from conflict to
lasting peace and sustainable development.

"The Security Council takes note with
interest of the important proposal by the
Secretary-General to establish a Peacebuilding
Commission and shares the objective of
improving United Nations capacity to coordinate
with donors and troop contributors and to
perform peacebuilding activities, in particular
from the start of peacekeeping operations through
stabilization, reconstruction and development.
The Security Council recognizes the important
role that this body could play to bridge the gap
between maintenance of international peace and
security and the work of humanitarian and
economic development assistance."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/20.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.
