Ms. Rulumeni (South Africa): South Africa
wishes to express its appreciation for the opportunity to
participate in this open debate on children and armed
conflict, to which we attach great importance. We also
wish to extend our thanks for the briefings presented
by Ms. Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict;
Assistant Secretary-General Khare; Ms. Johnson,
Deputy Executive Director of the United Nations
Children's Fund; and Ms. Gurung.

My delegation appreciates the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children in Armed Conflict to enhance the protection
of children in situations of armed conflict and to
promote a more concrete protection response. We also
wish to recognize the important work and progress
made as a result of the implementation of the
recommendations of the members of the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, which your delegation leads, Mr. President.

We would like to reiterate the importance and
relevance of the first report on children affected by
armed conflict, contained in document A/51/306. In
that context, we note with satisfaction that, since the
release of that report, significant progress has been
made in the development of international legal and
policy frameworks for the protection of children in
armed conflict.

The adoption of resolution 1612 (2005) on
children and armed conflict in 2005 was a significant
demonstration of the actions taken by the Secretary-
General, the Security Council and the international
community, which have produced tangible progress
that includes greater protection and awareness of the
plight of children in conflict situations. My delegation
has also noted the inclusion of, and the provision of
separate sections on, the protection of children in

Council resolutions, such as those on peacekeeping
missions. We have also noted the prominence of the
latest resolution on this issue - resolution 1882
(2009), which was adopted last year - as follow-up to
the relevant Security Council resolutions to monitor
and report on progress.

In his report of 13 April (S/2010/181), the
Secretary-General indicates that, in accordance with
the newly implemented child protection policy
directive of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Security Council is also being urged to
ensure that specific provisions for the protection of
children continue to be included in all relevant United
Nations peacekeeping operations, as well as in political
and peacebuilding missions. It also goes on to urge that
child protection concerns be reflected in all these
missions.

Of note is the progress achieved in a number of
countries emerging from conflict. In Burundi, for
example, the progress in discussions on the release of
children associated with the Forces nationales de
liberation, which culminated in the formal release of a
group of children on 2 April in response to the
declaration of the Special Envoys for the Great Lakes
Region and continued advocacy by the United Nations
and the Political Directorate, as well as the regional
initiative, warrants commendation.

Notwithstanding these achievements, there is still
much to be done to protect children from grave
violations. My delegation is disheartened by the fact
that the recruitment of children continues globally. We
must also highlight the lack of progress in the
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1612
(2005) on monitoring and reporting mechanisms.
Children remain vulnerable and adversely affected by
armed conflict despite positive developments.

South Africa therefore encourages the Security
Council to redouble its efforts and pay more attention
to addressing the plight of these affected children. We
call upon all the armed groups involved in the
recruitment of children and those groups that are party
to conflict to enter into dialogue and to agree to and
implement concrete, time-bound action plans to cease
and prevent grave violations committed against
children, as indicated in the Secretary-General's report.

Ensuring the well-being of children is not an
event but a complex and long process. Beyond
domestic political circumstances, and given that many
conflicts have cross-border dimensions, neighbouring
States as well as regional and subregional
organizations play a critical role and have
commensurate responsibilities in finding solutions for
children affected by conflict. While the demobilization
of children from armed groups remains a concern, the
Secretary-General's report informs us that some
children who have been demobilized often voluntarily
rejoin in order to receive salaries to support their
families.

My delegation welcomes the efforts of the United
Nations Children's Fund in undertaking to assist and
prepare time-bound action plans that would include
measures to screen the armed groups and armed forces,
as well as the establishment of prevention mechanisms
against the further recruitment of children. The
priority, however, is to ensure the release of children
from armed groups through utilizing mechanisms such
as these action plans and focusing special attention on
the needs of all children affected by armed conflict.

Sustained investment in health and social
infrastructures, as well as education and skills training,
will ensure the successful integration of children in
their communities and prevent re-recruitment. Special
attention should be given to girls who have been
exploited by armed groups. The rehabilitation and
reintegration of all children who have been associated
with armed forces require immediate attention.
Adequate funding and resources should be made
available by the international community to assist
national efforts to develop relevant and effective
programmes that will ensure the long-term
sustainability and success of such interventions.

South Africa supports dialogue and enhanced
international cooperation to encourage recalcitrant
parties to adhere to the letter and the sprit of those
international instruments that provide the most basic
and appropriate protection of the rights of the child in
situations of armed conflict. The recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict is not only an affront to
human values but also a fundamental impediment to
long-term socioeconomic development, nation-building
and social cohesion.

Lastly, my delegation supports the adoption of
the draft presidential statement at the end of this
meeting.
