First of all, allow me to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary- General, Mr. Chambas, for his intervention. Belgium attaches great importance to the work of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) in favour of prevention, reconciliation, mediation, sustainable peace and the promotion of the rule of law in West Africa and the Sahel. I would also like to thank Ms. Ibrahim for highlighting an important issue for West Africa and the Sahel. The security situation in the region remains unstable. In Mali, the Niger and Burkina Faso, the situation is deteriorating despite the many efforts made and growing international mobilization. In addition, parts of Nigeria also face constant terrorist attacks by Boko Haram as well as conflicts between pastoralists and farmers, which are also worrying phenomena and deserve special attention. Moreover, numerous local conflicts, sometimes of an intra- or intercommunal nature, are raging in the region. This deterioration has a direct impact on the humanitarian situation, causing suffering among hundreds of thousands of innocent civilians. The coronavirus disease pandemic is dramatically exacerbating this already bleak picture, affecting even more strongly the most vulnerable, including women. Large parts of Burkina Faso are now affected by violence. Recent actions have, hopefully, stopped further geographical spread. Belgium is concerned that terrorist attacks, which target not only the State but also civilians, infrastructure and places of worship, threaten not only Burkina Faso but also wider regional stability, with the risk of spreading to coastal countries, as with the attack on the border with Cote d'Ivoire on 11 June. Additionally, community relations are very strained and will take time and work to heal. Across the region, Belgium salutes the courage and sacrifices of the defence and security forces in their fight against terrorists. However, they know that, in order to ultimately defeat terrorism, they have an obligation to set an example through their actions in respect of human rights. It is not weakening the security forces to make them investigate allegations and, if need be, go through a publicly announced criminal or disciplinary procedure. The opposite is true: while a perception of impunity already fuels terrorism, actively fighting impunity is the best way to regain the trust of citizens, gather more intelligence and lay the groundwork for reconciliation. Belgium is committed to continuing to support its partners in the region with that aim. In addition, in line with the Secretary-General and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), Belgium believes that the response to the challenges that arise in West Africa cannot be achieved solely through security- related action. A holistic approach is needed to deal with violent extremism that also emphasizes good governance, the fight against impunity, the strengthening of democratic institutions and addressing the grievances of marginalized groups, as well as sustainable and inclusive development. Therefore, there is an urgent need to take tangible steps to halt the deterioration of the social fabric. Threats to pacific coexistence need to be resisted by fighting any attempt to divide on the basis of religion or community belonging. Democratic institutions sometimes remain fragile in the region. The various upcoming elections later this year could test them even further. It is therefore paramount that voting occur on a level playing field and that the elections be free, fair, transparent and peaceful. Belgium supports the efforts of UNOWAS to help in those elections and to consolidate democracy.str:In particular, the tensions in Guinea have already cost human lives recently, and it is important that there be renewed dialogue and compromise in order to achieve appeased elections. In Burkina Faso and the Niger, the challenge will be to ensure that elections are held all across the country. Finally, in Cete d'Ivoire, where we expect that 2020 will confirm the return to peace and stability, we call on all political actors to rise to the occasion, as the country's situation also impacts regional stability. Moreover, post-electoral tensions in Mali need to be addressed swiftly, in line with the recommendations of ECOWAS, to avoid a further deterioration of the political situation in the country. More broadly, we support the efforts of UNOWAS and the United Nations country teams to promote national reconciliation, post-conflict reconstruction and security sector reform. In various States, the political will to anchor good governance, democracy and human rights will be decisive in consolidating gains and embarking on the path of sustainable development. UNOWAS also plays a leading role in studying the impact of climate change on security within the framework of a conflict-prevention approach. This is vital work, as Ms. Ibrahim explained, and I encourage the Special Representative to continue that effort. In conclusion, I would also like to underline the essential role played by regional and subregional organizations. I commend their close coordination with UNOWAS and encourage them to maintain it in future.
