Mr. Pressman (United States of America): The
United States deeply appreciates Australia's leadership
in advancing the global community's response to
terrorism and violent extremism. The group known as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) does not
threaten only global security; the cruelty of that group
and others associated with Al-Qaida threatens the
values on which the United Nations was founded. Like
other violent extremist groups, ISIL is the product of
a brutal, nihilistic ideology that glorifies violence and
death.The horrific massacres of Sunni, Shia, Kurds,
Christians, Yazidis and other minorities demonstrate
that ISIL spares no group from its murderous agenda.

While continuing to terrorize and kill, ISIL is
actively engaged in recruitment activities that have
attracted significant numbers of foreign terrorist
fighters, from dozens of nations around the world, to
join them in Syria and Iraq in order to commit their
terrorist acts. The actions of ISIL and the foreigners
who havejoined their ranks are despicable. Just this past
Sunday, we were reminded of that horrific barbarity
by ISIL's murder of a humanitarian aid worker, Peter
Abdul-Rahman Kassig. ISIL terrorists - probably
from Western countries, and thus foreign terrorist
fighters - were seen once again in an ISIL video,
along with their cohorts, participating in a cowardly
and outrageous act targeting an innocent American
humanitarian aid worker who wanted to do nothing
more than provide help and comfort to the Syrian
people.

The spirit of goodness and service that burned so
brightly in Peter Abdul-Rahman Kassig is what binds
humankind together, and it is that light and that same
commitment to a better world that will ultimately
prevail over the destruction and hate of ISIL. As we
honour Abdul-Rahman's service and sacrifice, we
see other tragedies unfolding beyond Syria and Iraq.
In Canada less than a month ago, violent extremists
in Quebec and Ottawa killed Canadian soldiers and
attempted to harm senior Government officials, and
yesterday we witnessed a despicable terrorist attack on
worshippers in a synagogue in Jerusalem that resulted
in the murder of four innocent civilians, including
American citizens, as well as injuries to many more.
Our thoughts and prayers are with the victims and their
families.

Those incidents, along with ISIL's unrelenting
bloodshed and brutality in Iraq and Syria, remind us
that we must do more to counter violent extremism
and stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters. The
Security Council has recognized that countering this
threat will require the international community to
develop new tools, approaches and ways to harness our
collective efforts. The results of the Council's recent
efforts to respond, including presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/23 adopted today, provide an important
framework for addressing the threat in all its complexity.
In September, the Council adopted resolution 2178
(2014) at a summit presided over by President Obama
(see S/PV.7272) that focused on one aspect of this
menace, the global flow of foreign terrorist fighters to
and from the conflict zones involved.

The wide support that resolution 2178 (2014)
received, with 105 sponsors, demonstrates the
international community's solidarity in meeting this
threat. The United States will continue to work with all
of its partners to counter the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters into the region, and we stand ready to help
others do the same. Over the past year, we have worked
with Western Europe, the Balkans, North Africa and
the Gulf States to press for greater cooperation on
information-sharing, border security, law enforcement,
capacity-building, counter-messaging, and countering
violent extremism and terrorist financing. We are
pleased to be seeing stronger counter-terrorism laws
and more terrorists brought to justice in the Balkans;
increased security cooperation in North Africa; terrorist
financing reforms in the Gulf; and closer cooperation
with Western European partners.

But more must be done, and as President Obama
has emphasized, all of us must help our partners build
their capacity to meet the evolving threat of terrorism,
including countering the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters and violent extremism in the most vulnerable
communities. The Global Counterterrorism Forum's
first-ever set of international good practices for a
more effective response to the foreign terrorist fighter
phenomenon is a good guide. Preventing foreignterrorist
fighters from reaching Syria and Iraq, and then slipping
back across any of our borders, is a critical element in
strategies for degrading and ultimately defeating ISIL.

The Security Council has recognized that tackling
the ISIL challenge will require using other tools,
including financial measures and sanctions, as we
resolved in August in the adoption of resolution 2170
(2014). Today's presidential statement once again
addresses the importance of choking off all financial
support for ISIL that funds its violent terrorist acts and
its recruitment. In coming months, the Council should
consider whether additional actions and measures are
needed to ensure that ISIL does not use oil, kidnapping
ransoms, banks, Iraq and Syria's cultural property,
donations and other means to finance its murderous
campaign. We welcome and value the important work of
the United Nations counter-terrorism bodies, including
the work of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team established pursuant to resolution
1526 (2004), aimed at more effectively countering
terrorist financing, recruitment and travel, and the
efforts of the Executive Directorate of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee to identify legal and capacity
gaps in Member States.

Beyond the official counter-terrorism body of the
United Nations, there should be greater integration,
where appropriate, of counter-terrorism into the
Organization's other related efforts. The Council has
now firmly established the importance of countering
violent extremism, and we reiterate the central
importance of such international efforts to counter
and respond to toxic, violent ideologies of terrorism.
We must work together to de-legitimize ISIL's hate
and violence, and we must expose its dark, false and
deadly vision. In that regard, we particularly welcome
the recent efforts of the Global Engagement and
Resilience Fund, whose governing board met this
week and approved an accelerated funding mechanism
aimed at enabling the Fund to provide small grants to
community-based organizations for projects to counter
ISIL's violent extremism.

The challenges we face in countering terrorism
could not be more important, and so it is fitting that
today the Council has adopted an important framework
to help guide additional efforts. Now we must do more.
As we have heard from Council members today, we
are united in the face of this threat to our security and
values. We must turn outrage into action, we must do so
together and we must do so decisively.

