Mr. Ahsan (Bangladesh): Bangladesh appreciates
the role played by High Representative Wolfgang
Petritsch in an exceedingly difficult and complex
mission. His briefing this morning traced the
difficulties faced and the challenges ahead.

We also thank Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special
Representative and Coordinator of United Nations
Operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
comprehensive statement and for sharing with us his
perception about the present situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The overall situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
remains stable. However, some issues need to be
addressed. First, with respect to institution-building,
the consolidation of institutions is one of the main
priorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have noted
the progress and the difficulties in strengthening the
state institutions and in creating an independent
judiciary. These are very much part of the core
agenda of the country. The judicial and prosecutorial
appointment process should be improved to ensure that
appointments are conducted according to objective and
transparent criteria and based on proper professional
qualifications and procedures. Both are indispensable if
the rule of law is to be established uniformly across the
Federation. We agree in this regard with the comments
made by the Special Representative on the efforts of
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
regarding police andjudicial reform.

We continue to believe that the Republika Srpska
has an obligation to cooperate with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. There are
indicted criminals freely moving around the entity.
Without the cooperation of its authorities, the indictees
cannot be brought to justice.

Secondly, with respect to economic reforms, the
increasingly dire economic situation, as exemplified by
the recent downward re-evaluation of economic
growth, is of some concern to us. The creation of a
single economic space seems to have come to a
standstill. Many short-sighted political considerations
seem to have become dominant, culminating in the
blockage of numerous laws, including European Union
road-map issues, by one of the entities. Decisive and
concrete steps towards the structural economic reforms
so desperately needed to attract foreign investment and
to create jobs must continue. This will need bold
measures of reform to create investor confidence.

Thirdly, as to election laws, we welcome the
recent adoption of the Election Law by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliament. This will not only satisfy a
considerable need for an organizational structure for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but also demonstrate that the
newly elected authorities are ready for compromise on
essential matters.

Finally, the international community should
continue to support the institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in their efforts to achieve stability and
self-sustainability. The international community has,
however, invested a lot of effort and energy over the
last six years and we sincerely believe that these efforts
must continue. Failure to achieve the targets of
institution-building and the rule of law will have
repercussions throughout the region - a risk which we
should make every effort to avoid.

The options presented by the Special
Representative regarding streamlining point to the need
for the international community to remain engaged.
These options should be examined seriously in order to
give necessary direction. We must recognize that the
success of multi-ethnicity in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
crucial to that country and the region. The continued
support of the Security Council is important for peace
and reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
greater region.

