Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
successful presidency of the Security Council for this
month, during which you have offered valuable insights
into the work of the Council - the most important
being resolution 2388 (2017), adopted by the Security
Council today, on the issue of trafficking in Persons
in conflict situations. We would like to thank the
Secretary-General and all of today's briefers for their
valuable contributions to today's debate.

The delegation of Egypt aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. I would like to add the following points in
my national capacity.

Egypt believes that trafficking in persons is a
criminal act that goes against human values. Combating
trafficking in persons is a priority of the Egyptian
Government. Egypt is considered a State of transit and
destination for refugees and migrants fleeing the ravages
of war and armed conflict in the region - conflicts that
create an environment rife with trafficking in persons,
particularly carried out by terrorist groups, with the
purpose of exploiting migrants, especially women
and children.

Egypt has therefore been in the vanguard of States
to have ratified the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, as well as, in 2004, the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children, and
the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by
Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.
Moreover, together with Belarus in 2005, we launched
an initiative to form the Group of Friends United against
Human Trafficking.

At the national level, Egypt has established a
legal and institutional framework that guarantees the
implementation of its international obligations through
a number of measures.

First, in October 2016, Egypt launched a national
strategy to combat trafficking in persons, which was
accompanied by a five-year action plan covering the
years 2016 to 2021. It includes projects, awareness-
raising campaigns, media campaigns and capacity-
building for those working in Egypt on preventing and
combating trafficking in persons.

Secondly, in 2010, Egypt promulgated a law to
combat trafficking in persons. We have set up a national
coordination committee to combat and prevent illegal
migration and trafficking in persons.

Thirdly, Egypt has established specialized criminal
departments within its courts of appeal in order to
guarantee that issues related to trafficking in persons
are dealt with more swiftly.

At the regional level, Egypt makes active efforts
across all the regional initiatives in which it participates,
including the following measures.

First, Egypt hosted the second regional ministerial
conference of the African Union-Horn of Africa
initiative to prevent and combat trafficking in persons
and the smuggling of migrants, which was held in
Sharm El-Sheikh in September 2016.

Secondly, Egypt hosted the trilateral meeting for
the three main processes that are involved in preventing
and combating trafficking in persons on the African
continent, including the Khartoum process, the Rabat
process and the African Union-Horn of Africa initiative
to prevent and combat trafficking in persons and the
smuggling of migrants.

Thirdly, Egypt acceded to the Arab model law on
combating trafficking in persons and, in that regard,
actively participates in the meetings of the Arab
Regional Consultative Process on Migration.

At the international level, Egypt actively seeks
to cooperate with United Nations agencies and the
relevant international organizations in order to prevent
and combat trafficking in persons, especially the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and
the International Organization for Migration. Egypt
also actively participates in the ongoing consultative
process on two global compacts - on migration and
refugees - in order to pave the way for negotiations
on those compacts in the near future. Egypt looks
forward to arriving at two comprehensive and balanced
documents that take into consideration the interests of
all parties and States on migration and refugees.

The Security Council continues to set the legal
framework that is necessary to combat trafficking in
persons in areas of armed conflict. It has done so by
adopting resolution 2388 (2017) today, and we would
like to express our gratitude to the Italian delegation
for the great effort it has exerted in order to arrive
at a consensus resolution in the Council. In order to
ensure that the resolution is implemented in a way that
will guarantee its success, we would like to make the
following points.

The General Assembly is the main specialized
organ of the United Nations on the issue of trafficking
in persons.

The United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Palermo Protocoal are
considered the foundation for States to implement
Security Council resolutions, including everything
pertaining to the definition of the crime of trafficking
in persons and exploitation.

It is important that the international community
redouble its efforts in order to cut off all sources of
funding for terrorist organizations, including funding
from trafficking in persons, using all international
mechanisms available to do so.

The crime of trafficking in persons, including
women and girls, is not tied to any religion, nationality
or civilization. We also note the important role that
traditional and religious leaders can play in dispelling
the link that some extremist ideologies try to establish
and disseminate.

It is important to note in the General Assembly
the pioneering role of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in the field of trafficking in persons.
We would like to welcome the activities that the
UNODC has been carrying out in order to establish an
operational framework for the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

We recognize the important role of both the United
Nations and the private sector in rupturing the links
of trafficking in persons by following the chain of
consumption and purchasing.

In conclusion, Egypt would like to reiterate its full
support for the United Nations Global Plan of Action
to Combat Trafficking in Persons, which is considered
the governing framework for international cooperation
in fighting that crime - not only for States but also for
civil society and the private sector. Egypt supports the
political declaration that was adopted in September for
a second revision of that Global Plan of Action.

