Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the French presidency for convening
this important open debate, as well as the briefers for
their insightful statements. Azerbaijan welcomes the
advancement of the protection-of-civilians agenda in
the Security Council's work.

The intentional targeting of civilians remains one
of the most alarming trends of contemporary armed
conflicts. Civilians continue to suffer greatly from the
horrible consequences of armed conflict. The fact that
more than 60 million people were displaced as of the
end of 2015 is the only fact needed to demonstrate the
scale of the calamity of civilians. We appreciate the
generosity of countries that are hosting large numbers
of refugees.

My country commends the inclusion of the issue of
forced displacement in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) and
the Secretary-General's Agenda for Humanity.

The World Humanitarian Summit, recently held
in Istanbul, should further encourage Member States
and the whole international community to strengthen
their efforts to reduce human suffering. We also look
forward to the high-level meeting on large movements
of refugees and migrants to be held on 19 September.

Azerbaijan also supports the growing awareness
about the problem of internal displacement worldwide.
As the Secretary-General's report (S/2016/447)
acknowledges, strong protection frameworks are also
needed for internally displaced persons. In that regard,
the African Union Convention for the Protection
and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in
Africa - the first binding document on internal
displacement - is especially commendable.

Azerbaijan strongly condemns all attacks on
civilians and civilian structures in situations of
armed conflict. We are deeply concerned by sexual
Violence in conflict, grave violations against children,
the use of explosive weapons in populated areas and
attacks on humanitarian personnel, to name just a few.

The utmost attention should be given by all parties to
conflict to complying with international humanitarian
and human rights law and respecting the principles
of distinction, proportionality and precaution. We
echo the assessment of the Secretary-General that
most civilian casualties and suffering could indeed be
avoided if parties respected international humanitarian
and human rights law. First and foremost, a lasting
political solution should be achieved to put an end to
the plight of civilians.

We recognize the tremendous role that United
Nations peace operations have played in protecting
civilians around the globe. We condemn all attacks on
United Nations peacekeepers and pay tribute to those
who lost their lives while accomplishing their mission.
We cannot but agree with the recommendations offered in
the Secretary-General's report that the Security Council
should accord priority to the protection of civilians in
the mandates of peace operations in situations requiring
such protection. Mandates related to the protection
of civilians should be clear, realistic and achievable,
and peacekeepers must be fully equipped with all of
the operational and logistical capabilities necessary to
carry out their mandates. Furthermore, United Nations
peacekeeping operations should complement the work
undertaken by the Governments affected.
Unfortunately, my country has also been affected by
the large-scale Violations against its civilian population
committed by the Republic of Armenia. The occupation
of the Azerbaijani territories by Armenia has been
accompanied by deliberate attacks and the killing of
civilians, ethnic cleansing and forced displacement.
Resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and
884 (1993) refer specifically to the displacement of
civilians, attacks on civilians and bombardments of the
territory of Azerbaijan.

Azerbaijani civilians continue to be targeted by
Armenia. On 30 January last, I informed the Security
Council of the cases of two Azerbaijani civilians,
Mr. Shakhbaz Guliyev and Mr. Dilgam Askarov,
who were taken hostage by Armenia while they were
visiting the graves of their parents in the occupied
region of Azerbaijan. I once again draw the attention
of the Council to this issue, underlining the fact that
those civilians were captured on the territory of their
own country. Therefore, the illegal court proceedings
sentencing Mr. Askarov to life imprisonment and
Mr. Guliyev to 22 years in prison are null and void.
Mr. President, I appeal again, through you, to the
relevant international human rights bodies and
humanitarian actors to intervene in order to achieve
their release.

At the beginning of April, the Armenian armed
forces, using heavy artillery and large-calibre weapons
on their positions in the occupied territories of
Azerbaijan, increased the shelling of areas of Azerbaij an
close to the front lines, purposely targeting densely
populated areas. As a result, six civilians, including
two children, were killed, and 33 wounded. Houses,
schools, kindergartens and Vital civilian infrastructure
have been substantially damaged by the Armenian
forces in order to create panic among the population
and trigger massive displacement. A large number of
civilians have been deprived oftheir basic rights to life,
health, property and education. Many of the Violations
committed by Armenia against Azerbaijani civilians are
tantamount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.

Furthermore, despite the ceasefire agreed on
5 April, Armenia is now threatening Azerbaijan with
the use of "dirty bombs". Hrant Bagratyan, a member of
the Armenian Parliament and former Prime Minister of
Armenia, has proudly stated that his country possesses
a nuclear weapon.

As a result of the occupation of a large part of
the territory of my country, hundreds of thousands
of Azerbaijanis have found themselves in a mass
displacement situation. The Secretary-General's
report stresses the primary responsibility of national
Governments in protecting and assisting refugees
and internally displaced persons. In this regard, let
me emphasize that Azerbaijan has demonstrated
that it is possible to improve the living and housing
conditions of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
without undermining their return to their places of
origin. My Government's efforts to tackle the problems
of IDPs have been hailed by numerous international
actors, including the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the International
Organization for Migration and others. Azerbaijan
remains fully committed to the return ofIDPs, in safety
and dignity, to their native lands.

