Mr. Muhriddin (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian):
First of all, I would like to thank the Russian delegation,
which is presiding this month over the Security Council
and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), for
convening today's timely meeting.

In recent years, the rapidly changing situation in
the world has been accompanied by an increase in
tensions and armed conflicts and new challenges and
threats to international security. The expanding cross-
border nature of terrorism, extremism, drug trafficking
and organized crime is a matter of grave concern, as
is the rise in the number of returning foreign terrorist
fighters. I am convinced that, only through joint efforts,
will countries be able to effectively counter terrorist and
extremist organizations, which are deftly implementing
modern technologies and methods.

I should like to note that, during its 2018
chairmanship of the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS), the Republic of Tajikistan focused on
importance of strengthening cooperation between CIS
member States and other international and regional
organizations on countering such challenges and threats.
We also made efforts to step up the role played by the
CIS in addressing issues related to ensuring security
and stability and improving the work of CIS bodies
to combat terrorism, extremism, drug trafficking and
economic crime.

As was noted earlier, the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO) is making efforts and a significant
contribution to combating terrorism, extremism,
organized transnational crime, illicit trafficking in
narcotics and weapons, illegal migration, and illegal
trafficking in human beings. It has also been working
to strengthen its peacekeeping capacity and address the
consequences of natural and human-made disasters.

The agenda for cooperation between these two
organizations is very diverse and allows for addressing
a wide range of issues through sharing information,
organized visits, participation in conferences and
events, while taking advantage of both organizations'
potential. It is important to note the important role that
CSTO plays in helping ensure security on Tajikistan's
southern border with Afghanistan.

In that context, we believe that, with the United
Nations playing the central role in resolving the
situation in Afghanistan through political dialogue as
soon as possible, coordinated efforts are one of the key
factors to strengthening security in the region. It is well
known that the Shanghai Cooperation Organization is
one of the most dynamically developing international
organizations and that it has a huge potential for
countering such challenges. As a full-fledged member
of the United Nations, the CIS, the CSTO and the
SCO, Tajikistan consistently contributes to the
implementation of those organizations' programmes
and strategies in countering the challenges and threats
of our time.

We believe that the response to the increasing
threat of terrorism must be comprehensive and that
the United Nations must be a key coordinator. The
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
the relevant Security Council resolutions and United
Nations counter-terrorism conventions form the
basis of our collective struggle against terrorism. In
accordance with its international obligations, Tajikistan
is taking the necessary measures to combat terrorism
and extremism. We are party to all the United Nations
conventions and other foundational international and
regional instruments in this area.
I would like to take this opportunity to invite
participants in today's meeting to participate in the
high-level event entitled "International and regional
cooperation on countering terrorism and its financing
through illicit drug trafficking and organized crime",
which is to be held on 27 September in Conference
Room 7. The event has been organized by the Republic
of Tajikistan in cooperation with the Office of Counter-
Terrorism and builds on the outcome of the high-level
conference on countering the financing of terrorism,
held in Dushanbe in May.

In conclusion, I wish the Russian Federation every
success as it presides over the Security Council and
the SCO.

