Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I am making this statement on behalf of the
group of Arab States, which endorses the statements
delivered by the representative ongypt, on behalfofthe
Non-Aligned Movement, and the representative of the
Republic of Kazakhstan, on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.

I would like to offer you, Mr. President, our sincere
congratulations on your friendly country's assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of July
and to thank you for your tireless work during your
presidency.

The topic ofthis meeting, the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine, is not a new
item on the Security Council's agenda. This issue has
been with the United Nations since its founding. When
we consider the issues of occupation and colonialism
in the world, which the Organization has discussed
for many years and in many cases has successfully
resolved, we cannot help but wonder about the inability
of the Council and the wider international community
to find a solution to the question of Palestine and other
occupied Arab territories. Hope for finding a resolution
is starting to dwindle and has gone through many ups
and downs over the past 60 years. Whenever a ray of
hope appears on the horizon, it is quickly extinguished
by Israel's intransigence and refusal to abide by the will
of the international community. The human conscience
demands that a solution to the Palestinian question
be found, calling on the political will of the entire
international community to take the most courageous
steps towards that goal.

My first point concerns the stalled negotiations
between the Palestinians and the Israelis, which have
always been and remain the result of Israel's continued
and accelerating settlement activities, especially its
Judaization of Holy Jerusalem and the surrounding
areas. According to Israeli media reports, on 14 July
Israel decided to construct 130 new housing units in
the Har Homa settlement in Jabal Abu Ghneim on the
road leading south-east from occupied Jerusalem to
Bethlehem. This is part of a wider plan, endorsed by
Israeli authorities, to build over 1,000 housing units
in Jerusalem and Ramallah in the heart of the West
Bank. The continued settlement activity undermines
the peace process, destroys the two-State solution and
remains the main obstacle to any just solution.

The position of the international community
and the Council on the Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories is clear. However, it
needs a strong international political mechanism to
implement it, because the settlements clearly violate
the Fourth Geneva Convention, which considers Israel
an occupying State that may not alter the demographic
character of the area it occupies or confiscate occupied
territories. Moreover, the sixth paragraph of article
49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention states that "[t]he
Occupying Power shall not deport or transfer parts of its
own civilian population into the territory it occupies".

Israel has not only ignored that article, but has
violated it by providing political and economic
incentives to its residents to move to and live in the
occupied Palestinian territories, thereby changing their
geographic and demographic nature. The establishment
of the settlements has imposed limitations on the
daily lives of Palestinians in the occupied territories
and has left no reasonable room for the long-awaited
establishment of a Palestinian State.

The second issue which is of equal importance is
the situation of Holy Jerusalem, the first of the two
prayer points and the third holiest shrine for more than
1.5 billion Muslims throughout the world. The Israeli
occupation authorities continue to confiscate land and
demolish the homes of Jerusalemites in order to change
the human nature of the holy city. Israel also continues
to build settlements around the city on the lands of
Palestinian citizens. The occupying Power continually
transfers Israeli settlers to East Jerusalem, forcefully
displacing Palestinian families from their homes and
cancelling their residency permits.

In the past, we have spoken in the Council about
Israeli excavation activities around the Al-Aqsa
Mosque. However, the past 10 years have witnessed
unprecedented excavation activity in the area directly
attached to the Mosque, including the Arab village of
Silwan, which was annexed by Israel along with the
holy city of Jerusalem. According to the Centre for
Jerusalem Studies, which is part of Bar-Ilan University
in Israel, the recent activities undertaken by the Israeli
authorities are considered to be the largest excavation
operation ever beneath the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque and its
vicinity. All of these actions are illegitimate and illegal,
according to the resolutions on Jerusalem adopted by
the Security Council and the General Assembly.

The third issue thathould like to address - following
the eighth anniversary of the adoption of the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice of 9 July
2004 on the illegitimacy of the construction of the
wall in the occupied territories - is that of the racist
separation wall built by Israel, the occupying Power.
The wall breaks the West Bank into small and isolated
pockets in a manner that deprives the Palestinian people
of their land and water resources.

The deteriorating situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories at the very least requires the
Security Council to dispatch a mission to Palestine.
In the past, the Security Council has Visited many
areas throughout the world, such as Sierra Leone,
Haiti and most recently Liberia, in order to observe
the situation there first-hand. We therefore call on the
Security Council to make such a visit, out of moral and
humanitarian motives and on the basis of its mandate
to maintain international peace and security. We also
call on Council members to respond to the invitation
that has been sent to them from the President of the
Palestinian National Authority, Mr. Mahmoud Abbas,
in that regard.

In closing, I cannot fail to mention the seriously
deteriorating situation in the Syrian Arab Republic.
We all know of the recent increased intensity of
killing, whose victims now exceed 17,000. Syria has
also witnessed an increased flow of refugees escaping
the hell of fighting to neighbouring countries. Their
numbers now exceed 200,000 refugees, not to mention
internally displaced persons. The most recent victims
fell in the Al-Hula massacre of 25 May and the Trimseh
massacre of 13 July, in which over 250 civilians were
killed, not to mention the daily acts of killing in which
tens if not hundreds die as a result of these clashes.

All of that leaves no room for doubt that the
Syrian regime is relentlessly killing any Syrian who
opposes it. What encourages the regime to persist in
killing its people is the inability of the Council and the
international community to take any firm measure to
stop it, most recently when the Council failed to adopt
a draft resolution pertaining to Syria last week.

It appears that those who support the regime in
its criminal actions do not understand the dangers of
their support and its consequences in terms of human
tragedy, which will be remembered for all time. The
Syrian regime would not have killed or displaced those
thousands of people if it had not enjoyed the support
and backing of influential international Powers.

The Arab States have taken a clear and firm
position on the situation in Syria. They have urged the
Syrian regime to abandon the security option and to
adopt the political option, pursuant to the resolutions of
the League of Arab States that formed the basis of the
mandate given to Mr. Kofi Annan, Joint Special Envoy
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States
on Syria. On that basis, and in view of the Security
Council's inability to take the necessary measures
incumbent upon it by virtue of its mandate and
responsibilities, the Arab States have decided to appeal
to the General Assembly to uphold its responsibilities
in such situations, pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations.

