Mr. Mukerji (India): At the outset, Mr. President,
let me thank you for organizing today's debate on
the theme "United Nations peacekeeping operations:
The United Nations and regional partnerships and its
evolution". We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General, the Deputy Secretary General of the European
External Action Service and the Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations for their
briefings on this important topic. I would also like
to thank you, Mr. President, and your delegation for
circulating a comprehensive concept note (S/2014/478, annex) in the context of this debate.

As the largest overall contributor of troops to
the United Nations peacekeeping operations, having
sent more than 170,000 Indian troops to 43 of the
69 peacekeeping operations mandated so far, India
speaks with considerable experience in this field. With
the changing nature of conflict, we have witnessed
that there are new demands that have been placed on
peacekeeping operations. Those new trends can be seen
most in the African continent, where we have the bulk
of our peacekeepers.

Africa has seen several peacekeeping operations
that have involved the collaboration of non-United
Nations third parties and regional organizations,
including the African Union, the European Union,
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Southern
African Development Community. Through this debate,
we are endeavouring to undertake a much-needed
stocktaking of the partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations in peacekeeping
operations.

As mentioned in the concept note, we would
concentrate on the following three aspects of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. These are the political, operational and
financial aspects.

On the important political dimension, we have
consistently emphasized that the new trend of
peacekeeping operations, wherein there is a mixing of
mandates, directly affects the operational effectiveness
of the peacekeeping operation and exposes
traditional-mandate peacekeepers to unnecessary
threats from armed internal conflicts that the United
Nations has not itselfinstigated. We would like to point
out the dangers of using United Nations peacekeepers to
tackle what are essentially internal political conflicts.
In doing so, the Council is effectively endorsing
an unsustainable approach to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The concept note mentions greater strategic
guidance and support from Headquarters to provide
effective command-and-control structure. However,
those would be short-term remedies to essentially long-
term, unresolved political issues that peacekeepers
are unable to resolve. We agree that once there is a
structured mechanism of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, it would
be useful to strengthen it and to focus on replacing ad
hoc mechanisms with tested permanent mechanisms
that would be more predictable. We believe that
regional organizations, which are composed of States
Members of the United Nations, must advocate and
apply the same principles of the United Nations Charter
for peacekeeping that currently apply to mainstream
peacekeeping operations.

The second aspect of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations pertains to
the operational dimension. It has been our experience
that investment in equipment, logistics and training goes
a long way towards making peacekeeping operations
more viable and sustainable. It would go a long way
towards strengthening peacekeeping operations with
more than one contributor if we were able to improve
logistical support to the mission. We agree that proper
planning holds the key to the successful implementation
of the mandates of j oint operations, which would require
greater coordination of the efforts of two organizations
working for a common objective. It is also important
to place the right emphasis on the capacity-building
aspect of regional organizations, which would be
useful in tackling conflicts in their region. In addition,
it is also important to have a clear-cut exit strategy for
peacekeeping operations so that reference to the time
frame is clear to all.

The final aspect mentioned in the concept note
pertains to the financial dimension, which in our view
is one ofthe critical factors ofpeacekeeping operations.
In that regard, we note the cases of transition from a
regional organization-led peacekeeping operation to
a United Nations peacekeeping operation. The most
recent of those is the case of the Central African
Republic, where, through the adoption of resolution
2149 (2014), the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic was created, effective as of 15 September.
Such transitions require careful financial planning. The
importance of having concrete views on the issue of
financial collaboration cannot be overstated.

With the emergence of multidimensional mandates,
we have a situation of new peacekeeping mandates
without providing for matching financial resources.
In that regard, we would like to bring to attention of
the Council the fact that, after intense negotiations
between the troop-contributing countries, on the one
hand, and the finance-contributing countries, on the
other, the General Assembly recently decided a new
rate of $1,322 per peacekeeper per month starting 1 July
2014, as against the recommendation put forward by the
Senior Advisory Group of $1,762.55 per peacekeeper
per month. The larger issue of financial imbalance
must be taken into account when we look at the issue of
providing sustainable and predictable financial support
to joint peacekeeping operations.

In conclusion, we call on the Council to engage
with troop-contributing countries under Article 44
while drafting new multidimensional mandates for
peacekeeping operations. In addition, we would like
to reiterate that in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, we must make sure that all attempts at
the pacific settlement of disputes set out in Article 52
have been exhausted by the member States belonging
to regional arrangements or regional agencies before
the Council is asked to approve new peacekeeping
operations by regional organizations.

