Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
briefings provided by the various briefers this morning.
We would especially like to commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, for his outstanding role as leader of
MINUSCA for the past three and a half years, which
was an extraordinarily difficult period.

We are also grateful to the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, His Excellency
Ambassador Sma'i'l Chergui, for his prominent role
in the process of negotiating the important Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, which was recently concluded.

We are grateful as well to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Central Africans Abroad of the Central
African Republic, Her Excellency Ambassador Sylvie
Valerie Bai'po-Temon, who has honoured us with her
presence this morning.

Peru welcomes the recent progress made in the
political sphere, which we consider to be encouraging.
The signing of the peace agreement between the
Government of the Central African Republic and the 14
armed groups, as a result of the dialogues initiated in
Khartoum in January, is a sign of the determination of
the people of the Central Africans to put an end to the
more than five years of conflict in their country. It was
significant that members of political parties, religious
leaders, civil society, representatives of the victims of
the conflict, women and young people also participated
in the dialogues, since the process towards a sustainable
peace is only possible if all Central Africans take
ownership of the process.

At the same time, for the agreement to be
truly successful, its results should be reflected in
improvements in the security and socioeconomic
development of the country, as well as in the relief of the
grave humanitarian situation faced by its population.
The parties should now focus, without delays, on
the proper implementation and compliance with the
agreed commitments. The support of the international
community at this stage is fundamental. In that regard,
we would like to refer to some aspects that we consider
to be a priority in the implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic.

First, the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation programme must be
accelerated, based on compliance by the armed groups
with the obligations assumed in the peace agreement.
That is linked to the redeployment of national defence
and internal security forces throughout the territory
of the Central African Republic. We consider it of
the utmost importance to strengthen the support that
MINUSCA, together with the international community,
has been providing in that area in order to allow for
the establishment of mixed brigades and the integration
of former members of armed groups into the national
defence forces.

Secondly, the scope of sustainable peace requires
institutions and capacities that guarantee access to
justice and accountability for the crimes committed
and, as a result, promote national reconciliation. To that
end, we underscore the need for the establishment of the
truth,justice, reconciliation and reparation commission,
which will all allow for, among other things, providing
assistance to victims of sexual violence and children
recruited by armed groups. We recognize the efforts of
the Central African authorities in the establishment and
operationalization of their national judicial institutions,
particularly the Special Criminal Court, as important
steps in the fight against impunity.

Thirdly, it is important to increase State presence
throughout the national territory. To that end, it will
be essential that the Government of the Central
African Republic work within a progressive process
of decentralization that contributes to energizing
the country's development, thereby improving the
standard of living of the citizens. At the same time, it
will allow for the involvement of communities that are
marginalized by the conflict.

In conclusion, we would like to highlight the
work carried out by the African Union and the United
Nations in the search for a solution to the crisis in the
Central African Republic. The coming months will be
crucial. The international community should remain
vigilant as to the implementation of the agreement
and be involved in the monitoring mechanisms. For
our part, we will continue to support the authorities
and the people of the Central African Republic in their
efforts to entrench State authority and achieve peace
and national reconciliation.

