Ms. Colakovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
would like to begin by thanking the presidency for
having convened this important debate. At the same
time, since this is my last address to the Security
Council this month, I wish to express my gratitude to
you, Mr. President, and to the Turkish delegation for
successfully leading this important body during this
month. I am sure that your wisdom, guidance and
diplomatic skills will serve as excellent examples to all
of us.

This year, the agenda item on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict marks the tenth anniversary
of its consideration by the Security Council, to which
Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches the utmost
importance. Bosnia and Herzegovina associates itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
the Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union.

The report of the Secretary-General (8/2009/277)
vividly describes how civilians continue to suffer the
consequences of armed conflict and to be the target of
attacks. In some cases women, children and unarmed
men have become the primary target of attacks by
parties to the conflict. An unfortunate characteristic of
contemporary conflict is that civilian casualties often
outnumber combatants killed on the battlefield. Bosnia
and Herzegovina is deeply concerned by such attacks,
especially those deliberately targeting humanitarian
workers during their noble missions.

My delegation condemns all violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
Given its own painful experience, Bosnia and
Herzegovina always recognizes the need for strict
compliance with international humanitarian law. The
international community must strengthen mechanisms
to enhance compliance by State and non-State parties
to armed conflict with international law, in particular
2
based on provisions of the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.

As a State party, Bosnia and Herzegovina
reiterates its commitment to the provisions of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). The Court must be the real guardian of the
provisions of international humanitarian law. In that
regard, combating impunity is a factor in preventing
the commission of such acts against civilians.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomed the adoption
of the text of the Convention on Cluster Munitions at
the conference held in Dublin in May 2008. Bosnia and
Herzegovina signed the Convention on Cluster
Munitions at the Signing Conference of the Convention
held on 3 December 2008 in Oslo. The Convention on
Cluster Munitions will serve as an indispensable legal
instrument to broadly contribute to the protection of
civilians during armed conflict.

My country welcomes increased engagement by
the Security Council on issues connected to the
protection of civilians. In that regard, we would like to
commend the Security Council on the adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2009/l, at the last
meeting on this agenda item, and the updated aide-
memoire on the protection of civilians contained in its
annex.

I am convinced that the aide-memoire, produced
as a result of close cooperation between the Security
Council and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, is an indispensable tool that will
help peacekeeping missions to successfully carry out
their mandates.

My delegation supports the work of the Security
Council Group of Experts on the Protection of
Civilians as a body that will contribute to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict through its
analyses. Bosnia and Herzegovina would like to
reiterate once again the importance of the role of
regional and subregional organizations in conflict
resolution, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and conflict
prevention. Bearing in mind that the majority of
conflicts today are non-international, a regional and
subregional approach would lead to more workable and
lasting solutions. We invite competent United Nations
bodies and agencies to work closely with regional
organizations in that regard.
09-38414

Finally, the best way to reduce the consequences

of armed conflict is the timely address of the root
causes.

