Judge Pillay: I thank the representatives for their
comments. I shall endeavour to address some of their
questions. One that clearly is the concern of many of
them is: Would we be in a position to use ad litem
judges and would we be in a position to complete our
mandate by 2007?
I have prepared a plan that I will leave with you,
Madam President, and with the representative of
Norway, who raised the particular question. The plan
indicates that if, for instance, we had ad litem judges
available by April, we could immediately begin five
new cases. In other words, we now have 26 trialists
awaiting trail. We could try 14 to 17 of that number
from April to June next year. That is a reasonable
possibility. With the use of ad litem judges, we would
be in a position to complete the trials of current
detainees by 2004. I have said 2007 for future cases,
based on the Prosecutor's estimate.

However, I share the concern raised by members
as to the vast number and the uncertainty of who is
going to be arrested and whether there are going to be
136 or 45 individual trials. With that precaution in
mind, I make a positive prediction that we will be well
placed to complete all existing trials of detainees by
2004 and allow a three-year period for new trials.

The other concern that was expressed was the
impact of the measures of reform that have been taken.
The judges of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), together with the judges of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), have moved cautiously towards
many measures aimed at expediting trials, but, as the
representative of Ireland said in support of this, we
have to be very careful not to compromise the interests
of fair trial. I would give as a positive example of this
the judges' intervention with regard to reducing the
numbers of witnesses. Why do you need to call 100
witnesses? Why can't you call 50? That kind of
intervention is a positive example of the impact on
court proceedings.

A negative, or troubling aspect, is that we need
more court management measures in place to address
the question of translations. In the media case, for
instance, which is ongoing, we are talking about 600
audio-radio broadcasts in Kinya-Rwanda that have to
be translated into French and English. An hour before I
left to board the plane, a new issue came up - the
parties discovered that they were actually sitting with
100 tapes in Kinya-Rwanda of broadcasts of Radio
Muhabura, which is the RP of radio. Now, we do not
have translators who can translate from Kinya-Rwanda
direct into English. It has to go from Kinya-Rwanda
into French and then into English. This is a practical
problem that has to be addressed from a management
point of View. If we are to complete the mandate as the
representatives expect us to, then we need both
extrajudicial capacity and the resources to make it
work.

We bear in mind that, as the representative of the
United Kingdom has pointed out, reform measures are
a continuing process, and we will continue to address
them. At the moment, for instance, the judges are
dealing with several motions with regard to judicial
notice. If we can reach a stage where we can take
judicial notice of widespread and systematic killings,
for instance, or that genocide took place over the whole
of Rwanda, that will narrow the issues. That is
something we are working on.

I would rather not enter into such questions as the
transfer of the Tribunal headquarters to Kigali and the
cooperation of the Rwandan Government after our
mandate is fulfilled, because of the limits of my own
profession and the fact that these are political issues.
Suffice it to say that fair trials have to be perceived as
fair, and there is some concern about the security
situation in Rwanda. This has been expressed by
defence counsel.

The representative of Norway referred to the
information and outreach programmes that have been
put in place and asked what the prospects are for their
further development. At the moment, the information
office set up by the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) functions in Kigali alone. We need to
expand this programme so that it reaches the rural
areas in the whole of Rwanda. We are working on this,
and we could do much more if we received the level of
outreach funds that the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) has reached by way
of donations. A welcome sign, however, is that the
Government of the Netherlands has committed itself to
helping us set up a video link between the ICTY and
the ICTR, and between the ICTR and the Office of the
Prosecutor in Kigali, as well as this information centre.
That would enable the Tribunal to spread its
information work much farther.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the judges
of the ICTR and our new Registrar, Mr. Dieng, are
committed to making a very firm effort to ensure that
the ad litem reform is used to the fullest extent.

