Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

I would first like to thank you, Mr. President, and
New Zealand for having organized this very important
debate. We thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
We would also like to acknowledge the important
contributions by the Prime Ministers of Samoa and
Jamaica and the Minister of Finance of Seychelles in
sharing their perspectives on the peace and security
challenges faced by small island developing States
(SIDS). We welcome the participation of so many high-
ranking dignitaries from Member States: the President
of Kiribati, Ministers, the Prime Minister ofAruba, the
Premier of Niue and their respective statements.

We welcome, as I said earlier, the initiative by New
Zealand to convene this meeting. The security challenges
facing SIDS demonstrate the complex interlinkages
between stability, security and global challenges. Our
discussion should consider both independent States
and those overseas territories administered by other
States, including some EU member States, which face a
common set of problems.

The unique and particular vulnerabilities of
SIDS have been consistently acknowledged by the
international community, most recently at the third
International Conference on Small Island Developing
States, held in Samoa last September, to which the
previous speaker just referred. It is clear that the
vulnerabilities arising from small size and remoteness,
weak capacity and exposure to natural disasters can
have an impact on stability and in some cases pose
security challenges.

The SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (Samoa Pathway), agreed in Samoa last year, acknowledges
SIDS' unique and particular vulnerabilities while
offering many tools to address them. In helping
implement the Pathway, the international community,
including through the strong partnership between the
European Union and SIDS, will continue to deliver
on the promise of sustainable development through an
integrated, balanced and rights-based approach.

Many SIDS continue to be dramatically affected
by natural and other disasters, leading to loss of life
and livelihoods and significant economic, social
and environmental costs. Most recently, Cyclone
Pam showed us the dramatic impact of a natural
disaster on development and human security, in
particular when combined with remoteness and
geographical specificities. The Sendai Framework
firmly anchors risk management as a key element of
sustainable development and takes into account SIDS'
vulnerabilities. The European Union is thus reorienting
its support to make resilience a priority in cooperation
with those countries most vulnerable to natural
disasters, and will work with SIDS to better integrate
risk management and resilience into their policies and
strategies.

We must continue our efforts to avoid the negative
impact of climate change, which is not only threatening
the survival of some SIDS, but is also challenging their
access to key resources, such as water or fisheries. The
recentthe Arria Formula meeting ofthe Security Council,
initiated by Spain, on the role of climate change as a
threat multiplier for global security acknowledged that
climate change triggers humanitarian crises, as well as
political and economic instability and climate-induced
migration. Shrinking natural resources may exacerbate
tensions and potentially lead to conflict and, in turn, to
displacement.

It is in this context that the European Union and
SIDS will continue to work towards the shared objective
of addressing climate change at the global level. The
moment to act ambitiously is now. We need to get a
universal, fair, ambitious and balanced legally binding
international climate agreement in Paris later this year.
An agreement that ensures that the world remains on
track to keep global warming below 2°C is fundamental
in order to limit the risks predicted by science, of which
SIDS would be - or I should say already are - the
first victims. We would also welcome an update of the
Secretary-General's 2009 report on climate change and
its possible security implications (A/64/350).
The New Zealand presidency has rightly pointed
out in its concept note (S/2015/543, annex) that SIDS
are also affected by piracy and the trafficking of drugs,
small arms and persons. Law enforcement agencies
within SIDS often lack the capabilities and resources
needed to address those challenges and the corruption
that drives, enables and perpetuates criminality. Crime
and security are a joint priority area of cooperation
between the European Union and the Caribbean region
that constitutes a successful area of partnership in the
Indian Ocean. We closely cooperate with the Caribbean
nations in the fight against drug trafficking and
international criminal networks. In order to support the
region's efforts to increase security, governance and
the rule of law, the European Union adopted in July
2014 a comprehensive citizen security strategy for the
Caribbean and Central America. The action plan for
the strategy, adopted on 8 June, focuses on building
international cooperation and a shared political agenda
for citizen security, strengthening the ability of
Governments to deliver quality public services in the
area of security through capacity-building.

Security and the economic development of SIDS
are also impacted by the illicit exploitation of natural
resources, in particular fisheries. It remains crucial
to implement existing international commitments
that strengthen oceans governance rules, notably
in the context of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea. Moreover, the European Union
is cooperating with a number of SIDS in the fight
against illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing by
promoting measures to prevent, deter and eliminate
those phenomena, strengthening legal frameworks and
fisheries management plans, and promoting improved
fisheries management and the sustainable management
offishing resources. The European Union has concluded
sustainable fisheries partnership agreements with seven
SIDS and has renewed or reinforced cooperation in this
area in the Pacific Ocean. We plan to extend existing
programmes to West Africa, benefiting SIDS there.

In conclusion, all of the aforementioned security
risks and vulnerabilities are interrelated, which
constitutes in itself an additional threat to stability and
must be addressed in a comprehensive and collaborative
way. These risks and vulnerabilities equally require the
involvement of all actors and concerned stakeholders.
The European Union remains a strong advocate of
effective multilateralism and is committed to helping
SIDS overcome their vulnerabilities and challenges.

