Mr. Chaouachi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like, first and foremost, to thank Mr.
Annabi for his exhaustive and useful briefing.

It is almost a year since the population of East
Timorese expressed its will to begin a transition
process towards independence under the authority of
the United Nations. Today we would like to express our
satisfaction for the work done by the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
and particularly by Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and his
team, who deserve a tribute. Of course, UNTAET does
have a great deal of merit in progress achieved this far
and in the tangible results that have been reached.
However, we should underscore the important role that
humanitarian organizations continue to play in East
Timor and in West Timor, as well as the Indonesian
Government's determination to cooperate with
UNTAET, with a view to resolving all the pending
problems in order to have a successful transition
towards the independence of East Timor.

The situation remains to be a source of major
concern despite all the efforts that have been made.
This in no way detracts from the importance of the
progress that has been achieved by Mr. Vieira de Mello
and his team in the context of laying the foundations
for the new architecture of East Timor.

The question of refugees, as well as the security
issue, are among those which may have an adverse
consequence on the situation if remedies are not
brought to bear upon the situation with the necessary
swiftness. In fact, the difficult plight of refugees which,
according to the latest report of the Secretary-General,
number between 85,000 and 120,000, is worrying and
could be exacerbated, and it could especially have an
impact upon the decision of certain humanitarian
organizations to suspend their activities because of the
dangerous conditions under which they are carrying out
their work.

UNTAET, East Timorese officials and the
Indonesian authorities should take appropriate
measures to put a radical end to the destabilizing
activities led by the militias still present in the refugee
camps in West Timor and along the border. This
situation could easily discourage the promotion of
economic activities in this region and have an adverse
impact on public law and order, which is very
sensitive.

