Mr. Mendez: I am honoured to represent the
International Center for Transitional Justice (ICTJ) to
address the important issues raised by the Secretary-
General's report on the rule of law and transitional
justice in conflict and post-conflict societies. Several
of my colleagues participated last week in a workshop
convened by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Geneva to discuss
the tools that the United Nations must develop to be
better prepared to implement transitional justice
approaches. We are pleased to see that new approaches
are already moving from general policy to operational
design. The further stage of the Security Council's
participation in the debate highlights the transcendental
nature of the doctrine adopted by the United Nations
on this subject and embodied in the Secretary-
General's report.

The ICTJ was founded on the premise that
societies in transition from dictatorship to democracy
or from conflict to peace can find solutions to common
problems by analysing experiences in different
countries at different times. Official denial of mass
crimes and an effort to condemn their victims to
oblivion is often a feature of those transitions. To
overcome them, some States have established truth-
telling mechanisms to uncover the truth about and
preserve the memory of past abuses. Atrocities are
often met by de jure or de facto impunity, but there can
be no transition to a more humane, just, and democratic
order unless impunity is broken through prosecution,
trial, and eventual punishment. Little or no effort is
made to recognize the inherent dignity of victims; the
remedy for that is a policy of reparations that restores
the respect that societies owe to their most vulnerable
members. Additionally, there is often a risk of abuses
being repeated, especially if perpetrators are allowed to
remain in positions of power.

Transitional societies must therefore reform their
institutions and exclude perpetrators of human rights
crimes from newly reconstituted institutions. Finally,
societies that are still torn by underlying conflicts of a
social, political, or ideological character, should
consider conscious efforts to achieve reconciliation.
Reconciliation should be viewed as the ultimate object
and condition of the legitimacy of efforts to achieve
transitional justice.

The problems that I have just described impose
international law obligations on States undergoing
transitions to remedy those violations. Although those
obligations are universal, the policy mechanisms to put
them in effect must allow for national customization
and experimentation. Each society must find the set of
tools and policy schemes suitable to the circumstances
of its own transition. We, the international community,
should avoid adopting initiatives that seem to work in
other contexts, without a broad consultation with
national stakeholders. We support the report's
emphasis on national assessments and consultation
processes designed to increase local legitimacy and
ownership, thereby assuring a lasting legacy of
tolerance and democratic values.

National ownership will reduce the risk that the
work of the United Nations in this area will be
perceived as a foreign imposition that runs roughshod
over the richness and capabilities of local cultures. The
inclusion of a commitment to transitional justice in
peace agreements and United Nations mandates should
not lead to premature decisions to apply untested
models. The United Nations must invest from the start
in outreach, public education and dissemination of the
principles of transitional justice, as well as in the
application of rule of law principles to the reform of
State institutions. We recognize that the United Nations
needs to increase its reservoir of expertise and
capacities, and we hope that in so doing it draws on the
wealth of knowledge that is present in civil society
organizations, democratic Governments and academic
institutions.

The Security Council can play a large role in
enhancing the legitimacy of this evolving doctrine. In
some cases it will be necessary to create international
judicial instruments to provide redress to the victims of
mass atrocities. When such tribunals are created under
Chapter VII of the Charter, there is an explicit
obligation on the part of all Member States to
cooperate with their investigations, detentions and
evidence-gathering. On the other hand, even when not
acting under Chapter VII, the Security Council could
explicitly mandate cooperation with mixed or hybrid
courts and with the International Criminal Court,
which would help to clarify the scope of the
obligations of third-party States to cooperate with those
institutions. More significantly, however, it would
signal that the international community is not so much
interested in imposing its will on war-torn states, but
that it recognizes that the restoration of justice and the
rule of law is a common enterprise in which all States
must play a part.

There is an increasing consensus among legal
practitioners that truth and justice are not mutually
exclusive alternatives. The temptation to establish a
truth commission as a substitute for accountability
should be resisted, however. The report's rejection of
amnesty for international crimes such as genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity is to be
commended. We must also recognize that punishment
without a full exploration of the facts and of historical
and political responsibilities is equally inadvisable.
For those reasons, we should embrace a policy
that assigns proper priorities to truth-seeking and truth-
telling, as well as to bringing perpetrators to justice.
The United Nations has played a major role in
supporting the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in
Sierra Leone, which submitted its final report to the
President of Sierra Leone just yesterday. It has also
been central to the operations of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone. While the relationship between those
institutions has not been without its difficulties, there
is an increasing recognition that courts and
commissions can complement each other's work.

There is also a long-standing debate as to whether
the requirements of transitional justice objectively -
as well as subjectively - complicate peace processes
by creating disincentives for parties to a conflict to
renounce violence. Those of us who approach the
problem from a human rights perspective must humbly
recognize that the prospect of being prosecuted for war
crimes is not likely to persuade combatants to resolve
the conflict by peaceful means.

For that reason, it is not so much that we object to
peace agreements that are premised on impunity, but
that we must insist that we can do better. A peace
settlement that rejects impunity is a legal and moral
imperative, but it must also address the grievances that
gave rise to the conflict in the first place. That is why it
is important to resist the blackmail of those who
threaten to continue to fight and commit atrocities
unless they are given immunity. Ceasefires and truces,
however, should be encouraged at all times, and we
may have to forgo immediate justice as long as we
preserve the ability to address past wrongs in the
future. These thorny questions are context-specific and
cannot be resolved in an abstract debate. Yet, we
believe it is important for future peace-making to end
the easy resort to blackmail embodied in the promise of
loose amnesties and other rewards for atrocities.

We applaud the call in the Secretary-General's
report for the universal application of principles of
gender equality to all aspects of transitional justice and
the rule of law. At the ICTJ we are embarking upon a
review of mechanisms and approaches to transitional
justice to determine the degree to which they have been
gender-sensitive in design and operation, and how
similar exercises can be improved from that
perspective. We endorse the report's call for the
collection of documentation on best practices. In that
regard, we would like to draw attention to the
Moroccan Equity and Reconciliation Commission. Not
only is it a highly promising process, but it also serves
as a fascinating example for non-governmental
organizations and Governments throughout the Middle
East, North Africa and elsewhere. For that reason,
Governments' handbooks, databases and tools must
exist in multiple languages. We also encourage the
development of a standard set of benchmarks to
evaluate different transitional justice initiatives. The
number of successful prosecutions and convictions, for
example, is a definite consideration; yet institutions
should also be evaluated by examining whether they
have built the local capacity to deal with justice
effectively in the present and in the future.

Finally, we commend the report's
recommendation that the United Nations review its
own structures and resources in this field. The United
Nations already has an extensive track record on these
issues. It will need additional resources and better
coordination to address the challenges this report so
eloquently identifies.

