Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
and Director Ramesh Rajasingham for their very
comprehensive briefings.

The conflict in Syria has brought enormous and
unspeakable suffering to the civilian population
of Syria. Almost 12 million people are in need of
multisectoral humanitarian assistance. More than
6 million people are internally displaced, of whom an
estimated 870,000 live in sites of last resort.

A glimpse of hope emerged from the third Brussels
Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the
Region, held in the middle of this month, as donors
pledged a record amount to support people in need in
Syria, as well as the refugees and host communities in
neighbouring countries.

Let me be clear. There is no peace without justice
and continuing impunity for serious violations of
international humanitarian law remains our grave
concern. Any military operation should be fully in line
with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law in order to prevent harm to thousands
of civilians trapped in the middle of the fighting.
The protection of civilians and unhindered access to
humanitarian assistance are not a

choice but a legal obligation of all sides to
the conflict; those who do not comply should be
held accountable. In our opinion, the international
community, especially the Security Council, should
advocate more for their health and protection, especially
in the case of women and children. In that context, the
situation is extremely worrying in the north-eastern
and north-western parts of Syria, just to mention the
Al-Hol camp. Let me also underline the significance of
the agreement between Russia and Turkey on the Idlib
de-escalation zone as a crucial move towards avoiding
a humanitarian catastrophe. All parties to the conflict
should ensure the full implementation of the agreement.

The second convoy to Rukban delivered
humanitarian assistance to 40,000 people at the
beginning of February. The assistance provided
life-saving support to people there. Nonetheless,
it was only a temporary measure - sufficient for
approximately one month. As we approach the end of
March, it is clear that we desperately need a long-term,
safe, voluntary and dignified solution for thousands of
people, many of whom have been staying in the Rukban
area for more than two years now. We feel encouraged
by positive steps made recently by the Syrian authorities
in that respect and expect them to swiftly authorize
another inter-agency convoy to Rukban.

Let me conclude by underlining that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian conflict. A political
agreement in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) remains
the only way to achieve peace. We look forward to
the establishment of a constitutional committee, the
first step towards a genuine political process under
the supervision of the United Nations. Let me also
underscore that we should pursue an intra-Syrian
framework for political agreement in Syria. The
Syrian authorities have a special role to play, and they
should participate in the negotiations in good faith and
without preconditions.

Allow me to reiterate the European Union common
position on the reconstruction of Syria. We think
that it should commence once an inclusive political
transition is firmly under way, as we need to support
the safe return of millions of Syrian people who fled
their homes. We believe that the main durable solution
for Syrian refugees throughout the region will be
their sustainable, safe, dignified and voluntary return
to their country of origin, Syria, in accordance with
international law and the principle of non-refoulement.

