Mr. Muhumuza (Uganda): I would first like to
congratulate you, Madam President, on Nigeria's
accession to the presidency of the Council for this
month and on your successful conduct of its affairs, and
to thank you for holding this debate on the important
topic of regional organizations and the contemporary
challenges to global security. I would also like to take
this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing earlier today.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Article 52 of the Charter of the United Nations makes
provision for the existence of regional arrangements
or agencies for dealing with matters relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security as
are appropriate for regional action, consistent with
the purposes and principles of the United Nations. It
was therefore appropriate that when Secretary-General
Boutros Boutros-Ghali issued his June 1992 report "An
Agenda for Peace" (S/24111), at the end of the Cold
War, he highlighted the role that regional organizations
could play in preventive diplomacy, early warning
systems for crisis prevention, peacekeeping and post-
conflict peacebuilding.

In 2002, African Heads of State recast the
objectives of the Organization of African Unity and
transformed it into the African Union (AU). Part of the
objective was for Africa to respond to various conflicts
on the continent and to reestablish sustainable peace
and security, not just for individual Member States, but
for the region as a whole. Africa further came up with
its own system to address a broad spectrum of matters,
including peace and security, by launching the African
Peace and Security Architecture, leading to the creation
of the African Union Peace and Security Council.

My delegation believes that global security
cannot be achieved without cooperation with regional
organizations. Given their in-depth understanding
of respective regions as well as their geographic
proximity to challenging environments, regional
and subregional organizations are often uniquely
positioned to understand the particular local dynamics
and root causes of those challenges. Ugandan President
Museveni has said that in some cases, even before
the international forces acquaint themselves with
the names of the protagonists in a conflict situation,
regional actors might have made an impact in the early
stages of such a conflict.

Regional and subregional organizations are at
the centre of promoting cooperation and integration
in such areas as trade and investment, infrastructure
development and critical sectors, in the case of Uganda,
such as agriculture, energy, water and security, as well
as the fostering of private-sector partnerships. Uganda
believes that, due to the leverage regional and subregional
organizations have had within our respective countries,
they can, and often do, provide useful forums for policy
coordination and harmonization on various important
multilateral processes.

My delegation is of the view that regional and
subregional organizations require the political support
of the United Nations and international community for
successful preventive diplomacy and crisis management,
not unlike what the East African Community has
received in its Burundi political intervention or the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development in the
South Sudan civil war. However, we would like to
partner with the Security Council in those initiatives.
The Council needs to work hand in hand with affected
countries on procedural issues and the drafting of press
and presidential statements and resolutions that concern
areas of operation. I will briefly state why.

My delegation would like to emphasize the
importance of strengthening the United Nations-AU
partnership. The concept of a United Nations-supported
regional force, like the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), is simply an evolving construct
that can be traced back to the United Nations Mission
in Liberia takeover from the Economic Community
of West African States Monitoring Group in Liberia
in 1990, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur in 2004, the Force Integration
Brigade in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
African-led International Support Mission in Mali and
the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic.

The implementation of peacekeeping mandates
has, in some cases, also been severely hampered due
to a variety of factors, including insufficient troop
numbers, challenges faced by the Council in overseeing
the management of integrated operations, difficulties in
generating and quickly deploying well-equipped troops
and competent civilian capacity. Further challenges
to global security include the issue of resources for
regional organizations. Whereas the African Union
has shown willingness to participate in peacekeeping
operations, those initiatives lie largely in the hands
of under-resourced regional countries. In the past, the
Security Council has hesitated to provide the degree
of practical and material support in the peacekeeping
context that the AU Peace and Security Council has
requested. That is a major area where consistency and
predictability are required for regional partnerships to
be successful.

Allow me to give an example of a successful
partnership which has led to greater global security.
Following the establishment of AMISOM, the Security
Council requested the Secretary-General to provide a
United Nations logistical support package to AMISOM,
including equipment and services, until 1 June 2009 or
until the Council reached a decision on establishing
a United Nations force. By that time, it was clear to
the AU that the troops were operating in an untenable
situation and required an adjustment in their mandate.
The Ugandan Government therefore requested that the
Security Council strengthen the mandate of AMISOM
to a more robust one so that it could dislodge militants
who had increased attacks on the Somali Government.
In our statement to the Security Council at that time
(see S/PV.6068), my delegation argued that the wording
of the mandates rendered AMISOM. an observer in
an active conflict. This is a place where partnerships
between the African Union and the Security Council
can come in the wording of such mandates. AMISOM
had become a peacekeeping force in an environment
that was not peaceful. In addition, there was a need for at
least 16,000 troops in Somalia ifthe situation obtaining
then was to be contained and for the relevance of the
troop presence to be felt.

In our view, Madam President, resolution 1863
(2009) marked the turning point for AMISOM's
tangible successes. The Council responded positively
by renewing the AMISOM. mandate for another six
months and authorizing the Mission to take all necessary
measures to protect key infrastructure in Somalia as
well as to create the appropriate security conditions for
the delivery of humanitarian aid. It also requested that
the African Union maintain the AMISOM. deployment
and reinforce the original 8,000 troop deployment
in order to enhance the Mission's capability to carry
out an unfettered peace enforcement mandate and to
protect key installations around Mogadishu.

AMISOM. has transitioned beyond Burundi and
Uganda, and now we have Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya and
Sierra Leone also providing troops. Ghana and Nigeria
are among the police contributors. The peace dividend
from joint efforts within the AMISOM. family cannot
be overstated. We now have businesses flourishing
in Mogadishu and investors have the confidence to
venture into Somalia. The seaport is also vibrant and
airlines have reopened their flight routes into Somalia.

In conclusion, even though Africa seems to have
the greatest security challenges, it is also the place
where a partnership has the highest potential to make
an impact. The United Nations needs to fast-track its
efforts to broaden the contributor base by working with
partners at the regional and subregional levels. It should
take advantage of those capacities and we welcome the
efforts so far taken in that regard.

In order to foster that relationship further, the
United Nations needs to familiarize itself with the AU
institutional design, its working methods, practices
and capacities and vice versa. Both organizations
need to commit to exercising diligence, transparency
and good-will towards a workable partnership. The
United Nations should take maximum advantage of the
strengths and roles that regional organizations such as
the African Union and subregional organizations such
as the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the Southern African Development Community and the
Economic Community of West African States can play.
We should build on the lessons of our past and current
experiences to create ever more innovative and flexible
partnerships that draw on respective strengths, while
encouraging expanded cooperation and dialogue.

While Uganda commends the United Nations
system for coping with various African situations, with
varying degrees of success, it has been done mainly
through political and peacekeeping tools. United
Nations peacekeeping has been the most visible tool and
in several cases it has been very effective. By contrast,
United Nations conflict prevention and mediation
efforts have been less visible and United Nations
coordination of integrated programmes to address the
root causes of conflict has been even less effective.
That can clearly be seen by analyzing the resources
allocated to the new peacebuilding architecture. It is
incumbent upon us to find ways of ensuring predictable
and sustainable financing for regional and subregional
organizations, especially in cases where they carry out
notjust peacekeeping but also peacebuilding initiatives.

