The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Central African Republic in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ponkre-
Kono (Central African Republic) took a seat at
the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the
holding of the Summit of the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community in Libreville
on 2 October 2002 to consider the situation
between the Central African Republic and the
Republic of Chad. It commends the leading role
played by the President of the Gabonese
Republic, El Hadj Omar Bongo, in organizing
that meeting. It welcomes the undertaking by the
Central African Republic and the Republic of
Chad to relaunch the cooperation at various
levels. It strongly supports the intention of the
President of the Republic of Chad to visit Bangui
in the very near future. It encourages further
confidence-building measures to help normalize
the relations between the two countries.

"The Security Council also welcomes the
readiness expressed by the African Union to
continue to contribute towards ongoing efforts to
normalize the relations between the Central
African Republic and Chad and to promote peace
the

and stability in the Central African region as
stipulated in the Communique of the Eighty-
eighth Ordinary Session of the Central Organ of
the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution issued on 11
October 2002 in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

"The Security Council further welcomes the
final communique of this meeting (S/2002/ 1113).
In particular, it expresses its full support for the
decision to deploy in the Central African
Republic an International Observation Force
(PIC) of 300 to 350 troops from Gabon,
Cameroon, the Republic of the Congo, Equatorial
Guinea and Mali with three main tasks: ensuring
the safety of the President of the Central African
Republic; observing and ensuring security on the
border between Chad and the Central African
Republic; and participating in the restructuring of
the Central African Republic armed forces.

"The Security Council expresses once again
its strong support for the Representative of the
Secretary-General in the Central African
Republic, General Lamine Cisse, whose efforts
have been essential in this initiative. It
encourages him to continue to provide advice to
the Governments taking part in this initiative.

"The Security Council calls upon Member
States participating in the PIC to work in close
consultation with the Representative of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Peace-
Building Support Office in the Central African
Republic (BONUCA). It requests the Secretary-
General, through his Representative, to establish
appropriate liaison with the PIC.

"The Security Council encourages all
Member States to provide financial, logistical and
material support to the Member States
participating in the PIC.

"The Security Council invites the leadership
of the F10 to provide periodic reports, at least
every three months."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2002/28.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

