Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China is firmly opposed to the adoption by the Security
Council of the draft resolution on Myanmar. China
engaged in extensive discussions and consultations
2

with all Council members, especially the sponsor, in an
effort to prevent a vote on it. Regrettably, our
suggestions and goodwill failed to prevail. For China,
this meeting is the least desirable option. Before the
vote, therefore, China would like to reaffirm a number
of principled positions.

First, like the rest of the international community,
China sincerely hopes that Myanmar enjoys economic
development, social harmony, the rule of law and
inclusive democracy. That is in the interests of the
people of Myanmar, of all countries in South-East Asia
and of the entire international community. It cannot be
denied that Myanmar is now facing many political,
economic and social challenges and that some of its
problems are quite serious. But no country is perfect
and every country has to go through a process of
constant improvement. China therefore supports
continuing efforts on the part of the Myanmar
Government and all parties in the country aimed at
inclusive dialogue and national reconciliation.

So far, the international community, in particular
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
has made many constructive recommendations relating
to Myanmar - recommendations that could serve as
important guidelines for improving the situation in the
country. China sincerely hopes and expects that the
Myanmar Government will give due consideration to
those recommendations, listen to the call of its own
people, learn from the good practices of others and
speed up the process of dialogue and reform, so as to
achieve prosperity for its nation, bring benefits to its
people and contribute to peace, stability and
development in South-East Asia.

Secondly, China encourages and supports the
Secretary-General's good offices under the mandate of
the General Assembly. In recent years, there has,
understandably, been growing interest on the part of
the international community in Myanmar. China has
always believed that the United Nations can play a
constructive role in this regard. Thanks to the efforts
made by various parties, Under-Secretary-General
Gambari paid two visits to the country at Myanmar's
sincere invitation. He had frank talks and consultations
with Myanmar's leaders and achieved certain progress.

While the United Nations Secretariat is in a
transitional period, China supports the appointment by
the Secretary-General as soon as possible of a special
representative for Myanmar. We are also looking
07-20880
forward to another visit by Mr. Gambari, and hope that he
will continue his dialogue with Myanmar and enhance
mutual trust and confidence. As Mr. Gambari emphasized
in his briefing to the Council last November, the
Secretary-General's good offices are a process of dialogue
and engagement, which needs time and patience.

China sincerely calls upon the international
community and the Myanmar Government to sustain their
current sound interaction, to constructively support the
Secretary-General's good offices and to work together to
gradually achieve long-term stability and development
in Myanmar. The tenth ASEAN summit will be held
soon. China will, as always, support ASEAN in playing
a leading role in addressing the issue of Myanmar.

Thirdly, the Myanmar issue is mainly the internal
affair of a sovereign State. The current domestic
situation in Myanmar does not constitute a threat to
international or regional peace and security. No one
would dispute the fact that Myanmar is, indeed, faced
with a series of grave challenges relating to refugees,
child labour, HIV/AIDS, human rights and drugs. But
similar problems exist in many other countries. If,
because Myanmar is encountering this or that problem
in the areas to which I referred, it is to be arbitrarily
labelled as a prominent or potential threat to regional
security, included on the agenda of the Council and be
the subject of a draft resolution, then the situations in
all other 191 United Nations Member States may also
need to be considered by the Security Council. Such an
approach is obviously neither logical nor reasonable.

As a matter of fact, all of Myanmar's immediate
neighbours, all ASEAN members and most Asia-
Pacific countries believe that the current situation in
Myanmar does not pose a threat to regional peace and
security. Since various relevant United Nations
agencies have already held discussions on the
Myanmar issue, and given that the primary
responsibility entrusted by the United Nations Charter
to the Security Council is to maintain world peace and
security, China holds that there is no need for the
Security Council to get involved. Nor should it take
action on the issue of Myanmar. If it does so, it will not
only exceed the mandates of the Council, but also
hinder discussions by other relevant United Nations
agencies, and bring no benefit to the Secretary-
General's good offices.

It must be emphasized that China, as an
immediate neighbour of Myanmar and a Security
07-20880

Council member from the Asia-Pacific region, attaches
no less importance to the situation in Myanmar than do
other States. Although Myanmar's domestic political
process may not have achieved as many results as
expected, progress is undeniably being made, slowly
but steadily. As an old Chinese saying goes, one cannot
enjoy eating hot bean curd if one is too anxious. While
the intention of the international community is sincere
and good, it has to be accompanied by practical and
feasible ways and means, taking into account the
national conditions of Myanmar. Otherwise, there
would be unwanted or undesirable consequences.
Moreover, if the situation in Myanmar becomes
turbulent as a result of external interference, the
primary victims will certainly be the people of
Myanmar and neighbouring countries.

Therefore, China, together with other countries in
the region, wishes to see Myanmar enjoy political
stability, economic development and ethnic harmony.
China has always adopted a responsible approach and
has made vigourous efforts to encourage and facilitate
the Myanmar Government to address its problems step
by step. It is also our consistent position that the
internal affairs of Myanmar should be handled mainly
and independently by the Myanmar Government and
people themselves through consultation. The
international community can offer all kinds of
constructive advice and assistance, but should refrain
from arbitrary interference.

Based on the above principled position, China
strongly opposes the inclusion of Myanmar on the
agenda of the Council, and is firmly against adopting
any Security Council resolution on Myanmar. China
therefore cannot but vote against the draft resolution
before us.

