Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I should like to join preceding speakers in
welcoming Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone. I thank her for joining
us today and for her statement to the Security Council.
I would also like to thank Mr. Michael von der
schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General in Sierra Leone, for his briefing. I
also thank Ambassador John McNee, Chairperson of
the Sierra Leone country-specific configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for his briefing. In that
regard, allow me to emphasize how much we support
the activities of the Peacebuilding Commission in
Sierra Leone.

Sierra Leone is a post-conflict African country.
We are very keen to see that Sierra Leone is not
involved in conflict ever again. The wisdom of the
leadership of Sierra Leone, supported by the
international community, has been responsible for
many achievements along the road towards stability. It
is of the utmost importance to defend the achievements
that have been made and to build upon them towards a
State characterized by stability and well-being, where
violence among the people has no place.

The wisdom of the political leadership, with
President Koroma at the forefront and with the support
of UNIPSIL, succeeded in defusing the crisis that
broke out in March. The country has been spared a new
spiral of conflict. Regrettably, party-controlled media
outlets played a prominent role in the outbreak of the
crisis by encouraging violence, which led the
authorities to take the wise decision to temporarily
suspend their operations.

The political leadership in Sierra Leone has
overcome the crisis. The joint communique between
the two parties was signed on 2 April 2009; the three
main political parties have now committed to it. We
express the hope that they will be able to implement all
of its provisions, particularly those pertaining to
political participation, respect for State institutions and
State bodies such as the police force and the judiciary,
the creation of non-partisan media and the disbanding
of militant youth groups.

The living conditions of most people in Sierra
Leone are a source of grave concern. Prices,
particularly those of foodstuffs, are spiralling, while
unemployment is rife and the population relies to a
large extent on remittances from citizens living abroad.
In this regard, we express our appreciation for the
efforts of the African Development Bank and donor
organizations and States: despite the lack of resources,
they have supported local food production within the
context of the Government's reform policy. We look
forward to further support being provided to the
Government, as it lacks the financial resources it needs
to implement its development programmes. We
welcome President Koroma's Agenda for Change, and
we express the hope that it will be implemented.

We take note with satisfaction of the results of
efforts being made to support institutions such as the
National Electoral Commission, the Independent
Media Commission, the National Human Rights
Commission and the Anti-Corruption Commission. We
support the parallel plans adopted to provide job
opportunities for unemployed young people. We note
that young people played a central role in fuelling the
disturbances in the recent crisis. Like Ambassador
McNee, we also hope that the effective implementation
of the Joint Vision of the United Nations family will
change the lives of Sierra Leoneans and bolster the
peace that was achieved after strenuous efforts.

In conclusion, we express our thanks and
appreciation to the Secretary-General, the Peacebuilding
Support Office and the United Nations country team. We
congratulate them on reaching the political and
development benchmarks for peacebuilding. We wish full
success to the special session of the Peacebuilding
Commission on Sierra Leone to be held on 10 June 2009.
We call on all States to support that session.

