Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Lithuania for organizing this open debate. I also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al
Hussein, High Commissioner for Human Rights; and
Mr. Karamoko Diakite, President of the Cote d'Ivoire
chapter of the West African Action Network on Small
Arms, for their statements.

Chad, which has long been ravaged by civil wars
and has been a victim of repeated foreign aggression,
is better poised than anyone to give an account of the
devastating consequences of the illicit trafficking,
destabilizing accumulation and diversion of small arms
and light weapons. Africa is one of the most severely
affected regions in the world by the destabilizing
impact of small arms and light weapons. The
consequences of the abusive use of such weapons are
immeasurable. They prolong and fuel crises and armed
conflicts, with their toll of misfortune and the loss of
human lives. There are waves of internally displaced
persons who are often the victims of atrocities, such as
rape, forced disappearance, torture and so on. Based
on certain sources, the human lives lost because of
small arms and light weapons exceed half a million
per year. Furthermore, the proliferation of weapons,
whether they are linked to crime or conflict, destabilize
societies, causes human suffering, inverts the pyramid
of values and gives rise to a culture of violence.

Chad is extremely concerned by the scale and
consequences of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. Accoding to some statistics, approximately
1 billion of these devices are circulating globally. They
are used mostly by non-State actors such as rebel and
terrorist groups, pirates, drug cartels, private security
firms, mercenaries, et cetera. The international
community must redouble its efforts to counter the long-
lasting devastating effects of the abusive use of small
arms and light weaopns. In that regard, it is critical that
we develop comprehensive mechanisms to combat this
phenomenon internationally and nationally.

At the national level, it is up to each State to assume
its responsibility to address the potential for the illicit
use, diversion and circulation of weapons. States must
ensure that the arms and ammunition in their possession
are properly used and that they are securely stockpiled.
They must ensure that there are systems to manage and
monitor arsenals. Because of its painful experience
of conflict, in 2008 Chad established a national
disarmament commission that has carried out operations
to collect illegally acquired weapons throughout the
whole of its national territory. Those operations have
enabled us to recover thousands of weapons, firearms
and ammunition alike. This collection of weapons was
additionally supported by a long campaign to raise
awareness among the public about the dangers of small
arms and light weapons. Practical measures have also
been taken to step up border-controls and exchange
intelligence with neighbouring countries. A joint-
force of 4,000 Chadian and Sudanese soldiers has been
deployed along our common as part of this fight. Along
the same lines, on 25 March, Chad signed the Arms
Trade Treaty and deposited its ratification instrument
with the Secretariat.

At the international level, we must deal with
the underlying causes for the circulation of arms
and ammunition by combating the flow of such
arms, especially in conflict areas. In that regard,
effective measures must be taken in order to prohibit
the unscrupulous manufacture and brokering of
weapons - whether they be State or non-State
actors - so that they do not profit from death and
chaos, especially in the Middle East and Africa. In so
doing, they fuel conflicts to achieve their ends with
no consideration for human life. Chad condemns the
transfer of arms and ammunition, which more often
than not, flies in the face of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States. Such transfers lead to
civilian deaths, especially among women and children,
destabilize States and impede long-term governance,
while complicating the resolution of conflicts.

In the same way that we are endeavouring to
put in place laws and arrangements to monitor and
control weapons in our own countries, we must also
identify, locate and hold responsible the State and
non-State actors involved in the illicit transfer of arms
and ammunition. The recommendations on marking,
registering and tracing of small arms and light weapons
will not be effective unless all States commit in good
faith to putting and end to the illegal supply of arms
and ammunition. Furthermore, it is urgent that we
ensure, by way of an international legal instrument,
that non-State and State manufacturers, brokers,
importers and traffickers are held accountable for the
destabilizing illicit transfer, accumlation and diversion
of small arms and light weapons.

We regret the fact that certain prominent members of
the Council oppose the inclusion in the draft resolution
under discussion of a provision on the inadmissible
nature of the transfer of small arms and light weapons
to non-State actors. Chad hopes that these legitimate
concerns on the issue will be taken into account in the
final version ofthe text that is currently being discussed.
The issue of small arms and light weapons has been on
the Council's agenda since 1999, and it is our view that
this organ, vested with the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
must be find a solution, in particular to the critical issue
of transferring weapons to non-State actors.

Finally, the human cost of illicit transfers and
of destabilizing accumulation and diversion of light
weapons is intolerable. States must assume their
responsibilities and do everything in their power
to prevent and put an end to these activities, which
jeopardize international peace and security. The United
Nations must also do its part to advance this effort. We
therefore call on the Secretary-General to take into
account in his upcoming biennial report the issue of
the illicit transfer of small arms and light weaopns to
non-State actors.

