Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I extend our heartfelt
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February,
Mr. President, and commend you for the dynamic and
very relevant programme of work you have drawn
up - proof of which is the convening of today's
important debate.

I also welcome Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres and Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, and Mr. Richard
Sezibera, Minister of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Rwanda, and thank them for their
informative briefings.

The problem of the use mercenaries and the activities
they carry out is complex. It arises from multiple
factors, as we have seen, such as weak institutions,
limitations in the international legal frameworks that
criminalize them and perverse incentives to illicit
monetary gain without the slightest consideration for
human life and dignity.

The use of mercenaries, activities related to
mercenaries and military and private security
companies, many of which are vehemently criticized
for dubious methods in the conduct of contractual
services, undermine human rights, particularly the
self-determination of peoples and, as a result, peace
and security worldwide.

According to relevant reports, the list of human
rights and humanitarian law violations perpetrated by
mercenaries include executions, sexual slavery, rape
and other forms of sexual and gender-based violence,
torture, mutilation, forced displacement, forced
disappearance, arbitrary destruction of cultural goods
and forced enlistment and recruitment of children.

We are also alarmed by the link between drug
trafficking and other forms of organized crime involving
mercenaries, the violence that is generated from this
connection and the erosion of the constitutional order
of States. More perplexing are the acts of barbarism
represented by violations of the human rights committed
against innocent child Victims of kidnappings, torture,
detention, sexual slavery and the forced recruitment as
child soldiers.

In the face of such atrocities, we commend the
work of international institutions and agencies that
shed light on the causes of this global issue and make
recommendations to combat and avoid them. We
therefore recognize the work carried out through the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights by the Working Group on the use of
mercenaries as a means of Violating human rights and
impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-
determination.

The most recent report of the Working Group
(see A/73/303) introduces several important aspects
that we believe should be the focus of our attention to
and consequently addressed through our respective
axes of action. These include the improvement of
the international legal framework for the prevention
and punishment of the recruitment, use, financing
and training of mercenaries and foreign fighters; the
strengthening of national institutions and regulations,
including levels of respondent liability, and the
establishment of an international legally binding
instrument for private military and security companies;
increased international cooperation among States for
the prevention, prosecution and punishment of these
crimes; addressing the root causes of conflicts, which
may be diverse in scope - historical, social, political
and economic - including their history of armed
conflict or instability, poverty, high unemployment,
the exploitation of natural resources and institutional
weaknesses; and responses to the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflicts, with a focus on the
rehabilitation and reintegration of children and the
implementation of preventive measures.

Preventing violence, combating terrorism and
crime and respecting human rights, especially those of
our children, are key elements to safeguard world peace
and security.

