Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We, too, align ourselves with
the statement to be made by the Head of the Delegation
of the European Union (EU).

I should like to thank the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his
briefing this morning and for the work he and his team
are doing on the ground. Mr. Inzko is the seventh High
Representative since the creation of the Office under
the Dayton Accords 22 years ago. When Carl Bildt was
appointed as the first High Representative in 1995, he
said that

"the history of the conflict in Bosnia - as well
as in all of the former Yugoslavia - is the history
of the most flagrant violations of human rights we
have seen in recent European history".

Despite the fact that challenges still remain, High
Representative Inzko's briefing today underlines the
remarkable progress that Bosnia and Herzegovina has
made since then. This has happened thanks to the efforts
and support of successive High Representatives and the
international community, not least the European Union,
which has remained committed to building an equitable,
peaceful and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Sweden has shared the road with Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its journey. During the war, Sweden
offered refuge to many Bosnian refugees. Some returned
after the war to rebuild their country, while others
remained and have enriched our society, including on
the football field. We have contributed personnel to the
United Nations Protection Force, the Implementation
Force, the Stabilization Force and, most recently, the
European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR) Althea.

Sweden's Foreign Minister Margot Wallstrom
recently visited Bosnia and Herzegovina, where she
welcomed progress in the country's EU accession
process and reiterated our firm support for Bosnia
and Herzegovina's continued EU integration, while
underlining the importance of dedicated implementation
of the reform agenda, focusing on challenges regarding
socioeconomic development, corruption, organized
crime and fundamental freedoms. These reforms,
including that of the Election Law, need to be pursued
in an inclusive and transparent manner in order to
be sustained. Minister Wallstrom urged Bosnia and
Herzegovina's political leaders to remain focused on
their common goal of a better future for all citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, irrespective of party
affiliation or ethnicity. While Bosnians will set the
pace for their country's EU integration, Sweden will
continue to assist, both politically and through our
development cooperation.

Looking forward, there are three points that I
would like to make.

First, we welcome the relatively calm and
stable security situation, as reported by the High
Representative. The recurrence of nationalistic rhetoric
and incidences of ethnically motivated disputes is of
concern, however, particularly in light of regional
instability and the weak functionality of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina state. All parties should do everything
possible to avoid such rhetoric and actions, which
undermine the reform process.

Secondly, the Dayton Accords provide a framework
for peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The unity of the country is crucial to its further
development. It is important that efforts towards
continued reconciliation and an inclusive society be
supported. In that regard, crimes committed during
the war, including sexual and gender-based violence,
should be addressed. Impunity threatens stability and
social cohesion, making reconciliation more difficult.

Thirdly, as stability continues to be strengthened,
there is a need for a discussion on the reconfiguration of
the international presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
including the phasing out of the executive mandate of
EUFOR Althea, to ensure stronger national ownership
and responsibility. For that reason, we welcome the
strategic review of the mandate of EUF OR Althea this
autumn, which will serve as an important basis for
evaluation of the continued mandate for the mission.

Finally, as EU High Representative Federica
Mogherini said in the Chamber only last week (see S/PV.7935), the countries of the Western Balkans,
including Bosnia and Herzegovina, have made
impressive steps forward towards peace, regional
cooperation and economic growth. The European
Union has been instrumental in these efforts by
creating a European perspective. That is not in doubt.
By continuing the path of reform, the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina will take their place in a Union of over
500 million people committed to prosperity, peace,
stability and equality for all its citizens.

