Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I want
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate.
I should also like to thank Mr. Guehenno for his
briefing.

On behalf of my Government, I wish to thank the
staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) - in particular former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tom Koenigs
and Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Bo Asplund - for their dedication to the
cause of Afghanistan's success. We also thank them for
the timely and sound input they provided to the
Secretary-General in producing a frank and
comprehensive report (S/2008/159). My Government
concurs with the central judgement of that report,
which presents a balanced account of both the progress
that has been achieved and the challenges confronting
Afghanistan.

The success of Afghanistan is a vital interest of
the international community. Success in Afghanistan
will contribute not only to the improvement of the lives
of 30 million people, who have suffered terribly as the
result of 25 years of occupation and war; it will also be
a keystone in the effort to defeat terrorism, to weaken
extremism, to create regional stability in Central and
South Asia, to advance the needed political and
economic transformation of the broader Middle East
and to reduce the threat of narcotics from Afghanistan.

As we look ahead, Afghan leaders, regional
Powers and the international community all have
important responsibilities if Afghanistan is to fully
succeed. However, I would like to focus on the actions
needed on the part of the United Nations.

The United Nations should be proud of the role it
has played in Afghanistan, starting with the Bonn
process. The United States welcomes the appointment
of Mr. Kai Eide as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We
thank him for taking that important and challenging
job. He can count on our support, and we promise to
work closely with him. His appointment opens a new
chapter in United Nations engagement in Afghanistan.
His role will be vital in advancing the kind of
productive partnership with President Karzai and the
Afghan Government that is the foundation for all,
meaningful progress. Afghans have governed their
country for millenia. Our task is not to do this work for
them, but to enable their country to stand on its own
feet as soon as possible.

As we discuss the renewal of the UNAMA
mandate, the focus should be on setting the right
priorities. At the top of the agenda is empowering
Special Representative Eide to coordinate and integrate
more effectively the support of the international
community, which is composed of dozens of donors,
agencies and implementers. One of the greatest assets
for Afghanistan is the sheer number of countries
involved, on both the military and the civilian sides.
The inevitable resulting challenge is ensuring that
sufficient coordination exists to get the most out of the
individual efforts.
First, Special Representative Eide will need to
ensure that civilian assistance is integrated in support
of the Afghan people and Government and of efforts to
stabilize the country. While the question of integrating
NATO-International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
military efforts will be dealt with during the upcoming
summit in Bucharest, success against the insurgency
requires a comprehensive campaign plan that ensures
that military action to clear areas of the enemy is
coordinated with civilian efforts to establish good
governance and economic development.

Secondly, Special Representative Eide should
better coordinate the efforts of the international
community to ensure a shared and focused
commitment to the Afghan National Development
Strategy and the Afghanistan Compact. The execution
of the elements of the Compact has been uneven, and
Special Representative Eide should catalyse improved
results where needed. This will entail greater
coordination both among donors and between the
Afghan Government and donors. This is particularly
needed to increase the capacity of Afghan ministries to
provide basic services and to tackle the problem of
corruption.

Thirdly, Special Representative Eide should work
to bolster international support for Afghanistan. Among
the leaders - as well as the publics - of key donor
countries there is an inadequate understanding of the
achievements and challenges of Afghanistan. The
upcoming Paris conference of donors will be an
important opportunity to rally such support. Explaining
all aspects of the current situation, Special
Representative Eide can enable friends of Afghanistan
to appreciate the return on the investment to date and
to focus future commitment on the most important
challenges and opportunities.

Fourthly, Special Representative Eide should use
his good offices to promote reconciliation and
accountability, in close coordination with the Afghan
Government, based on the acceptance of the Afghan
constitution. In addition, Special Representative Eide
should engage in active diplomacy to create a regional
environment conducive to the stabilization of
Afghanistan. In the aftermath of the attacks of
11 September 2001, regional Powers came together,
despite their differences, to support the Bonn process,
which enabled Afghans to freely choose their own
Government. Reclaiming the spirit of Bonn is in the
interest of all these countries. It should be a key
priority for the United Nations effort.

To carry out this mission, UNAMA must have the
right people in Afghanistan, as well as sufficiently
robust funding and security assets. We regret that, as

noted in the recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/159), UNAMA faces vacancy rate and staff
retention issues. The United Nations must incentivize
its best people to create an effective presence,
particularly in parts of the country where NATO-ISAF
is achieving stability but needs a partner to help to
improve governance and development. It is not just a
matter of filling the slots, but rather one of getting
highly motivated and capable people with the right
skills.

The United States is also ready to do its part to
help Afghanistan succeed. In addition to the 27,500
troops already deployed to support Afghanistan, the
United States will send an additional 3,200 marines,
2,200 of them dedicated to the strengthening of
security in the south and 1,000 to training Afghan
national security forces. In 2008, the United States will
provide over $2.9 billion in total assistance, including
$1 billion for education, health, agriculture,
infrastructure and local reconstruction. In addition, we
have asked Congress for $2.6 billion in a 2008
supplemental funding request. We are also undertaking
a number of new initiatives, including the
establishment of a public-private partnership with
American law firms and schools to help advance the
rule of law and establish a strong core of legal
professionals.

The Council should fully support UNAMA and
its team as they pursue all these avenues. We look
forward in the coming days to working with the
Government of Afghanistan, the Security Council and
other key countries to ensure that UNAMA can better
address Afghanistan's current needs and priorities.

