Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this emergency meeting
of the Security Council to address recent developments
in eastern Ukraine. I thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
comprehensive briefing. We recognize the Secretary-
General's good offices and the efforts by Mr. Feltman
to find a solution to the crisis.

Rwanda, like all other members of the Security
Council, is extremely alarmed at the rapidly
deteriorating situation in eastern Ukraine. The regional
summit held on 26 August in Minsk - where Presidents
Petro Poroshenko of Ukraine and Vladimir Putin of
the Russian Federation met for the first time since the
election of the former in May - had raised hope for a
ceasefire and a diplomatic solution to the conflict.
Unfortunately, the past few days were marked by
renewed fighting in eastern Ukraine, particularly in
the Donetsk region, where the town of Novoazovsk
has fallen into the hands of armed separatists who now
threaten to take over the strategic port city of Mariupol.
In that regard, we were troubled by the information
provided by one of the leaders of the armed separatists
that 3,000 to 4,000 Russian nationalists had joined
their ranks. We are also concerned at the accusations
of border crossings by Russian elements into Ukraine.
It is clear that the rise of tension and rhetoric between
Ukraine and the Russian Federation could, if not
properly addressed, lead to a full-blown conflict
between the two countries, thus further threatening
international peace and security and worsening a very
dire human rights and humanitarian situation in eastern
Ukraine and the wider region.

The situation in Ukraine has been on the agenda of
the Security Council since the end of February. We have
been constantly meeting on this crisis. We have held 24
meetings, as Ambassador Power of the United States
informed us. But, unfortunately, we have been unable
to take any meaningful decision, with the exception of
our adoption of resolution 2166 (2014), on 21 July, on
the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17.

In any case, given the division in the Council, it
is unlikely that a solution will come from New York.
Only a genuine dialogue among Ukrainians, coupled
with diplomatic talks between Ukraine and the Russian
Federation, with the support of the United Nations
and regional organizations, can provide a sustainable
solution to the crisis. We believe that President
Poroshenko's peace plan and the Minsk process can be
a viable framework for achieving that goal.

I will conclude by once again calling on all parties
in Ukraine to respect the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. Armed groups must
cease hostilities, lay down their weapons in order to
de-escalate the situation and give peace a chance. In
that regard, we urge all the original stakeholders to use
their influence and to work towards peace and stability
in the region.

