The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Croatia, Germany and Italy, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Simonovic'
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Henze
(Germany) and Mr. Falci (Italy) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium, contained in document S/ 1997/767.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to documents S/ 1997/745 and S/ 1997/772,
which contain the text of the letters dated 24 September and
3 October 1997, respectively, from the Permanent
Representative of Croatia to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General of 2 October 1997
(S/1997/767), on the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium (UNTAES), and agrees with its
balanced and objective assessment.

"The Security Council notes with approval
several positive actions taken by the Government of
Croatia which are contained in the report, as well as
those which have occurred since the report was
issued. These developments include the recent
agreements relating to education, progress on the
reintegration of the judiciary, the law on
convalidation, moves towards recognition of
pensioner service, assistance to local governments
and municipalities, and provision to UNTAES of
documentation on 25 war crimes cases. The Council
is also encouraged by the increased cooperation with
the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. The Council expects the Government of
Croatia to continue to build upon these positive steps
and accelerate its efforts in order fully to complete
these initiatives.

"The Security Council welcomes the recent
establishment by the Government of Croatia of a
programme for national reconciliation. A final
assessment of this programme must await its full
and prompt implementation.

"The Security Council continues to note with
concern that there are still many outstanding areas
and issues of contention and non-compliance, which
require further, urgent action from the Government
of Croatia. The Council reiterates its call to the
Government of Croatia to curb media attacks on
ethnic groups. The Council also underlines, in
particular, the importance of the removal of all legal
and administrative barriers, thus allowing the
accelerated voluntary two-way return of displaced
persons, including their right to choose to live in the
region, as well as the return of refugees. It calls
upon the Government of Croatia to give immediate
effect to recent decisions of the Constitutional Court
regarding the Law on the Temporary Takeover and
Administration of Specified Property, and to take
further action to promote the safe return of owners
to their homes and the resolution of the issue of lost
tenancy rights, including ensuring access to
reconstruction assistance.

 

"Much progress in these and other outstanding
areas must be made on an urgent basis, in order for
the Government of Croatia to comply fully with its
obligations and create the conditions for a successful
completion of UNTAES. For its part, the local Serb
population must also take more active measures to
participate in the reintegration process.

"The Security Council notes the urgent need for
all local government bodies in the region, particularly
the City Council of Vukovar, to commence full
normal functions immediately.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
about the behaviour of some officers of the
Transitional Police Force, and urges full cooperation
with UNTAES in improving the performance of this
Force. The Council approves the intention of the
Secretary-General to retain United Nations civilian
police and military observers at current levels to the
end of the UNTAES mandate. The Council also notes
the need to address concerns relating to the
continuation of police monitoring functions.

"The Security Council welcomes the close
cooperation between UNTAES and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in
expanding the long-term mission of the OSCE in
Croatia.

"The Security Council shares the assessment of
the Secretary-General that there is sufficient time for
Croatia to comply fully with its obligations and
commitments before 15 January 1998 and urges the
Government of Croatia to redouble its efforts in the
time remaining. The Council looks forward to the
next report of the Secretary-General on all aspects
relevant to the peaceful reintegration of the region,
due by the beginning of December."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/48.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.50 am.

