Mr. Salame: I am pleased to be joining the Security Council from Brazzaville, where I attended the eighth summit of the African Union High-Level Committee on Libya at the level of Heads of State and Government, hosted by the President of the Republic of the Congo, His Excellency Mr. Sassou Nguesso. In my intervention, I reiterated the Organization's strong partnership with the African Union as we work together in the pursuit of peace and stability in Libya. On 21 January, the Secretary-General briefed the Council on the outcomes of the Berlin conference and, most important, on the collective efforts ahead in order to peacefully resolve the Libyan conflict. I will brieflyupdate the Council today on what has occurred since the Secretary General's briefing. When we started preparatory consultations for the Berlin conference in September 2019, at the peak of the war, we were under no illusions about the challenges of the task that lay ahead. We also knew that we had to mobilize in order to prevent Libya's further downward spiral into chaos and civil war. I wish to express my gratitude to Chancellor Merkel and the Federal Republic of Germany for working relentlessly with us in the months leading up to the 19 January leaders' gathering. At the Berlin conference, representatives of countries concerned and regional organizations, some of which have directly or indirectly fuelled the conflict, agreed not to interfere in Libya's internal affairs and to abide by the United Nations arms embargo. The final 55-point Berlin communique comprehensively tackles the full range of issues underpinning the Libyan problem set. It is buttressed by the detailed operational plan of United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), which forms the basis for the Mission's work in the coming period. The Berlin conference was a serious effort to try to unify a discordant international community and to give hope to the beleaguered Libyans in the form of the provision of a protective international umbrella by the summit participants. That umbrella will allow Libyans to restore a measure of their plundered sovereignty and come together to chart their way forward. The summit was held against the backdrop of the truce called for by Presidents Putin and Erdogan on 8 January and accepted by both parties to the conflict. Following the 12 January commencement of the truce, there was an initial reduction in violence, which provided the residents of greater Tripoli a much-needed respite from the suffering of war. But with recent developments on the ground, I regret to report that the truce holds only in name. Artillery exchanges have significantly increased in Tripoli in recent days, with an associated increase in civilian casualties due to the use of indiscriminate shelling. Since 6 January, we have verified at least 21 civilian casualties -18 deaths and 3 injuries - of conflict-related incidents in and around Tripoli. In the last two days alone, four children - all under the age of 12 - perished as a result of shelling in the Al-Hadaba area of Tripoli, two of whom died at the scene of the attack, while the other two died in intensive care; the last one died just yesterday afternoon. We are also witnessing severe fighting outside Tripoli. On 26 January, the Libyan National Army (LNA) launched an offensive against Government of National Accord (GNA) forces in the Abu Qurayn area, south of Misrata, prompting heavy clashes with dozens of casualties on both sides. Those clashes were accompanied by fixed-wing strikes conducted by the LNA and drone strikes by both sides. As I speak, the battle for Abu Qurayn is ongoing. On 8 January, the LNA extended its unilaterally declared no-fly zone to include Mitiga airport. On 22 January, the LNA further extended that no-fly zone southwards towards Gharyan and Tarhouna and threatened to shoot down any military or civilian aircraft approaching Mitiga airport. Since that time, Mitiga airport has been shelled on three occasions, resulting in civilian casualties, damaging the civilian airport's infrastructure and temporarily halting air traffic. On 28 January, two days ago, GNA forces reportedly downed an LNA drone in the vicinity of Misrata. Since 12 January, the Mission has recorded more than 110 reported violations of the truce. I am also deeply worried about the military reinforcements received by both sides, raising the spectre of a broader conflict engulfing the wider region. The warring parties have continued to receive a sizeable amount of advanced equipment, in addition to fighters and advisers from foreign sponsors - in brazen violation of the arms embargo and the pledges made by representatives of those countries in Berlin. The LNA has reinforced its forces along the front lines in Tripoli with arms, equipment and infantry elements, including foreign fighters. Meanwhile, there has been a notable increase in heavy cargo flights - several per day - to Benina airport and Al-Khadim air base in eastern Libya delivering military equipment to the LNA. Yesterday three boats were in Tripoli and Misrata delivering new weapons in the west, while two cargo planes landed at Al-Khadim air base in the east. At the same time, foreign fighters who support the GNA have been flown into Tripoli by the thousands and deployed in forward locations, alongside Libyan forces. During this period, the GNA forces, supported by a foreign sponsor, established advanced air defence systems throughout the western region - to put itbluntly, Hawk anti-aircraft defence systems. As recently as Tuesday, the presence of foreign naval assets, including warships, was witnessed off the coast of Tripoli, in addition to cargo ships. All those manoeuvres to resupply the two parties threaten to precipitate a new and much more dangerous conflagration. They violate the spirit and the letter of the Berlin conference. I urge the parties and their foreign sponsors to desist from reckless actions and instead renew their expressed commitment to work towards a ceasefire. As the Secretary-General briefed the Council on 21 January, we received from both parties - on 19 January, in Berlin - the full roster of names of their military representatives to attend the Joint Military Commission talks in Geneva. Those talks form the pillar of the military track and must be launched as soon as possible. I had hoped to be able to brief the Council today from Geneva, not Brazzaville, with the talks having started on Tuesday. The GNA representatives are ready to engage, and I met with them personally in Tunis on Monday to lay out the framework for the expected talks. As of yet, the LNA delegation has been unable to confirm its participation, although I am scheduled to meet General Haftar in Al-Rajma in two days' time to push for the team to be dispatched without delay. It is imperative that the Joint Military Commission meet under United Nations auspices to transform the truce - or whatever is left of it - into a ceasefire and discuss the modalities for a ceasefire monitoring mechanism, which I know is of great interest to the Council. The Commission will also seek to reach an agreement on long-term security arrangements, while directly addressing grievances expressed by both sides. The Council's collective support and engagement in that process is vital. Consolidating the truce is critical for the success of our parallel efforts to start the Libyan political forum, thereby enabling the parties to discuss transitional institutional arrangements. However, the selection process for Libyan delegates to that endeavour has not yet been completed. On 10 January, I asked the Presidents of the High Council of State and the House of Representatives to start, on the basis of each of the 13 electoral districts, a process to select representatives of the two houses for the Libyan political forum. I offered the support of UNSMIL to ensure that the process was inclusive, transparent, fair and democratic. On 19 January, the High Council of State completed the selection of its 13 delegates. Deep political divisions within the House of Representatives have been impeding the selection process of its delegates to the Libyan political forum. Yesterday a district-based selection process for the 13 delegates started with the support of UNSMIL. I am pleased to report that, with UNSMIL representatives as witnesses to the process, three House of Representatives districts elected their delegates for the political talks. Yesterday's efforts sent a positive signal from Parliament to the Libyan people that should be encouraged and replicated in the 10 other districts. UNSMIL continues to be on standby to assist the remaining districts in completing the process. On the economic track, following their first meeting, on 6 January, Libyan experts representing the main national institutions, as well as different economic sectors, are now developing the terms of reference for the Libyan expert economic commission. We have issued invitations to the second economic meeting, which will take place on 9 February in Cairo, and received an enthusiastic response from the participants. On 7 January, UNSMIL convened a second meeting of the second track dialogue between the two branches of the Central Bank of Libya to develop a road map for their eventual unification. The completion of the international audit of the two branches of the Central Bank of Libya remains critical for transparency and creating the conditions for eventual unification. While we have made significant progress and hope to soon begin the audit, there has been no shortage of challenges. We will continue to rely on the strong support of the Security Council in order to move forward with the process. The international follow-up committee to the Berlin conference will get under way in the coming weeks with the formation of four working groups focused on the political, military, economic and international humanitarian law and human rights tracks. Those mechanisms will ensure that the hard work ahead of Berlin continues and that those who obstruct the process - whether inside or outside Libya - can be held to account. The economy in Libya is becoming increasingly unstable due to the conflict. Institutional fragmentation and the inability to enact a unified economic policy are exacerbating existing challenges and creating new ones. On 18 January, the National Oil Corporation declared force majeure on oil exports from ports ineastern Libya following local protests against the ports. On 20 January, the National Oil Corporation extended the force majeure to all onshore ports following pressure exerted by LNA-aligned forces to shut down production at the Al-Sharara, Hamada and Al-Feel oil fields. Oil production will soon be reduced to 72,000 barrels per day, coming only from Libya's offshore sites. The blockade results in losses of approximately $55 million per day in national revenue and, as of today, the cumulative lost revenue as a result of the blockade has reached over $622 million. The 72,000 barrels per day that I mentioned must be compared to the situation two weeks ago, when production stood at 1.3 million barrels per day. Libya's national debt has now surpassed 100 billion dinars and is spiking upwards. Expenditures on salaries proliferate as competing authorities add to an already bloated payroll. Government subsidies, both hidden and overt, continue to increase as the quality of services diminishes. Cuts to customs tariffs and taxes are narrowing Libya's revenue base, making the country entirely reliant on oil exports - which have now stopped - and fees on foreign exchange. Commercial banks are finding it increasingly difficult to operate under the supervision of two competing central banks. A number of commercial banks, particularly in the country's east, are now either unable to honour transactions or will soon reach that point. While the Mission continues to work to find halfway measures to keep the economy afloat, fully addressing the situation requires a political solution that allows for more fundamental economic and institutional reform. The humanitarian situation remains deeply concerning. More than 150,000 people have been forced from their homes in the Tripoli area since the conflict began in April. As of 22 January, nearly 120 schools in Ain Zara and Abu Salim in Tripoli remain closed after a number of schools reopened following the truce, depriving at least 70,000 children of their basic human right to an education. A total of 26 health facilities have been damaged to varying degrees due to proximity to the clashes, including 12 that have closed, while another four remain at high risk of closure. At least 953 migrants, among them 136 women and 85 children, were returned to Libya in the first two weeks of 2020. Most were disembarked in Tripoli and all were taken to detention centres, where they are routinely subjected to serious human rights violations and abuses. Those returned migrants are among over 1,000 who have left Libya by sea since 1 January, driven in part by the heaviest clashes Tripoli has seen since hostilities began nine months ago. The increase in departures is alarming, given the very limited search-and-rescue capacity in the Mediterranean. On 27 January, UNSMIL and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) issued a joint report on the 2 July air strike on the Tajoura detention centre, calling for accountability for violations of international law and urgent action to prevent a repeat of a similar incident. I regret the recent news that OHCHR has stopped activities at the gathering and departure facility it had established, as it was unable to guarantee safety due to training exercises nearby. I am concerned about credible reports of serious human rights violations in Sirte, including enforced disappearances and arbitrary detention by armed groups since the LNA took the city on 6 January. There are reports of families forced to flee, some due to their affiliation with the Government of National Accord and others due to their association with elements of the former regime, that is, the Al-Qadhafi regime. UNSMIL has received reliable reports of hundreds of prisoners from at least four towns and cities in western Libya, including Tripoli and Khums, being released contrary to Libyan law in order to fight on behalf of the Government of National Accord in exchange for promised freedom following the end of the conflict. We have also received reports of summary executions and revenge killings in Tripoli and in nearby Tarhouna, which is under the control of forces loyal to the LNA. The fate of many forcibly disappeared Libyans remains unknown. More than half a year has passed since Siham Sergewa, a member of the House of Representatives, was seized at night from her home in Benghazi. I reiterate that the authorities in eastern Libya are responsible for respecting international human rights law and are legally obliged to establish the fate and whereabouts of Ms. Sergewa. I welcome the joint statement issued by several Member States on 17 January and urge others with influence on the relevant authorities to demand her immediate release and the release of all victims of enforced disappearance and to hold those responsible to account. In contrast to the malaise that has beset some in Libya's political class, many other Libyans have not stood idly by in the face of the widespread use of hate speech and divisive rhetoric designed to tear thecountry apart. I applaud the civil society activists and tribal elders who have courageously raised their voices, particularly in the past few days, in order to maintain social harmony among Libyans. I was heartened to see that a group of young activists in Benghazi issued a New Year's Day call for a cessation of hostilities and a return to political talks. It is my sincere hope that the momentum created on 19 January in Berlin - genuine momentum - and here today in Brazzaville will be seized by the Council and by the Libyan parties. Libyans need to be given some hope that the international community has not abandoned them. Specific endorsement of the Berlin conclusions by the Council through the adoption of a resolution would send a decisive signal not only to the Libyans but also to the spoilers - local and international alike - about the seriousness with which the international community regards this process. However, I must also be candid in expressing my deep anger and disappointment at what has occurred since the Berlin summit. There are unscrupulous actors inside and outside Libya who cynically hint towards efforts to promote peace and piously affirm their support for the United Nations. Meanwhile, they continue to strengthen their commitment to a military solution, raising the frightening spectre of a full-scale conflict and further misery for the Libyan people, more refugees, the creation of a security vacuum and further interruptions to global energy supplies. All that is done in blatant disregard of Libya's sovereignty and the fundamental rights of the Libyan people and in flagrant violation of international consensus and the rules-based international order. I hope that in the coming days the Council can find its unity and its voice to halt Libya's senseless unravelling. Too much is at stake, including our collective credibility.
