Estonia is submitting the present statement in explanation of its vote on the draft resolution contained in document S/2020/1054, of 29 October 2020. Estonia considers women and peace and security an integral part of the agenda of the Security Council. We have welcomed and supported the steps forward made in its development, including by our co-sponsorship of key Council decisions on women and peace and security over more than 10 years. Estonia continues to implement the women and peace and security agenda nationally and has made it one of our priorities as an elected member of the Security Council. Estonia therefore appreciates the attention devoted by the Russian Federation to the issue of women and peace and security during its presidency, including the debate organized on 29 October (see S/2020/1084) on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Estonia believes that the anniversary should be used to enhance the commitments made on women and peace and security and to promote the full implementation of all Security Council resolutions in this regard. While Estonia believes that the Security Council has already established a comprehensive normative framework on women and peace and security, we engaged constructively and in good faith in the negotiations on the draft resolution before us with the objective of ensuring a Council outcome that would add value to the agenda and its implementation. Our engagement has also been based on the conviction that we cannot take a step back on our commitments. We believe that the ownership of the women and peace and security agenda lies with numerous Member States, civil society organizations and women peacebuilders, who have worked with determination to advance it, and that we have no right to diminish it. Our proposals made repeatedly in the discussion of the draft before us reflect these considerations. We strongly regret that several of our suggestions, which were closely based on the Council's agreements to date, are not reflected in the draft contained in document S/2020/1054. The text as it stands excludes key elements with respect to civil society involvement in the women and peace and security agenda, including the requirements for their protection and support. Given the serious threats and reprisals against women human rights defenders, this is a stark omission of the role of our key partners in the implementation of 1325 (2000). The text inadequately reflects the foundation of international human rights law, upon which the women and peace and security is based, including the Committee on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women general recommendation No. 30. It fails to sufficiently address the link between the restrictions on women's full enjoyment of human rights and the challenges related to their participation and protection. It also does not address the structural barriers faced by women. It does not adequately reflect the importance of the full, equal and meaningful participation and leadership of women in peace processes - which is a major shortcoming in the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda - and means to ensure this. The draft also discounts the role of women's leadership in tackling the coronavirus disease epidemic. The Security Council has taken a decision to integrate women and peace and security concerns across all country-specific situations on its agenda, yet the draft fails to mention this key aspect of the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. It also overlooks the importance of gender mainstreaming in the work of the entire United Nations to support the full implementation of Council decisions on women and peace and security. We highly value the cooperation of all Council colleagues who engaged in discussions on this text. We believe that the expertise and openness brought by them to these deliberations would have provided us with solutions for a consensual Council product, which would do justice to the twentieth anniversary of the women and peace and security agenda. We regret that so many of their suggestions went unheeded throughout several rounds of negotiations. We underline the need to ensure a true dialogue, transparency and openness in any Council deliberation. We sincerely regret that the draft text fails in the objective that it set out at the start of this process. We believe that the women and peace and security agenda belongs to all of us and, therefore, it is our responsibility to make sure we stand with the commitments we have made to women as part of our goal of ensuring peace and security. For these reasons, Estonia abstained in the voting on this draft resolution.
