Mrs. Marsudi (Indonesia): I wish to applaud you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting. I
also thank the briefers for their insightful presentations.

Climate change is real, and it is happening now. I
was born in Semarang - a peaceful coastal city of the
island of Java, Indonesia. It is located in a low-lying
delta. Since the city's establishment in the seventeenth
century, its coastal area has always been prone to sea-
water flooding, which we call "rob flooding", during the
rainy season. Climate change has further exacerbated
that vulnerability. The prevalence of rob flooding has
increased. According to research done by the United
Nations Population Fund, Semarang, my hometown,
will experience climate-related sea-level rise by 40 to
80 centimetres in the next 100 years, thereby expanding
the potential inundation area inland by 1.7 to 3 square
kilometres. My hometown shows clearly that the
security threats of climate change are indisputable.
However, as an economically dynamic city, Semarang
has the capacity to adapt.

But that is certainly not the case for many other
places around the globe. When there is no capacity to
adapt, potential security threats become real security
threats - from the loss of livelihoods to irregular
migration; from food scarcity to the loss of territory;
and perhaps even the survival ofa nation isjeopardized.
Indonesia therefore truly shares the concerns of small
islands developing States about the survival of our
nations. The question then is: How should the Security
Council respond to that threat? Allow me to highlight
some pertinent points.

First, the Security Council must consolidate efforts
to better respond to the security impacts of climate
change - I repeat, the security impacts of climate
change, not climate change itself. In past discussions,
the Security Council has acknowledged the negative
security implications of climate change in the Sahel
and the Horn of Africa. We can build upon past
accomplishments. One concrete step that we can take
is to better equip our peacekeepers with the capacity
to undertake military operations other than war - to
carry out not only peacekeeping operations but also
climate peace missions. In that context, Indonesian
peacekeepers stand ready to share their experience with
military operations other than war.

Secondly, our approach to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding must - and I repeat must - ensure
synergy between security and development. One cannot
exist without the other. Therefore, efforts towards peace
must take into account the often-overlooked aspect of
sustainable development.

Thirdly, I wish to reiterate that the responsibility
to respond to the security impact of climate change lies
with the countries concerned. Instead of interfering,
what we must do is assist based on actual needs and
priorities. Indonesia stands ready to contribute. We
have extended technical assistance to the Pacific and
Africa to enhance their adaptive capacity. We are
committed to doing more.

The role of regional organizations should not be
overlooked, as the impacts often spill into neighbouring
countries. In our own region, we are proud that the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
has strengthened the capacity of its Humanitarian
Assistance Centre in providing a coordinated
response - one ASEAN, one response.

Finally, our homework in the Council is to better
define what falls under the ambit of climate change
itself and what constitutes the security dimension of
climate-related impacts. The United Nations system
must work in synergy, according to the respective
competencies and mandates of its bodies.

For Indonesia, while the Security Council can
deal with the security dimension of climate change,
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change remains the leading forum to address climate
change. Upholding the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change is absolutely vital. The Security Council may
rest assured that Indonesia stands ready to contribute
to global efforts to combat climate change.

