Mrs. Asmady (Indonesia): Allow me to join
others in thanking you and your delegation for taking
the initiative of organizing this open debate on a very
important issue. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Merores, who has spoken on
behalf the President of the General Assembly, and
Mr. Christian, Acting Chairman of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission, and to
welcome the Deputy Secretary-General, Mrs. Migiro,
to the Council.

Conflict prevention and resolution in Africa is a
major concern of the Security Council and is an
important part of its work for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Council's
institutional and practical cooperation with the African
Union in this regard continues to evolve, moving today
in the direction of greater partnership. We welcome
this development.

There are five major points underlying the
Indonesian perspective on this issue.

The first is that the quantity and nature of
conflicts in Africa have been changing. Conflicts that
five or ten years ago may have seemed intractable are
now being resolved, particularly in the Great Lakes
region and in West Africa. Other difficult problems,
however, persist, as in Somalia and the Western
Sahara, and some new ones have emerged, particularly
in East and Central Africa. These conflicts, moreover,
are far more complicated and wide-ranging,
interlinking intra- and inter-State conflict dynamics.
The United Nations, together with the African Union
and subregional organizations, has confronted these
issues and is deploying new ways of cooperating and
collaborating to address recent and persistent conflicts.

Second, preventive measures are cost-effective
and save lives. The best way to maintain peace and
security is to stop conflicts before they start and, when
they do start, to keep them contained. The tinderbox of
unrest in Africa needs to be monitored and kept in
check, lest it threaten to ignite as a result of polarizing
issues and economic adversity and deprivation.

In order to prevent a flame from becoming a
wildfire, we need an early awareness of the possibility
that conflict might occur. An early warning mechanism
helps alert us to potential or latent conflicts. While the
concept of an early warning system is not new, we
believe its full potential has not been realized. It is not
enough to simply be aware of hot spots for conflicts.
We need resources and the means to alter the situation
on the ground and contribute to the maintenance of
peace in addition to the ability to predict where conflict
might arise.

It has never been very clear, however, what calls
for preventive measures by the international
community and what falls within the domestic
jurisdiction of States under Article 2 of the Charter of
the United Nations. It is clear that conflicts in Africa
today are, with one exception, intra-State conflicts. We
believe that countries have the primary responsibility
to prevent and resolve their internal conflicts. The
preventive methods called for in the report of the
Secretary-General last year on the preventive of armed
conflict are applicable; in all cases these include
structural, operational and systematic prevention
methods.

Our next point is that conflict prevention is
closely related to efforts to address the root causes of
conflict. Particularly important is the fact that the
sources of conflict are frequently economic and social
in nature. Consequently, the Security Council should
more closely engage its partners in the United Nations
system that are competent in economic and social
issues. Indeed, Article 65 of the Charter lays the
foundation for such cooperation. The Security Council
affirmed in resolution 1625 (2005) its determination to
cooperate with the Economic and Social Council.

Fourth, while we should do all we can to prevent
conflict in Africa in terms of committing troops to
peacekeeping, there are many advantages to troops
being drawn from within the African region. As
recently highlighted in Darfur and Somalia, we need to
put a mechanism in place whereby more troops can be
trained and the African standby force can become truly
operational.

Utilizing regional forces is beneficial, as they
have the advantage of familiarity with the region,
cultures and people and in many cases have the
potential to gain greater trust among the parties. Such a
force could also be deployed faster and have an
immediate impact on the ground while the Security
Council considers the issue. There are also greater
incentives to commit troops to conflicts in
neighbouring countries, because of their inherent
interest in regional stability. It is essential that United
Nations peacekeeping operations or United Nations-
mandated operations should be neutral and perceived
as such.

Finally, we are convinced that United
Nations/African Union cooperation, coordination and
collaboration are essential for the maintenance of peace
and security in Africa. We welcome recent
strengthening of that cooperation, in which African
countries and the African Union play a central role,
while the United Nations strengthens the provision of
resources for the African Union.

The joint communique between the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union of last June is an essential instrument
for strengthening and developing a stronger and more
structured relationship on conflict prevention,
management and resolution; on peacekeeping and
peacebuilding; and on information-sharing on conflict
situations on the agendas of the two bodies.

A multi-pronged approach is required to prevent,
resolve and eradicate violent conflict in Africa. There
are promising signs in many of the existing conflicts in
Africa today, and with appropriate preventive and
innovative measures we may be able to ensure that
there are fewer human tragedies in the region in the
future. We should commit our intellectual, political,
financial and institutional resources to this effort and
develop more advanced coordination with regional
economic and political institutions. The time to act is
now.

