Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General de Mistura for
his briefing and for his leadership of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
I warmly welcome Ambassador Tanin and thank him
for his remarks on the priorities set by his Government.
We took due consideration of Minister Zalmai
Rassoul's letter to the Secretary-General (S/2011/118, annex). Brazil supports Afghanistan's aspirations for
ownership in ongoing processes and for full
sovereignty.

The situation in Afghanistan has visibly improved
over the past year. First and foremost, I wish to
congratulate the Afghan people. I would also like to
acknowledge the importance of the work of the
Independent Election Commission and the Electoral

11-2662]
Complaints Commission, which acted in a
commendable way throughout the electoral process.

The tensions over the status of parliament,
however, must be solved in a mature and institutional
way. Efforts to create the foundations for sustainable
peace through political dialogue must continue. It is
only with the sincere involvement of all stakeholders
that the remaining challenges will be overcome.

In that sense, we welcome the latest peace and
reintegration efforts by the Afghan Government,
especially such initiatives as the High Peace Council
and the Afghan Peace and Reintegration Programme.
The fact that armed groups are increasingly joining the
reintegration process is another positive trend that the
international community should support. We commend
the role being played by UNAMA in providing
logistical assistance to the High Peace Council's
missions throughout the country.

Efforts to further regional cooperation are
essential for the well-being of the Afghan people. In
that regard, we welcome the instances of Afghanistan's
increasing cooperation with its neighbours, such as the
signing of the intergovernmental agreement and gas
pipeline framework agreement, as well as the
ratification of the Afghanistan-Pakistan Transit Trade
Agreement.

Nevertheless, the security situation is still
alarming. The human cost of the armed conflict in
Afghanistan grew in 2010. Civilian deaths have been
increasing each year. Although the majority of civilian
casualties are caused by anti-Government forces, it is
important that the International Security Assistance
Force and other international forces continue to review
their tactics and procedures in order to reduce civilian
casualties even more. We are particularly saddened by
the recent increase in deaths among women and
children.

There is no military solution to this conflict. The
Kabul process must be closely followed until transition
to full Afghan leadership and responsibility is attained.
The next few years offer a critical opportunity for
donors to support Afghan priorities and commit to the
principles on their effectiveness.

Other important steps to move the Kabul process
forward include UNAMA's continued support for the
promotion of coherent planning and delivery of aid,
based on the principle of Afghan ownership and
leadership of aid coordination.

We believe that enhancing productivity in
agriculture is of particular importance in helping to lay
the foundation for both peace and development in
Afghanistan. The creation of conditions for sustainable
agriculture deserves full attention.

Brazil is committed to strengthening its
contribution to the stability and social and economic
development of Afghanistan. We will soon open an
embassy in Kabul.

We have sent a mission to Afghanistan to identify
areas for technical cooperation. In consultation with
the Afghan Government, we have decided to develop a
capacity-building project in the area of agro-ecological
zoning for wheat and soybean crops, which we hope
will help to advance sustainable agriculture in
Afghanistan.

Here in the Security Council, and through an
enhanced bilateral presence in Kabul, Brazil stands
ready to work with the Afghan people and Government
towards a brighter future. In response to the express
wish of the Afghan Government and as requested by
the Secretary-General, Brazil supports the extension of
the mandate of UNAMA for a further 12 months.

