Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Mohammed Ibn
Chambas, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his substantive and comprehensive
report (S/2017/563). We agree with his assessment
that the situation in the diverse and extensive region
that he covers is a complex one. The terrorist threat
remains acute, and eradicating it is one of the primary
tasks on the regional agenda. Until then it will be
impossible to achieve sustainable political stability
or make substantive progress in solving the region's
socioeconomic issues. We are concerned about the fact
that various criminal groups, pirates and smugglers
are working closely with terrorists, exploiting gaps
in national and border security for their own illegal
activity and essentially profiting from chaos, instability
and the suffering of civilians.

All of that puts an additional burden on the already
difficult humanitarian situation in West Africa and the
Sahel. Unfortunately, for many ordinary people, the
dry statistical data that is comprehensible to specialists
familiar with the region does not convey the tragic scale
of the realities in the region. It will take a long time and
redoubled international assistance efforts to overcome
the negative trends. We note the response of the Lake

Chad Basin Commission and its work in forming ajoint
multinational rapid-reaction force together with Benin.

We welcome the establishment by the countries of
the Group of Five for the Sahel of a counter-terrorist
force, endorsed by the Security Council in resolution
2359 (2017), and we urge that it be deployed on the
ground as soon as possible. We emphasize that efforts to
improve security and stability should be carried out as
part of a comprehensive approach, combining military
counter-terrorism measures with efforts to strengthen
State institutions, promote systemic economic and
social development, spread a culture of respect for
human rights and the rule of law and provide jobs for
young people.

We greatly appreciate the steps that have been taken
by the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel and the specialized United Nations agencies to
provide various types of assistance to countries in this
part of Africa. It is important to ensure that, as before,
these efforts are coordinated with regional associations
such as the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the Mano River Union, the Lake
Chad Basin Commission, the Group of Five for the
Sahel and others. We also think it important to ensure
that we improve the effectiveness of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, whose potential has
not yet been fully realized, and that the United Nations
agencies in West Africa and the Sahara-Sahel region
take that factor into consideration in coordinating their
aid efforts with the Governments of the region.

In that regard, the views of the countries for which
the Strategy was developed should be a priority. Above
all, we should ensure that external assistance does
not take the form of solutions imposed on African
Governments by outsiders. We support the principled
position that outside meddling is unacceptable. We all
remember that the roots of the precipitous degradation
of the situation in the region go back to 2011, when
outside interference resulted in an operation aimed at
regime change in Libya.

