Mr. Corr (Ireland): May I also congratulate Mali,
and you personally, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency for December, which promises to be a very
busy month, and assure you of the full support of my
delegation. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Durrant of Jamaica for what was an outstanding
presidency in November.

My delegation would like to thank Mr. Annabi for
his comprehensive briefing and, indeed, thank all those
concerned for producing the Mission report now before
us. Ireland warmly commends the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH),
including the International Police Task Force, for its
achievements to date in restructuring and reforming the
law enforcement agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and - as the report of the Secretary-General points
out - for completing 43 of the 66 core projects in its
mandate implementation plan.

Ireland fully endorses the statement which will be
delivered shortly by Belgium on behalf of the European
Union. I therefore wish to make only a few comments
in my national capacity.

It is clear that although UNMIBH has achieved
significant results in Bosnia and Herzegovina, there
remains cause for concern in some areas. Ongoing
problems include an unacceptably high level of
political interference, inadequate support for the police
force, a lack of judicial and penal reform and poor
economic progress. It is essential that all the relevant
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina implement fully
the provisions of the Dayton-Paris Peace Accords and
work to develop viable State-level institutions, rather
than allow short-term political interests to prevail over
the interests of the country as a whole.

Ireland welcomes the work of the Police
Commissioner project, which aims to create a non-
political police service, and the introduction of a
disciplinary code. We urge the relevant authorities to
cooperate with UNMIBH in its efforts to encourage
minority representation in local police forces. We agree
fully with the Secretary-General's assessment that the
response of police forces to the violence against
minority returnees is an important indicator of police
performance.

Ireland welcomes the progress achieved in
relation to refugee returns and notes that the figures for
2001 are the highest since the end of the war. However,
Bosnia and Herzegovina is still faced with significant
pockets of resistance to the establishment of a truly
multi-ethnic society. It is also struggling to create a
viable economy and continues to suffer from serious
deficiencies in State- and entity-level governmental
authorities.

The relevant authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina must assume more responsibility. They
should work to improve inter-entity cooperation and
push ahead with vital economic reform, which will
strengthen the country's capacity for self-sustainability
and help it to fulfil the conditions outlined in the
European Union road map for moving towards
European integration.

The State Border Service and the Special
Trafficking Operations Programme (STOP), established
by UNMIBH, have achieved significant progress in
relation to human trafficking and illegal migration. We
note that since July 2001, seven individuals have been
convicted of trafficking-related offences, but that,
regrettably, overall progress in combating this illegal
trade remains severely hampered. Further progress in
relation to these issues and in relation to property
rights law is central to the normalization and stability
of the entire region.

Finally, Ireland believes strongly that the
international community must continue its involvement
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Work should continue to
reaffirm the rule of law, develop independent and
effective institutions, facilitate further refugee returns
and foster economic development. Efforts should be
made to ensure that the considerable achievements
made in relation to policing and future work in
restructuring and reforming the police force should not
be endangered by weakness within the judicial system.
We believe that particular attention should be paid
during the next year to ensuring progress in relation to
judicial, penal and police reform. A recalibrated
international presence will be necessary to achieve this
progress and to create a Bosnia and Herzegovina that is
sustainable, integrated fully into Europe and able to
meet its international obligations.

It is important that planning continue urgently at
all levels so that a smaller, but robust, follow-on
mission with achievable objectives can be deployed
before the end of the current UNMIBH mandate.

Ireland notes the Secretary-General's
recommendation that regional actors are best placed to
assume responsibility for this, and, for its part, is
participating actively in talks about the various
possibilities. We look forward to further discussions on
this matter in the Council.

