Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to join my
colleagues in warmly welcoming the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Vuk
J eremie, and the Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Kosovo, Mrs. Vlora Citaku. I would
also like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Lamberto Zannier for his briefing.
We appreciate the contribution made by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and commend the dedication and service of
its staff.

Tomorrow, Kosovo will celebrate the third
anniversary of its independence. We congratulate the
people and leadership of Kosovo for the progress that
has been achieved over the past three years. We will
continue our support for a free, multi-ethnic,
democratic and dynamic Kosovo, whose future lies in
Europe.

We welcome the most recent recognitions of
Kosovo as an independent State, bringing the total
number of recognitions to 75. Germany sees those
recognitions as a clear sign that the region has gained
stability since Kosovo's independence. We call upon

ll-23603
States that have not yet done so to recognize the
Republic of Kosovo, as a contribution to peace and
stability in the Western Balkans.

Our common goal in the region is very clear. We
want peace and stability, freedom, the rule of law and
respect for human rights. The prospect of European
Union (EU) membership has facilitated peace and
reconciliation. One day, all countries in the region, as
well as Serbia and Kosovo, should find their place
under a common European roof.

Germany commends and fully supports the
efforts of the High Representative for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy of the European Union, Baroness
Catherine Ashton, and her representatives to facilitate a
process of dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, as
supported by General Assembly resolution 64/298,
adopted in September 2010. We welcome the fact that
both parties are ready for that dialogue and we hope
that, after some delays, it will now start quickly and in
a constructive spirit.

We echo the Secretary-General in welcoming the
peaceful conduct of the recent parliamentary elections
in Kosovo. We view the increased overall turnout and
the good participation by Kosovo Serbs and other
communities as a positive sign of the wish of all of
Kosovo's citizens to jointly participate in building a
sustainable, multi-ethnic future.

We regret that a number of irregularities marred
the voting and counting processes. However, we
welcome the fact that the competent institutions in
Kosovo addressed the irregularities in an efficient and
responsible manner, in line with the existing legal
framework in Kosovo. All unlawful acts related to the
elections have to be investigated and prosecuted so as
to further strengthen the credibility and legitimacy of
the democratic process in Kosovo.

We hope for the speedy formation of a new
Government and the election of the new President of
the Republic. The new Government will face a number
of important challenges, such as addressing the
pressing need for socio-economic development,
strengthening the rule of law throughout Kosovo and
combating corruption and organized crime. The full
integration of representatives of the ethnic
communities in institutions and society, especially the
Kosovo Serbs, and the protection of their religious and
cultural sites will also have to be addressed.
As the report (S/2011/43) of the Secretary-
General underlines, many challenges remain in
northern Kosovo. Although the overall security
situation in Kosovo has remained relatively calm, it
continues to be potentially volatile in the north.

We welcome the continued close cooperation
between the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission (EULEX), the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Kosovo Force. We fully
support the important work of EULEX and are pleased
that it has extended its presence and activities in the
north of Kosovo so as to guarantee the implementation
of its mandate throughout the territory of Kosovo.

The grave allegations of crimes committed
against Serbian nationals during and after the end of
the armed conflict in Kosovo, as described by the
Special Rapporteur of the Parliamentary Assembly of
the Council of Europe, Dick Marty, are shocking.
Germany takes them seriously. Those allegations must
be investigated fully and impartially. We call on all
relevant organizations, institutions and individuals to
come forward and present any evidence they have to
allow for a full investigation. We welcome the fact that
the Government of Kosovo and the Government of
Albania are prepared to fully cooperate in the full and
impartial investigation into the allegations made by the
Special Rapporteur.

EULEX has the necessary capacities, competence
and, above all, jurisdiction to carry out those
investigations. EULEX has our full support and
confidence. From our point of view, the setting up of
an ad hoc body or tribunal by the Security Council
would not serve our joint objective of a speedy and full
investigation.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that my country
remains committed to a strong partnership between the
United Nations, the EU and the relevant actors in the
region - a partnership that builds on shared values
and common goals.

