Mr. Kalomoh: First, let me thank members of the
Council for the kind comments made towards our
Office in Guinea-Bissau and the excellent work that we
are performing.

I wish to respond to a comment made by the
distinguished representative of Russia, echoed by the
representative of France, regarding the role of the
United Nations in ensuring that elections take place as
planned. While we all recognize that the primary
responsibility for creating an enabling environment lies
with the leaders in Guinea-Bissau, I believe it will be
expected of us to remain vigilant, to monitor the
situation as it evolves and to continue to support the
efforts of the national leaders as they forge ahead
making preparations for the elections in the time frame
they have been given and ensuring that they keep their
commitment to the deadline they have established. We
also believe that the subregional leaders will continue
to support the efforts of the leaders of Guinea-Bissau
and to hold them to their commitments keep to the
deadlines established to hold the elections.

There are a number of factors that need to be
given constant attention. One, obviously, is the support
of the donor community to the electoral process. As the
Ambassador of Guinea-Bissau has just indicated, the
United Nations has made arrangements, through
UNDP, in support of the electoral process.

There is another factor that may influence the
timing of the election and that is the salary arrears. The
Secretariat and the group of friends of Guinea-Bissau
and the ad hoc committee of ECOSOC, are trying to
mobilize resources from donor countries to support the
Government of Guinea-Bissau in paying salary arrears.
We recognize that some donors have difficulty in
providing budgetary assistance, but we hope they will
be flexible and pragmatic to see how they can best
respond to these budgetary difficulties.

We take note, with appreciation, of the emphasis
made by almost all the speakers on the need for
stability. The international community has invested a
lot of resources and energy in the electoral process in
Africa and elsewhere. But, we have all come to realize
that, in and of themselves, elections do not provide
stability. It is the sustained efforts to support the
development programmes of countries, particularly
those countries emerging from conflict, that will
guarantee stability. At least, it is in that vein that we
believe it is very essential for the international
community to remain engaged in support of the people
and the Government of Guinea-Bissau to develop its
weak State structures, so that they can support the
future elected Government. Without that support, as we
were reminded by the representative of Pakistan and
the representative of Guinea-Bissau, yesterday it was
President Vieira, today President Kumba Yala,
tomorrow the next leader. Therefore, in the absence of
sustained support, the instability will continue.

To recapitulate, I simply want to say that the
United Nations is involved in mobilizing support, we
have made some arrangements with UNDP that support
the electoral process, and we are satisfied that, should
the conditions for holding elections continue to prevail,
we will be adequately prepared to provide that support.

