Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and the
countries aligning themselves with this statement.

First of all, I would like to thank the Chairpersons
of the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions Committee, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004) for their comprehensive and
informative briefings. The European Union welcomes
today's joint briefing as an important contribution to

S/l'V.5446

 

strengthen the acceptance, legitimacy and transparency
of the Security Council's efforts in the field of counter-
terrorism and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction.

Terrorism is a threat to all States and to all
peoples. Terrorism knows no borders. It is a global
threat that requires a global and comprehensive
response. In the global fight against terrorism, the
United Nations has a unique role to play. The 13
universal United Nations conventions and protocols
against terrorism, together with Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004) and
1624 (2005) and other relevant resolutions, provide the
legal framework for multilateral action against
terrorism. The European Union continues to be
committed to reaching agreement on a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism during the
sixtieth session of the General Assembly, in order to
achieve the objectives agreed at the 2005 world
summit.

It is also imperative that the United Nations and
its Member States continue to show their unity and
resolve in their fight against terrorism by adopting and
implementing without delay a global counter-terrorism
strategy based on the elements and recommendations
contained in the recent report of the Secretary-General.
The strategy should be operational and action-oriented.
It should focus on capacity-building, coordination and
cooperation and should involve all relevant actors,
namely, Member States, the United Nations, all 23
bodies and organizations in the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, civil
society and the public at large. As highlighted in the
Secretary-General's report, we believe that the Security
Council and its committees have a key role to play in
the global fight against terrorism.

Turning to the work of the three Committees, the
European Union reaffirms the importance of respect for

international law - in particular human rights law,
refugee law and international humanitarian law,
including due process and the rule of law - in the

fight against terrorism, which is a prerequisite for
making that fight both legitimate and effective.

We reiterate the 2005 world summit's call on the
Security Council to ensure fair and clear procedures for
placing individuals and entities on sanctions lists and
for removing them, as well as for granting
humanitarian exemptions.

The European Union calls upon the 1267
Committee to continue its efforts to further improve
the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime, especially
the consolidated list and the Committee's guidelines.
We expect that the Committee will expeditiously take
up its work on the guidelines dealing with listing and
delisting procedures, as mandated by Security Council
resolution 1617 (2005), while taking into account the
important recommendations in the fourth report of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team. In
that regard, we note the contributions of some Member
States to that important issue, including an academic
study on strengthening targeted sanctions through clear
and fair procedures that was sponsored by Germany,
Sweden and Switzerland, as well as initiatives by
Council Members such as Denmark and France. We
also note the recent publication of a legal opinion
commissioned by the Office of Legal Affairs on the
website of the United Nations.

In our view, effective listing and delisting
procedures are essential to preserve the legitimacy and
reinforce the efficacy of the United Nations sanctions
regime. A number of cases are currently pending before
various courts, including the European Court of
Justice, that challenge the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions regime as violating the rights of listed
individuals to a fair trial and to an effective remedy.
We believe that the Security Council should devote
special attention to that matter, as a negative court
ruling would not only put the Member States
concerned in a difficult position but might also call the
whole system of targeted United Nations sanctions into
question.

We would also like to draw attention to the
efforts of the democratically elected Government of
Afghanistan to foster the process of national
reconciliation, which have led it to put forward
requests to the 1267 Committee to delist certain
individuals who hold governmental functions, among
others in key positions at the provincial level. We call
upon the Committee to quickly decide upon those
requests in order to support the process of national
reconciliation as well as the rebuilding and
stabilization efforts of the international community.

The European Union fully supports the latest
work programme of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
for the period of April to June 2006. We welcome the
goal of the CTC to achieve concrete results with regard
to the revision of the reporting regime, the

Sll'V.5446

 

enhancement of dialogue with Member States and the
deepening of relations with international, regional and
subregional organizations. We note with appreciation
that the Committee intends to shift its focus from
reporting to implementation and to start reflecting on
additional means to address the cases of States that do
not meet the requirements of resolution 1373 (2001),
based on the analysis of country reports provided by
the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED).
The European Union supports the steps of the CTC to
encourage States to report on their implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005) and reiterates its call upon the
CTC to further intensify its efforts to mainstream
human rights throughout all of its work.

The European Union welcomes the efforts of the
CTC and the CTED to improve the coordination,
coherence and efficiency of the delivery of technical
assistance in the field of counter-terrorism. We
commend the efforts of the CTED to enter into
dialogue with States, and encourage the continuation of
joint visits, including efficient follow-up, together with
other entities of the United Nations system and
regional organizations. In that context, the European
Union reiterates its readiness to continue its
cooperation and participation in CTED visits. We are
also pleased to note the exemplary cooperation
between the CTED, as key facilitator of technical
assistance, and the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime as a key
provider of technical assistance to requesting countries
for the ratification and implementation of the 13
universal United Nations conventions and protocols
against terrorism. Finally, we call upon the CTED to
work closely with all technical assistance providers and
to share information that might be helpful to them in
their assistance programmes.

The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the danger of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, including their means of delivery,
and of their acquisition by non-State actors, in
particular terrorists. The European Union highly
welcomes the recent adoption of resolution 1673
(2006), which extended the mandate of the 1540
Committee for a further period of two years, until April
2008. We commend the Committee and its group of
experts for their comprehensive final report and
recommendations on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), which shall constitute a basis for the
adoption of a comprehensive programme of work
addressing the resolution in all its aspects. We
recognize that the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) is a long-term task that will require
continuous efforts at the national, regional and
international levels. In that regard, we note with
concern that, as of today, 57 States have not yet
submitted their first reports. We urge all States which
have not yet done so to submit their reports to the
Committee and reiterate our readiness to consider any
request for assistance or advice to such States as might
be required.

The European Union welcomes the Committee's
intention to keep the facilitation of further reporting
and the promotion of the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) through outreach activities among the top
priorities of its future work. In that regard, we would
like to inform the Council that the European Union will
adopt a joint action to provide support to three regional
seminars in China, Ghana and Peru, which will be
organized by the 1540 Committee in the second half of
this year. We also commend the Committee for the
recent publication on its official website of a
legislative database containing relevant information
about national laws, regulations and other measures
related to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), which will be an important tool for Member
States when enacting national implementation laws and
measures.

Let me conclude by stressing the need for the
United Nations and its Member States to stand united
in a concerted effort to combat the global terrorist
menace we face today. The European Union stands
ready to play its part.

