Mr. Vohidov (Uzbekistan) (spoke in Russian):
Allow me at the outset to thank Sir Jeremy Greenstock
for his extremely detailed and useful briefing on the
work carried out by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter
terrorism. The creation within the structure of the
Security Council of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
has again demonstrated that the United Nations is a key
international structure in the fight against terrorism and
other threats in the twenty-first century.

In accordance with paragraph 6 of resolution
1373 (2001), Uzbekistan has submitted its report to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee on the steps it has taken
to implement this resolution.

We would like to note that the contact centres in
Uzbekistan, established in accordance with the
programme of work of the Committee for its first 30-
day period, are ready for active dialogue with the
corresponding contact centres of other States and with
competent international organizations on questions
covered by resolution 1373 (2001).

Uzbekistan feels that in the first 90-day period of
the implementation of its mandate, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee has achieved positive results in
implementing the provisions of paragraph 6 of
resolution 1373 (2001). The effectiveness of its work is
to be seen in the fact that by mid-January of this year,
123 States have already submitted their reports on their
progress in the implementation of measures provided
for under resolution 1373 (2001). We learned with
enthusiasm of the results of the first work period of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, and we support its
recently published programme of work covering its
second 90-day period.

There is no doubt that the activities of the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee deserve
the highest praise. Sir Jeremy Greenstock has set an
example of openness and informativeness in his work
and is actively carrying out meetings in various formats
for an exchange of views and ideas of Members of the
United Nations.

I should like to note that Uzbekistan, as a party to
all 12 international conventions and protocols against
terrorism, has been in favour for several years of the
creation within the United Nations of a centre to
counter all manifestations of international terrorism.
The circumstance that the functions entrusted to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee are consonant with those
that were proposed for the mandate initiated by us in
1999 for the International Centre to Combat Terrorism
is a source of satisfaction for Uzbekistan and stirs the
desire to continue our cooperation fruitfully.

In the Millennium Declaration adopted during the
Millennium Summit, heads of State and Government
expressed their determination to undertake agreed
actions to combat international terrorism. In the light of
the tragic events of 11 September 2001 and the still
existing threat and challenges of international
terrorism, work to develop two new international
instruments to be adopted by the General Assembly is
more timely than ever. These include a comprehensive
convention to combat international terrorism and a
convention to combat acts of nuclear terrorism.

However, today's reality shows that it is not
enough to simply adopt legal instrument in the fight
against terrorism. We must recognize that the threat of
obtaining, possession and use by terrorists of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons is real. We feel that,
in order to achieve effective results to combat
terrorism, we need to create a global system of
cooperation within the United Nations. In this context,
particularly significant is the fact that the question of
combating international terrorism falls directly within
the competence of the Security Council, which was in
particular reflected in the establishment of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. However, we are sure that
together with this, we will need to increase the overall
United Nations potential to combat international
terrorism by further strengthening and developing the
already existing structures and divisions of the
Organization.

We are convinced that only through joint efforts
can we counter international terrorism, which requires
that we develop agreed global measures and possibly a
global plan of action to combat terrorism. In this
context, we support the Secretary-General's initiative
on the speedy convening of a high-level conference
under the auspices of the United Nations to develop a
plan for jointly organized actions of the international
community to combat terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.

We are sure that such a conference would
promote constructive consideration and adoption of
urgent strategies and measures to eliminate
international terrorism.

