Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I will not speak today of hunger or poverty or the
ineffectiveness of the Council's sanctions, nor of
the need to review unilateral sanctions, nor of the
obscene proliferation of weapons, nor of the silencing
of traditional cultures 4 we have a hard time
understanding how traditional cultures contradict the
rule of law and human rights principles. I will also not
speak about the women raped while fetching water, nor
about children in refugee camps who only eat twice a
week. Instead, I will speak speak only about the report
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.

Argentina would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda
for presenting her twentieth report pursuant to resolution
1593 (2005). Argentina, like all of us, has kept track:
there have been 20 reports. When it comes to the
situation in Darfur, we often say that we are concerned.
When we talk about Council referrals to the Court, we
say that we are deeply concerned. Argentina laments
the fact that human rights violations continue and
that international humanitarian law is being violated
in Darfur. At the beginning of this year, in resolution
2138 (2014), the Council stated that it was imperative
that all parties refrained from committing further
violations and abuses of international humanitarian
law and human rights law. And yet we see just how
necessary it is to lift the obstacles that continue to exist
so that the work of the Group of Experts and the work
of African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) can move ahead effectively
and consistently. The Council also called upon the
Government of the Sudan to ensure accountability for
serious crimes.

Argentina again thanks the Prosecutor for her
dedication to monitoring the crimes currently being
committed, including different types of attacks on
civilians, attacks on humanitarian and UNAMID
workers and forced displacement of civilians - numbers
that are difficult to comprehend - the proliferation
of violence against women for the mere fact that they
are women, and the sexual and gender-based violence
taking place. The latter has become a key feature of
almost all of the conflicts that we address in the
Security Council. That is also the case in Darfur. Is
this something new, or are we becoming emboldened to
making visible the fact that our bodies - the bodies of
women - have always been used as a weapon of war
and object of contempt?

I should like to recall that it was less than a month
ago that information was referred to the Security Council
concerning massive violations in Thabit, North Darfur.
The Government of the Sudan was called upon to meet
its responsibility to allow UNAMID unrestricted access
to investigate the events. We also want to encourage
the Prosecutor to continue to investigate all such acts
that can be deemed crimes under the Rome Statute. In
particular, we thank the Office of the Prosecutor for its
policy paper on sexual, sexist and gender-based crimes.

There is another crucial aspect that the Prosecutor
frequently underscores in the reports on Darfur.
Of course, that has to do with cooperation. The
Government of the Sudan, pursuant to resolution 1593
(2005), should cooperate with the Court and provide
all the necessary assistance. But that goes not just for
the Government of the Sudan. As this is our last time
to address the matter of the International Criminal
Court, we would like to take this opportunity to recall
that States parties to the Rome Statute are compelled
to cooperate with the Court. However, the Council's
resolution also urges all Members of the United Nations
and regional organizations to cooperate with the Court.
A key aspect of cooperation is the execution of arrest
warrants. Currently, the arrest warrants that have
been issued by the Court since 2007 for genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity continue without
having been executed. It is unfortunate that other States
have set aside their obligations of cooperating with the
Court, including some non-parties to the Rome Statute,
for combating impunity is not limited to the parties to
the Rome Statute. Argentina therefore again urges all
States and regional and subregional organizations to
cooperate with the Court.

The matter of cooperation is directly linked to the
follow-up that the Council undertakes with regard to its
referrals to the International Criminal Court.

I am being repetitive, as is the Prosecutor of the
Court. It is normal that the Prosecutor recall in her
report the communications from the Court to the
Council, of which there have been eight to date. It is
alarming that none of these has received a response or
led to action by the Council. In presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/2, we the Council committed to undertake
effective monitoring of referrals to the Court. We made
a commitment to do so. To date, however, despite the
efforts by many members of the Council, it has not been
possible to reach an agreement on a mechanism to carry
out such monitoring. I think it took Rene' Descartes less
time to compose his Discourse on the Method than it
will take us to agree on the monitoring mechanism.
At the open debate on 23 October convened by my
delegation (see S/PV.7285), it was once again clear that
support from States Members of the United Nations
for effective follow-up on referrals was overwhelming.
We therefore urge once again that the Council dedicate
themselves to come up with a monitoring mechanism.
This organ cannot ignore its own decisions. It cannot
ignore its referrals to the Court.

I shall now turn to two matters having to do with
the Secretariat. The first has to do with the Secretary-
General's guidelines on non-essential contacts by staff
of the Organization with persons subject to arrest by
order of the International Criminal Court. Not as a
State party to the Rome Statute but as a member of the
Organization, Argentina, with all due respect, urges the
Secretary-General to ensure strict application of the
guidelines. That should include a rigorous assessment
of just how such contacts are essential for compliance
with United Nations mandates. Any contact found
to be essential by such an assessment must be made
known to the Court prior to that contact taking place.
We cannot continue with this culture of suspicion:
there must be reporting. The Secretary-General should
also inform the Member States, who are the ones that
approve the mandates. Such measures are necessary
because contacts with United Nations officials, in
particular high-level officials and officials on the
ground, including in peacekeeping operations, could
have an impact on the Court as well as undermine the
credibility of the United Nations.

With regard to the manner in which the information
from UNAMID in the Prosecutor's nineteenth report
concerning crimes committed against civilians,
especially women peacekeeping staff, could have been
treated, Argentina appreciates the note from Sectary-
General. The conclusions summarized in his note
dated 29 October are worrisome. We believe that it is
essential for there to be follow-up to the information
that has been investigated and to the conclusions,
both with regard to UNAMID and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. It would also be desirable for
the Security Council to have access to the full report.
Why should we not? We urge Member States to follow
up on these matters, including at the Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.

As with each time that the Council takes up the
International Criminal Court, I would like to recall
that there are two aspects with regard to referrals to the
Court, including when it comes to the issue of Darfur,
with which Argentina does not agree. The first has
to do with extending the jurisdiction of the Court to
cover nationals of States that are not party to the Rome
Statute, and the second pertains to the assertion that the
United Nations will not cover the costs of referrals. The
position of my delegation is well known and I will not
repeat it here.

In conclusion, as I have said, this is the last time that
Argentina has an opportunity to to address the matter
of the International Criminal Court as a member of the
Council; we may have another chance in 2030. Memory
is a collective thing, while the fight against impunity is
universal. I wish therefore to underscore that the Court
is an institution born of a common understanding that
serious crimes must not go unpunished and that justice
and punishment for the guilty contribute to preventing
such crimes.

The International Criminal Court was not a gracious

concession or the outcome ofa rational and deep exercise
in reflection by peoples and Governments. Instead, it
was prompted by fear in the face of atrocities and mass
crimes committed by murderous States. Terror led us
to work to bring the International Criminal Court into
existence. Let us speak the truth without being ashamed
as human beings. The International Criminal Court was
not driven by reason; it was created by terror.

Therefore I say to Ms. Fatou Bensouda, a brave
daughter of Africa and of humankind: continue to be
what you are - tireless - and comply with what all of
us ask, namely, impartiality, by which I meanjustice, for
the sake of memory, which is not passive or individual,
but collective, as well as for the sake of truth, which
is what allows us to know what is happening from
the voices of the oppressed, raped and silenced. In a
word, for the sake of justice, which means bringing
injustice to light. Justice is not a messianic force, it is
not revenge, it is not retaliation and it is not lynching.
It means "never again". And do so for the sake of
reparation to victims, which does not just mean giving
them money and improving their health as survivors;
it means emancipating victims as human beings and
understanding that life - a dignified life - is the right
of all.

