Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the holding of this important meeting
and to Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Ambassador Djani
and the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yuri Fedotov, for their
valuable briefings.

At the outset, we condemn the senseless attacks
carried out last week by the Taliban in various parts
of the country. We offer our condolences to the
victims" families and wish a speedy recovery to those
affected. Such a threat to civil society is all the more
troubling in the current electoral context, with reported
attacks on candidates, workers and electoral and voter
spaces. Those unacceptable crimes must be met with
a commensurate response, and those responsible must
pay for their actions by facing justice.

In keeping with Special Representative Yamamoto's
statement, we believe that Afghanistan is at a decisive
crossroads. The presidential elections scheduled to be
held in a few weeks will not only mark the democratic
destiny of the country, but will also provide a new
historical context and an opportunity to contribute
decisively to stability, reconciliation, sustainable peace
and the fight against corruption, pursuant to the vision
developed under the Geneva Mutual Accountability
Framework, with the support of the United Nations.

In that regard, we stress the importance that the
elections be held in accordance with the code of conduct,
which promotes and encourages behaviour based on
dialogue, tolerance and mutual respect, underpinned
by the lessons learned from previous elections. As the
Secretary-General indicates, that requires the process
to be perceived as fair, transparent and fair for all
candidates, including refraining from the use of State
resources for campaigning purposes.

With regard to the peace process under way,
we deem it to be of key importance that the solution
to the current crisis be framed primarily within the
intra-Afghan dialogue, under the inclusive leadership
of the process advanced by the Special Representative,
and with the firm support of countries with influence.
We reiterate the importance of maintaining direct
negotiations between the Taliban and Government
representatives, as President Ashraf Ghani has stated,
with a view to ending the violence.

The multisectoral visit led in July by Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed - in the course
of which it was emphasized that the peace process
will be successful only if it is inclusive and fully
respects the rights of all Afghans - was very useful.
We must not forget that the majority of the victims
of violence are women and children. We therefore
welcome the Government's efforts to better promote
and protect women and their participation in the
main electoral institutions, the Independent Human
Rights Commission and initiatives to strengthen their
participation in the peace process, as recognized by the
National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security,
and in the economic empowerment programme.

The precarious security situation that has
been described is compounded by the presence of
terrorists from the Islamic State and their ties with
drug trafficking. As acknowledged at the recent
Istanbul Process meeting, it is imperative to establish
a regional strategy to adequately address the nexus
linking terrorism and organized crime in that area, in
accordance with resolution 2482 (2019). We highlight
the efforts of the Government, in partnership with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which
Mr. Fedotov pointed out earlier.

In conclusion, we underscore the vital work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
in meeting all of those goals, particularly its work in
addressing the difficult humanitarian situation of the
country, including calls for a more significant response
by the international community to respond to urgent
food and health needs. We reaffirm our support for the
invaluable work of Special Representative Yamamoto
and his team, the renewal of whose mandate we
strongly support.
