Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation condemns in the strongest terms
the wave of terrorist attacks seen in New Zealand, Sri
Lanka, Burkina Faso and the United States, including
on a synagogue in California. We express our solidarity
with the Governments of those countries and with the
victims' families. We also express our solidarity with
Mozambique over the floods and cyclones in that
brotherly country that led to great destruction.

We first thank your delegation, Mr. President, for
having convened this very important open debate and
for your skill in conducting our work this month. We
also join other members in expressing our gratitude
to all the briefers for their detailed and informative
updates. In addition, we congratulate the State of Israel
on the holding and successful conclusion of the general
elections held at the beginning of April. We welcome
the presence of the Israeli and Palestinian delegations,
as well as others that, in solidarity with the Israelis and
Palestinians, are inscribed on the list of speakers for
this open debate.

Since the beginning ofthis millennium, the situation
in the Middle East has always been one of our key
concerns in considering ongoing international conflicts.

Like other countries, Equatorial Guinea has always
hoped that the problems created by the conflicts in
the region could be addressed with greater clarity and
sincerity, but above all fairly. What has happened in
Syria, Yemen, Lebanon, Palestine and other parts of the
region explicitly violates the purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations with regard to the pacific settlement
of disputes. The situation in the region is so sensitive
and so likely to deteriorate that it is crucial to ensure
that none of the parties enmeshed in those conflicts
take ill-advised steps that could plunge the region into a
fresh wave of violence, which would do nothing to help
achieve a peaceful, sustainable and lasting solution.
Every stakeholder in the region should therefore make
every effort to avoid any action that could incite further
violence among the warring parties.

In addition to the many deaths and injuries caused
by the ongoing destruction in the region, it has also
produced enormous losses of infrastructure and crops
as well as a lack of important services needed for
human subsistence, which has meant that their peoples'
development has been set back by decades. That has
forced millions to move from their places of origin
and to accept the fate of poor migrants, which is to
be mistreated all over the world. Among them are the
millions of Palestinians who have been involuntarily
displaced to various parts of the Middle East and
elsewhere, while maintaining the firm hope that one
day they and their children will be able to return to
where they were born.

While we await the publication of the United
States peace plan, which we hope will consider the
concerns of the two parties to the conflict and will
be an impartial and constructive starting point for a
renewed negotiations process, our delegation is very
concerned about the possibility that the elections held
in Israel earlier this month will radically influence the
decisions, actions and behaviour of the parties to the
conflict, a concern that we expressed in our statement
in January (see S/PV.8449) and that was evident in
the Council's subsequent discussions in February
and March (see S/PV.8466 and S/PV.8489) on Israel's
decision not to renew the mandate of the Temporary
International Presence in Hebron and the disagreement
between Israel and Palestine on the collection of tax
revenues, to mention only a couple of aspects.

The history of this conflict argues against creating
further disputes with regard to the few issues that for
many years have enjoyed some form of agreement,
unless there is a patently clear reason to the contrary.
That is something that Israeli and Palestinian politicians
must bear in mind if they truly intend to resolve their
long-standing differences one day. Equatorial Guinea
has always hoped to see the Israelis and Palestinians
come to an understanding that a definitive political
solution to their conflict would help resolve many of
the conflicts that are destabilizing the region today.
The establishment of an independent Palestinian State
is key to achieving an effective and lasting peace in the
Middle East.

The situation of women and children and the
entire population of the Gaza Strip remains a matter of
concern. For the past decade, Gaza has seen a decline in
needed public services and employment opportunities
that is entirely the result of the ongoing clashes
between Israel and Hamas and of internal Palestinian
divisions. We appreciate the work of the humanitarian
agencies that support the population, and we urge the
international community to encourage such efforts
by further contributing to the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. Both Israel and Hamas must refrain from any
unilateral action likely to aggravate the conflict, which
in our view can be resolved only through negotiations
and dialogue based on the concept of two independent
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security within internationally recognized borders.

We encourage Egypt and other international
actors to continue working to foster intra-Palestinian
reconciliation, which in addition to its key role in
Palestinian consolidation has a crucial part to play in the
control and management of the Gaza Strip, which today
continues to cause serious security issues alongside
neighbouring Israel. We deplore the fact that Israel has
taken no steps to immediately and completely cease
all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, as called for
in paragraph 2 of resolution 2334 (2016), as was
indicated in the Secretary-General's report of 26 March
(S/2019/251).

We call on the United Nations and the international
community to step up efforts to exert further pressure
on the parties, so that negotiations between Israel and
Palestine can be resumed and lead to a negotiated
solution based on dialogue to this conflict that has
lasted for so many years.

