Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I thank our briefers for their valuable insights. I was struck today, as ever, by the consensus in their contributions, in terms of both their analyses and their prescriptions. I wish to begin by paying tribute to the dedication and courage of all the men and women serving in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and to the memory of all those who have made the ultimate sacrifice. We condemn, in particular, the deadly attacks against MINUSCA personnel in July, just as we condemn all attacks on all peacekeepers. I also reiterate our solidarity with the Government and the people of the Central African Republic in their pursuit of peace, stability and development. As we have said time and again, the 2019 Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic is the only viable framework for sustainable peace in the Central African Republic. The agreement must be protected, including through the Council's continued imposition of sanctions against violators. We call on all armed groups to end their violence against civilians. In particular, we condemn the scale of conflict-related sexual violence against women and girls. Impunity for sexual assault and all human rights abuses must end. Elections in the Central African Republic later this year offer a significant opportunity to consolidate constitutional order. All stakeholders have a role to play in supporting peaceful, inclusive and free elections. While we welcome the preparations made to hold elections on time in December, we regret that provisions have not been made to ensure the participation of all the people of the Central African Republic. All citizens, including internally displaced persons and refugees, deserve the right to be heard in both these and subsequent elections, . We are trying to help. As announced by the United Kingdom's Minister for Africa at the Secretary- General's recent high-level event, the United Kingdom is contributing well over half a million dollars to the United Nations Development Programme elections fund to promote the participation of women, youth and underrepresented groups. We urge other partners to contribute to that fund. As others have said today, the scale of the humanitarian crisis in the Central African Republic underlines just how vital it is that all stakeholders fulfil their responsibilities in the coming months. As we heard again today, humanitarian needs have been exacerbated by coronavirus disease, with more than half the population now facing food insecurity. This year, the United Kingdom has committed approximately $35 million to the humanitarian effort in the Central African Republic, including extra funding towards famine prevention and Ebola preparedness. We will continue to play our part, and we join Germany in calling on all others to do the same. As we look ahead to the renewal of MINUSCA's mandate next month, highlighted by the representative of France, I want to voice the United Kingdom's support for maintaining a robust mandate, with the protection of civilians at its heart, alongside the provision of support for the peace agreement and the electoral process. A sustainable peace will not be won by MINUSCA alone, however, nor will peace be wone through humanitarian support alone. The recommitment of all parties to full implementation of the peace agreement and to fair, inclusive and peaceful elections is the only way to assure long-term stability.
