Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Security Council's agenda for the past
month has been especially full. We would like to thank
you personally, Mr. President, and your entire team
for your very professional and effective execution of
your functions in the presidency. We appreciate the
relevance of Kazakhstan's initiatives, which reflect
the Council's central role in seeking and developing
effective solutions to very difficult problems related to
the maintenance of international peace and security.

That applies particularly to the Security Council's
meeting on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (see S/PV.8160). We believe firmly that
the way to put an end to the risks and threats in this
area is by observing the fundamental principles of
international law and ensuring equal and indivisible
security conditions for every country. The current
state of affairs in the area of non-proliferation and
disarmament urgently needs us to collaborate in the
quest for ways to deal with its growing problems while
at the same time maintaining cooperation mechanisms
that have been proven to be effective and respecting the
interests of all States.

We greatly appreciated the holding of a
ministerial-level debate on Afghanistan and Central
Asia (see S/PV.8162). Kazakhstan's particular focus
on the issue of Afghanistan has been backed up by
Astana's responsible attitude to the quest for answers
to the threats to the Central Asian region emanating
from Afghanistan. The dangerous situation there,
including the increasing risk of Afghanistan's northern
provinces becoming a bridgehead for the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, requires an integrated approach
both from the regional Powers and the international
community as a whole. We assume that within the
framework of initiatives designed to promote Central
Asian-Afghanistan cooperation, primary consideration
will be given to the positive experience of the Moscow
format and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Afghanistan Contact Group. Mutually beneficial
cooperation is what is needed in Eurasia today,
and external actors should promote that rather than
attempting to drag the countries of the region into a
zero-sum game or present them with a false choice
between North and South.

We welcomed the presidential statement on
Afghanistan and Central Asia (S/PRST/2018/2), aimed
at strengthening peace and stability in the region. It
is important that we succeeded in reaching a mutual
understanding on conflict prevention in the presidential
statement. However, it was also clear that discussion of
this pressing issue should continue in the wider format
ofthe General Assembly and its specialized committees.
We commend the Council's very well prepared mission
to Kabul during Kazakhstan's presidency. After a gap of
many years since the previous such visit, it once again
demonstrated the Security Council's unity on the issue
of the Afghan dossier and represented an important
milestone in the context of resolving the country's
situation. We were pleased with the consultations on
the activities of the United Nations Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, which we
see as a comprehensive political tool for establishing
dialogue, cooperation and a peaceful resolution of the
issues among Central Asian states. It was gratifying
that for the first time in three years the Council was
able to agree on a press statement regarding the Centre's
activities (SC/13179).

The quarterly debates on the Middle East have
unfortunately confirmed the fact that the crisis trends
in the region are still dominant. An episode of serious
arrhythmia in the efforts to settle the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict complicated the task of restarting a political
dialogue. The situation in Yemen is rapidly deteriorating,
while the state of affairs in Syria, Libya and Iraq
remains difficult. We firmly believe that breakthroughs
will be possible only through coordinated international
cooperation and the establishment of a unified agenda.
We must strive to unite our efforts to combat terrorism
and consolidate our approaches to settling serious
regional crises. Russia is ready to participate in that
work with all interested partners. Attempts to promote
national agendas while ignoring the views of other
Member States, which we unfortunately witnessed
at the beginning of the month, are counterproductive
and only make the quest for lasting solutions to the
issues harder.
In the past month, with regard to a settlement of
the conflict in Syria, a ninth round of negotiations
was held under the auspices of the United Nations. We
are pleased that there has been no pause in the recent
inter-Syrian talks. In Sochi, in the past few days, with
the support of the United Nations, the partners in the
Astana process and the leading regional states held the
Syrian National Dialogue Congress, an unprecedentedly
major event hosted by Russia. The Security Council has
consistently emphasized that it is the Syrians themselves
who must determine their country's future, and a wide
representation of every stratum of Syrian society such
as this is therefore simply crucial to enabling work to
begin on such urgent issues as constitution-building. In
that regard, our efforts dovetail fully with the logic of
resolution 2254 (2015), and we hope that they will have
an appropriate follow-up.

At Russia's initiative, the Council began discussing
the creation of a new international investigative
mechanism to replace the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism, whose reputation is
tainted. It will be important to ensure that any new
entity works professionally and reliably to establish
all the circumstances related to the use of poisonous
substances, in strict conformity with Chemical Weapons
Convention rules, in order to eventually ascertain the
identity of the perpetrators of such acts.

During the discussion in January of issues in West
Africa and the Sahel-Saharan region (see S/PV.8156),
we concluded that the countries of the region are all
dealing with similar challenges and threats that should
be combated through a multifaceted approach. The
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel region
is a mechanism whose potential for making progress on
these issues has not been fully exploited.

The extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus for another six
months was an important step, since the mission will
be particularly needed during the six-month pause in
the direct talks on a settlement between the island's
two communities. The slight reduction in the size of
its military component should in no way affect its
overall effectiveness.

In conclusion, we would like to once again thank
our friends from Kazakhstan and wish every success
to the delegation of Kuwait, to which the baton of the
presidency passes in February.

