Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for having attended our open debate today and I thank
him for his statement. I am also grateful to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ms. Zerrougui,
for presenting the annual report (S/2016/360). I thank
the Executive Director of UNICEF for his briefing,
which I found to be quite striking.

The delegation ofMalaysia is doing an excellentjob
steering the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict in a very discreet and effective manner.
Malaysia is contributing to promoting the protection of
children in armed conflict using all of the tools that
the Security Council has at its disposal. I commend
Malaysia for that work.

Children and armed conflict is a topic that is so
much more than an item on the agenda of the Security
Council: it is a collective responsibility and an ethical
imperative for all of us, as States Members of the United
Nations and as human beings. Given the recruitment of
minors and the bombing of schools and the kidnapping,
rape and killing of children, we have to be intransigent
when it comes to the protection of children and demand
strict compliance with domestic and international
law. That is why I would like to focus my comments
on an essential question, namely, the credibility of
those responsible for attacks against children in armed
conflict. I am going to refer very briefly to three
matters - the attacks against doctors and hospitals, the
Children, Not Soldiers campaign and the fight against
terrorism.

When the Charter of the United Nations was
adopted, the nature of armed conflict was different
than it is today. Wars and conflicts have evolved over
the last 70 years. It has therefore been necessary for
the Council to adopt new instruments to tackle the
threats to peace and security. Resolution 1379 (2001) is
an excellent example of this process of adaptation. At
that time, the Secretariat was given the task of drawing
up an annual list of parties responsible for deliberate
attacks against children in a dispute. In a globalized
world, with the possibilities of having access to means
of communication and to social networks where
information constantly flows in real time to any part of
the world, this United Nations black list is called upon
to mobilize trust and to have a record of violations of
international humanitarian law and especially to ensure
that we combine all of our efforts at every level to
protect children in armed conflict.

This list could be a very useful instrument, but
it will be useful only insofar as it is credible. As a
result, we have to very strictly respect the process of
compiling data on the part of the United Nations, which
must continue to be completely transparent and neutral.
When there are Member States that never appear on that
list and where year after year we see their involvement
in attacks on children, or when we decide to include
or exclude a country for political reasons, we are
irreparably eroding the credibility of the list and of the
Organization. Therefore, we urge the Secretary-General
and all Member States to respect the conclusions of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism of the United
Nations. I would like to make three comments.

First of all, Spain had the honour of belonging to
the drafting team of resolution 2286 (2016) adopted in
May ofthis year, concerning the attacks against doctors
and hospitals referred to by my colleague from Egypt.
We take note of the mentions made in the Secretary-
General's annual report on children and armed conflict.
These are two parallel agendas, but they mutually
reinforce each other. We are grateful for the letter that
the Secretary-General just sent to the President of the
Security Council announcing his intention to present
a set of recommendations on the practical application
of the resolution. We will naturally follow these
recommendations very closely.

Secondly, we welcome, as the Secretary-General
said, the success ofthe Children, Not Soldiers campaign,
which has made it possible to conclude national action
plans for putting an end to the recruitment of Children
in the armed forces of States Members of the United
Nations. Spain, which has contributed to financing this
campaign, trusts that it will be a stimulus for addressing
the challenge that remains, namely, non-State actors.

Thirdly and lastly, it is those non-State actors, in
particular terrorists, who concern us the most. Episodes
such as the beheading of an 11-year-old child, which
took place in Aleppo, the abduction of girls by Boko
Haram, the massive recruitment of minors by Da'esh,
the suicide attacks carried out by minors - all of
these acts show that children are increasingly exposed
to violent extremism. We are not just talking about
child soldiers, but also child terrorists, who are both
executioners and victims. We have to use all of the
tools that we have at our disposal to ensure that these
attacks are investigated, that we identify and hold to
account those who are responsible for them. That is the
minimum that the victims deserve.

