Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): Allow me first to congratulate
you, Ambassador Qin Huasun, on the excellent manner in
which you have been presiding over the work of the
Security Council this month. Having worked with you in
the Council, I am keenly aware of your dedication to
African issues, which motivated you and the Council to
organize this open meeting on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Allow me also to congratulate your predecessor, my
colleague Ambassador Fowler of Canada, on the
commendable way in which he conducted the affairs of the
Council for the month of February. I also have the honour
to recognize the presence of the Minister for Human Rights
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, His Excellency
Mr. She Okitundu.

Kenya remains gravely concerned at the situation that
has continued to obtain in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. For many months now, the situation has remained
in a stalemate despite concerted regional and bilateral
diplomatic efforts. We are convinced that the international
community needs to be more involved and needs to stop the
conflict from escalating even further. The conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has the potential to
engulf the eastern, central and southern subregions of
Africa, with the attendant implications for the whole of the
African region, and indeed beyond.

Aware of this fact, and at the invitation of my
President, His Excellency Daniel arap Moi, the three
leaders of the East African Cooperation group, comprising
President Moi of Kenya, His Excellency President Mkapa
of Tanzania and His Excellency President Museveni of
Uganda, met last October in Nairobi to try and address the
situation. It is worth noting that during the early stages of
the renewed conflict, President Moi had, on many occasions
during regional efforts to resolve the problems of the
region, expressed the fear that the problems underlying the
1996-1997 crisis in the Great Lakes region had not been
properly addressed; he feared that the crisis would recur.
It is unfortunate to note that this has come to pass, and,
as the leaders observed during their October meeting, the
conflict has already adversely affected their countries.
Some of these effects are an influx of refugees, the
displacement of populations, political insecurity and a
decline in economic activities.

The leaders underscored the urgent need for the
international community comprehensively to address the
situation obtaining in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. They offered the following points as a basis for
facilitating a speedy resolution: first, the immediate
cessation of hostilities; secondly, the immediate holding
of negotiations leading to a ceasefire agreement and a
troop withdrawal; thirdly, the adoption of measures to
address the security concerns of neighbouring States;
fourthly, initiation of an all-inclusive political dialogue
including the protection of marginalized groups; and,
finally, the deployment of a neutral international
peacekeeping force under the auspices of the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity. Those
points are as valid today as they were in October of last
year; it is in their realization that a lasting solution to the
crisis lies.

Kenya firmly believes in respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We urgently call on all the parties involved in this
painful conflict to re-commit themselves to a peaceful
solution and to work unreservedly towards that goal. In
this regard, we are greatly encouraged by African regional
efforts dedicated to resolving this conflict, chaired by His
Excellency President Chiluba of Zambia and involving
President Chissano of Mozambique and President Mkapa
of Tanzania. From our information, we can see that this
regional initiative has achieved some progress. This
includes agreement in principle on: a ceasefire;
withdrawal of forces; the establishment of a neutral force
to monitor the agreement; and discussions among all
Congolese parties. We now await substantive progress in
negotiations on the modalities of implementation. We
hope that the great effort already expended on this
initiative will soon bear some fruit in the form of a
lasting, peaceful solution. Kenya strongly supports this
initiative and would encourage more concrete support
from the international community.

As a complement to these regional efforts, Kenya
would also like to see more active involvement by the
international community, and in particular by the United

 

Nations. In this context, we have always felt that this is
another situation where the personal involvement of the
Secretary-General could have borne some fruit. However,
we are also sensitive to the ramifications of this kind of
involvement and would welcome any proposals the
Secretary-General might offer in that regard.
The Security Council cannot afford to abdicate its
Charter-based primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, including in Africa. To
leave the burden of enforcing a peace agreement on a
purely regional force with no international component
cannot, and indeed should not, be tested in a complex
dispute such as the one prevailing in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. When Kenya was a member of the
Security Council, we argued that a suitable concept of
operations for a peacekeeping force should be designed. We
believe that the time has come for this idea to be taken to
its logical conclusion.

In this regard, we encourage a holistic approach in
addressing the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Such a holistic approach would, as we see it,
simultaneously do two things. First, it would address the
immediate political and security problems inherent in the
conflict, and, secondly, it would incorporate a carefully
calibrated incentive package which would anticipate a post-
conflict peace-building period in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is in that context that we view the French
proposal for an international conference on peace, stability
and socio-economic development in the Great Lakes region
as a positive and constructive move.

Given this background, Kenya would be very
interested to know how the Security Council intends to
proceed in addressing the complexities of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

