Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): Peacekeeping remains
the flagship agenda of the United Nations enterprise.
Peacekeeping operations and missions come with
high expectations. They have long been the signature
and most popular image of the United Nations. The
missions' ability to protect not only civilians but also
United Nations peacekeepers and personnel is the
standard by which United Nations peacekeeping is
measured, affecting its legitimacy and credibility. Even
as the greatest credit to the United Nations has come
from peacekeeping, its biggest and deepest stains have
come from failing in the same.

Peacekeeping should not decide political outcomes,
but it does commit to establishing humane conditions
where they have ceased to exist. While a mission may
produce a political outcome, the containment or even
defeat of the murdering elements is acceptable because
it stops the carnage and rapine. Life and human dignity
are United Nations peacekeeping's absolutes.

Today's open debate, under the presidency of
Indonesia, is therefore a timely follow-up event after
the successful 2019 United Nations Peacekeeping
Ministerial a month ago. Continued dialogue and
debates on the subject are key to ensuring that the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative will succeed after
achieving near consensus on 24 mutual commitments
last September.
The Philippines welcomes the efforts of the
Department of Peace Operations to establish clear
performance standards and assessments based on regular
evaluations of military units, including on command and
control, the protection of civilians, conduct, discipline
and training. They enable an objective assessment
of whole-of-mission performance - civilian and
uniformed components, staff and leadership - through
data collection and analysis.

The Philippines reaffirms that peacekeeping
operations must be measured by the mandate to protect
civilians as the core criterion of success, with child
protection and combating sexual exploitation and abuse
as key elements. Predeployment training should be
tailored to respond to particular country-specific or
context-specific challenges of protecting civilians with
clear definitions of the responsibilities, opportunities
and constraints that will be faced by peacekeepers
in the field. But again, the safety of civilians is an
absolute and in no case shall it be sacrificed for any
other consideration.

Our Department of National Defence takes a strict
approach to cases of misconduct. The Armed Forces
of the Philippines makes sure that all its peacekeeping
contingents are deeply instilled with guidelines for
proper behaviour and conduct in the United Nations
mission area. As part of its predeployment and
in-mission training of personnel, the Armed Forces of
the Philippines imposes the most stringent measures
in the selection of candidates and implements a system
of rewards and penalties for well-performing and
misbehaving personnel. The Philippines wishes to
submit the following.

First, the Philippines encourages Member States to
host centres of excellence in each region to support the
trainers in delivering training packages to troop- and
police-contributing countries, consistent with United
Nations standards and approaches.

Secondly, the Philippines believes that threat
analyses and data should be shared with other missions
to improve the safety and security of peacekeeping
personnel and, foremost, that of civilians.

Thirdly, on the ability and authority of the Force
Commander to appropriately respond to emergency
situations on the ground without the need to consult with
mission legal advisers, the Philippines supports the call
to limit national caveats from host States addressed to
Force Commanders overseeing peacekeeping missions.

Fourthly, the Philippines supports the increased
deployment of women United Nations peacekeepers,
including in the highest posts. There is no debate
about their pre-eminent qualification for any aspect of
peacekeeping operations.

The Philippines has never failed in its peacekeeping
commitments and commits to a larger presence in
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

The meeting rose at 4.30pm.
