Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this meeting and thank
Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and Ambassador Mauro
Vieira, Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings.

We would like to begin by highlighting the political
progress made in Guinea-Bissau, such as the holding of
legislative elections on 10 March after more than three
years of political impasse, the appointment of a Prime
Minister and the formation of a new Government.
We welcome the active participation of civil society
organizations and women in that process, which,
with the assistance of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS),
allowed for the development of important initiatives,
such as the Code of Conduct and Electoral Ethics.

We also highlight the fact that 24 November has
been set as the date for holding the presidential elections.
We urge the Guinea-Bissau authorities to work without
delay on the organization and holding ofthose elections
on the basis of lessons learned and with the necessary
resources in order to promote the implementation of
the Conakry Agreement and to foster dialogue and
national reconciliation.

In that context, it will be important that UNIOGBIS
continue to assist the country in organizing the elections,
in accordance with the provisions of resolution 2458
(2019). The entire international community must also
be committed to addressing the technical, logistical
and financial aspects and to encouraging widespread
citizen participation, including of women and young
people in particular.

However, we must bear in mind that, while such
progress encouraging, the Government authorities
must have the strong political will to advance towards
peace, stability and socioeconomic development in
the country.

We believe that it is essential, first, to continue
working on the constitutional reform process,
strengthening the rule of law and establishing
inclusive democratic institutions, including security
sector reform. Secondly, the ongoing threat posed by
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
in the country must be addressed, while developing
a consistent anti-corruption strategy. Thirdly, it is
necessary to implement the socioeconomic reforms
that the population so badly needs, which will allow
the country's vast agricultural, mining and fishing
potential to be exploited.

To that end, the full involvement of the national
authorities, the strengthening of regional cooperation
and the maintenance of policy and operational
coherence among the various efforts, initiatives and
mechanisms deployed on the ground will be crucial.
That is especially important in view of the upcoming
withdrawal of UNIOGBIS, which will require a new
type of partnership with the United Nations to enable
an inclusive and successful transition process. In that
context, we would also like to highlight the projects
promoted by the Peacebuilding Fund, which play
a fundamental role in supporting the political and
institutional stabilization processes in Guinea-Bissau,
as Ambassador Vieira just outlined.

We emphasize the work that the United Nations
country team, together with the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Economic Community of West
African States, the African Union, the Community
of Portuguese-Speaking Countries and the European
Union are carrying out on the ground to promote
economic growth, human development, the sustainable
management of resources and the strengthening of the
rule of law and governance.

To conclude, I would like to thank Mr. Viegas Filho
for the important work he carried out, as well as to wish
Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly every success in her new
role as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of UNIOGBIS.

