Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): First
of all, I would like to welcome my friend, Foreign
Minister Hoshyar Zebari, to the Council and thank him
for his statement.

The United States welcomes the adoption of this
resolution. We think it is a vital resolution, and we
welcome it for a number of reasons.

First, we welcome it because the resolution
recognizes the progress that Iraq has made. Progress
has been achieved across the board in Iraq. As the
Foreign Minister mentioned, on the security front the
number of attacks is down and Iraqi capabilities are up.
In ten days, the mandate of the multinational force in
Iraq will expire. A bilateral security agreement will
regulate the presence of United States forces in Iraq
and a broader strategic framework agreement will
guide overall relations on economic, security and other
fronts between our countries. We welcome this positive
change. Also, 13 of the 18 provinces will be under
Iraqi security control. In fact, they already are, and
progress will be made on the remaining ones in the
coming weeks. Parliament has passed many laws. On
the economic front, inflation is down, economic
growth is up. Again, as the Foreign Minister
mentioned, regional relations have improved
considerably during the past 12 months.

A second reason why we welcome the adoption of
this resolution is that it helps facilitate more progress
in Iraq by allowing immunities for Iraqi funds so that
these funds are available for the Iraqi Government to
implement its economic development plans and its
plans for additional sectors in Iraq.

The third reason is the commitment - which the
representative of the United Kingdom and others have
mentioned - by the Security Council to review
resolutions that pertain to Iraq. Circumstances in Iraq
are fundamentally different since many of these
resolutions were imposed. Iraq is a significantly
different place than it was when resolution 661 (1990)
was adopted. It is totally reasonable for this review to
take place, and we look forward to the report of the
Secretary-General in the near future.

As many have stated, Iraq has made a great deal
of progress. I want to congratulate the Iraqi
Government, the Foreign Minister and the Iraqi people
for the progress they have achieved. They deserve our
support for the continued progress that is needed in
Iraq. This resolution provides that support, and
therefore we are very pleased to join the consensus
with regard to it.

Like my colleague from the United Kingdom, I
also want to take advantage of this opportunity to
thank the representatives of Indonesia, Panama, Italy,
8

South Africa and Belgium for their friendship and for
the role they have played in this Council during the
period that I have been here, and I wish them all very
well. I wish for a successful new year for them and for
their countries.

