Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would also
like to convey my gratitude to you, Madam President,
for having convened this public meeting on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
I also thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his briefing.

Chad wishes to express its deep concern regarding
the most recent developments in the occupied
Palestinian territories, where the brutal actions by Israel
against Palestinian civilians continues. Incursions into
holy sites continue, threatening to further deteriorate
an already extremely tense situation, especially in
East Jerusalem. It is in this tense climate that Israel
has announced its plan for the construction of 1,000
additional housing units in East Jerusalem, thus fanning
the flames of discord. Quite clearly, settlement and the
illegal appropriation of land are very serious acts that
risk completely undermining any chance for a peace
process as well as undermining all mediation efforts.

A legitimate question in this case is how can the
Palestinian people build its future independent State,
one which would be viable and sovereign, if its territory
is reduced on a daily basis? In that regard, we condemn
as firmly as possible the construction of any new
settlements, attacks against civilians, the destruction of
houses and the forced displacement of Palestinians, and
we urge Israel to bring all this to an immediate end.

Turning to the political process, as other delegations
have underscored, the current status quo is no longer
acceptable, and it is regrettable that of late the Security
Council's public and closed meetings on the issue of
Palestine are leading to no concrete initiatives likely
to unblock the situation and to improve the living
conditions of Palestinians under occupation. It is high
time for the international community to assume its
responsibilities to lend real momentum to the peace
process and to bring Israelis and Palestinians back
together around the negotiating table. That requires
Israel to respect its international legal commitments
and to put an end to all actions that are fraught with the
risk of reducing the peace process to nothing.

The solution of two States living side by side in
peace remains the only possibility that would guarantee
security for Israel and a better, safer future for the
Palestinian people. We are convinced that to achieve a
just and lasting peace in the region, Israel has to respect
the relevant United Nations resolutions. Israel will have
to recognize that peace is simply incompatible with the
occupation policy, the construction of new settlements
in Palestinian territories, the massacre of innocent
people or the desecration of holy sites.

