Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's open debate on
the situation in the Middle East. I would also like to
thank Mr. Pascoe for his briefing. We appreciate the
statements made by the Permanent Observer of
Palestine and the Permanent Representative of Israel.

More than two months have passed since the
unilateral ceasefires were declared by the respective
parties, but the situation in Gaza continues to be a
source of serious concern. We call on all parties to
make every effort to achieve a durable and effective
ceasefire agreement and fully implement Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009). The sustained
re-opening of the crossing points and the prevention of
the illicit trafficking of arms are essential ingredients
for an effective ceasefire.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza continues to
be very serious. Sixty-five per cent of Gazans live
below the poverty line and 37 per cent live in extreme
poverty. 40,000 people in Gaza remain without access
to water through the public network. We must remind
ourselves that there has not been much improvement in
Gaza. Improved access for humanitarian relief items
and the opening of crossings remain a priority concern.
We strongly urge Israel to make further efforts to
improve the access of goods and humanitarian workers
to Gaza.

At the same time, we condemn the sporadic
rocket attacks into Israeli territory around the security
crossing areas. They have to be stopped immediately.
They undermine the security of Israeli citizens, the
efforts for reconstruction and the peace process.

We have to realize how important it is mobilize
concerted international support to the humanitarian and
reconstruction needs of Palestinian people. It is
heartening that the Sharm el-Sheikh conference in
early March succeeded in mobilizing resources of over
$4 billion.

For our part, Japan pledged $200 million in
assistance to the Palestinian people and will provide
assistance to needy citizens in a timely manner. We
also support the development of the Palestinian
economy through the Corridor for Peace and Prosperity
initiative. The objective of this initiative is to help the
establishment of a Palestinian State. We also make a
positive contribution to the meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians.

To reconstruct Gaza effectively and for the peace
process to advance, Palestinian reconciliation is of
utmost importance. We urge Palestinian leaders to
redouble their efforts to reconcile as soon as possible.
Japan continues to support President Abbas and the
Palestinian Authority in their efforts to reunify the
West Bank and Gaza.

We are encouraged by the efforts of Arab leaders
to create an environment conducive to the advancement
of peace in the region as a whole. We are confident that
the Arab League summit in Doha, Qatar, will
strengthen cooperation among the countries in the
region. At the same time, we hope that the incoming
Israeli Government will commit itself to the two-State
solution and work with the Palestinian Authority to
restore the peace process.

We acknowledge that the United Nations, under
the leadership of the Secretary-General, has been
playing a vital role in the Palestinian territory in the
areas of both humanitarian assistance and
reconstruction. We would like to reiterate our
appreciation for the courageous work of staff of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) during this
difficult period. We also commend the work of the
United Nations agencies in supporting the
reconstruction efforts of the Palestinian Authority.

The damage and injuries incurred at UNRWA and
other United Nations facilities are not acceptable, and
such attacks should not be repeated. We appreciate the
Secretary-General's intention to report back to the
Security Council on the findings by the Board of
Inquiry.

We expect a new political development on both
the Israeli and the Palestinian sides. It is essential for
all parties to respect and to work towards the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1850
(2008) and 1860 (2009). For that purpose, Israel must
freeze settlement activities in accordance with the
principles contained in the Road Map.

We firmly believe that peace can be achieved
only through dialogue, political commitment and
negotiation. For our part, we will continue to make
efforts to have a positive influence on the Middle East
peace process.

