Mr. Morales Lopez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Ambassador Koro Bessho of Japan for
convening this open debate and for the concept note
(S/2017/1016, annex), which has served as a guide to
debate an issue which certainly is of great importance
and current relevance.

The maintenance of international peace and security
is the fundamental mandate that the Charter of the
United Nations has entrusted to the Organization, and,
more specifically, to the Security Council, which has
the responsibility to ensure that the decisions taken
within this organ are consistent with the changing
needs in an ever more complex global context.

As is stated in the concept note, an integrated
approach to the threats to peace and security requires
timely attention and action to address the main causes
and multipliers of conflict. The Secretary-General
quite rightly alluded to that this morning. He referred
to the alarming qualitative and quantitative increase
in threats that constitute a clear peril to humankind as
a whole: nuclear proliferation, climate change, water
shortages, more bloodthirsty and long armed conflicts
and also phenomena that affect security in cyberspace.
All of that requires more flexible diplomacy if we are
to be more effective, but also if we are to focus on
prevention. In that regard, Colombia believes that it is
precisely that aspect of prevention and peacebuilding
that should make the maintenance of peace a priority in
the work of the Security Council.

As my country pointed out recently in the General
Assembly during the adoption of the resolution on
reforming the peace and security pillar, we can be
under no illusions. The security and peace situation that
we are currently living in around the globe currently
requires bold, effective and expeditious measures
to respond to needs that the current structure of this
pillar of the Organization prevents resolving with
forcefulness. Undoubtedly, the changing nature of the
conflicts today is a challenge to the Organization. It
should lead us to create new ways to address them and,
at the same time, generate a culture of prevention that
is genuinely effective.

That need to strengthen institutional capacity in
the face of real threats is what motivated Colombia to
support the efforts of the Secretary-General to reform
the peace and security pillar of the Organization, an
effort that, thankfully, was recently endorsed by the
General Assembly, thereby making this debate even
more timely. My country is following this process in
the conviction that it constitutes an important step in
the right direction, making it possible to modernize and
adapt the Organization to the crises and emergencies
affecting the world today.

Against that backdrop, I would like to emphasize
that we must not underestimate the relationship
between an effective administration and the division of
responsibilities from the highest level so that the United
Nations is able to fulfil its mandates. At the same
time, however, we should also support the worthwhile
initiative of the Secretary-General to place greater
emphasis on preventing conflicts and on the concept
of sustaining peace, which clearly require additional
mechanisms and flexible processes for the swift and
effective deployment of the enormous capabilities at
the disposal of the Organization.

Colombia has experienced both to the results and
the challenges faced in preventing conflict, thanks
to the United Nations special political mission in
Colombia, mandated and consistently supported by
the Security Council, and subsequently the transition
towards a verification mission that is the result of the
significant impetus that the United Nations has given to
building stable and lasting peace in my country.

Finally, I would like to stress that the success of the
Colombian peace process is based on the premise that
the prevention and resolution of conflicts flows from
a comprehensive approach that takes into account the
crucial elements of sustainable development, gender
equality and the role of women in transitional processes
and institution-building.

Before I conclude, I would like to warmly
congratulate Japan for its exceptional and outstanding
role as as it soon concludes its tenure in the Security
Council. I would also like to thank other countries that
are completing their Security Council membership
this year.

