Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me, Mr. President, to congratulate the delegation of the People's Republic of China on assuming the presidency of the Council this month. We wish you every success. I also thank the Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of Belgium for his distinct leadership of the Council last month. I welcome the briefing of Ms. Jeanine Hennis- Plasschaert, Special Representative of the Secretary- General for Iraq and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). My delegation has taken note of the report of the Secretary-General dated, 20 February, on the implementation of SecurityCouncil resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2020/133), and his report dated 21 February, on the implementation of the Security Council resolution 2470 (2019) (S/2020/140). Iraqis have been protesting for five months, demanding change, economic reform and end to corruption. The protestors have succeeded in making their voices heard by the Government and political, religious and society actors alike. Concerning the conflict in the region, it is no secret that Iraq was targeted in January. These violations were a breach of our sovereignty and have had a negative impact on the stability in the country. Regarding counter-terrorism, our security forces continue to fight the remnants of the terrorist organization Da'esh after having liberated all our cities, to the extent that no Iraqi territory is now controlled by terrorists, thanks to the sacrifices of all kinds made by these forces and with the support of the international community. Iraq is now on the cusp of a new era of stability and looking forward to new prospects for joint work in order to achieve the socioeconomic life that the Iraqis deserve. Despite the difficult situation in Iraq of recent times, there have been intensive political consultations in the past few months to meet the legitimate demands of protestors in terms of achieving the desired reforms, which are also supported by the highest religious authority in the country. On that basis, on | February President Barham Salih of the Republic of Iraq mandated Mr. Mohammed Tawfik Allawi to form a new Government. In a letter addressed to the President dated 1 March, Mr. Allawi apologized for not being able to form a new Government. The President of the Republic will mandate another candidate to form the Government, in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and the periods specified therein. With regard to preparations for prompt elections in our country to meet the demands of the protestors, a law drafted by the Independent High Electoral Commission was enacted on 5 December 2019, which ensures the holding of fair and free elections with greater transparency, in line with the reforms demanded by the people. Nine new members - seven judges and two counsellors - were elected to the Board of the Independent High Electoral Commission, in the presence of the representatives of the United Nations, the media, non-governmental organizations and unions. A woman judge was selected to Chair the Board of Commissioners, an unprecedented and important step towards promoting the participation of women in high-level State decision-making processes. It is also an incentive for the participation of women in the political process. Turning to the electoral law of the Iraqi Parliament, late last year the latter adopted this law, which is considered to represent an important change vis-a-vis the previous electoral laws. The new law ensures a more just representation of segments of society through new mechanisms for electoral constituencies, and the broader participation of young people in political life. The law reduces the minimum age of eligibility for election to Parliament from 30 to 25 years. Iraq looks forward to the international community playing an important role in assisting us in holding the coming elections by providing necessary technical assistance. In this respect, we call on the United Nations to provide all technical resources necessary to ensure the success of these upcoming elections, in accordance with the mandate of UNAMI. Iraq recognizes the importance of and is committed to upholding basic rights and international obligations, notably human rights, such as the right to life, the right of peaceful assembly or demonstration, and the freedom of expression. The Government continues to carry out its responsibilities to protect the Iraqi people. My Government therefore condemns and rejects any form of violence. The security forces instructed by the Government have exercised the utmost restraint when dealing with the unfortunate incidents during the demonstrations. Some elements of infiltrators have sought to undermine and subvert the peaceful movement of the protestors, seeking to defame the security forces and the peaceful protestors at the same time. The instructions to security forces from their leadership prohibit the use of live ammunition against protestors in any form or their being targeted directly with tear gas. The number of casualties has recently declined, despite continuing protests in the central and southern provinces of Iraq. This can be attributed to the strenuous efforts of the caretaker Government to implement the package of reforms it has announced. There is now significant cooperation between protesters and security forces to ensure peaceful protests and to block infiltrators. Meanwhile, the Government has made efforts to restore stability and ensure normalcy despite the situation in my country. The Baghdad Operations Command and the Mayoralty of Baghdad have successfully restored normalcy and opened markets and streets, as well as gradually lifting security restrictions in Baghdad, particularly in the International Zone and the rest of the cities and provinces. The applicable Iraqi Constitution provides for the non-interference in the domestic affairs of other States and for Iraq to resolve all conflicts peacefully. It also emphasizes the need to preserve Iraq's vital interests. My Government therefore rejects being a battleground for regional conflicts. Respecting the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Iraq is a steadfast national demand that should not be disregarded under any pretext or in any circumstances. Earlier this year, in four letters addressed to the President of the Security Council and the Secretary- General (S/2020/15, S/2020/26, S/2020/55 and S/2020/84) Iraq condemned the attacks that had violated its sovereignty in breach of the principles of international law. At the same time, we emphasized that Iraq was committed to ensuring that its territory was not used to target any other State. We acknowledge the importance for the international community to stand by Iraq and to assist it in addressing any violations committed on its territory through legal and diplomatic means. Regional and international partners of Iraq should support the country in its efforts to restore stability and achieve reconstruction. We therefore call on the Security Council to emphasize the need to respect Iraq's sovereignty, not to undermine its security and to assist its efforts to ensure stability. With regard to the attacks on the United States Embassy in Iraq and the Consulate of the Islamic Republic of Iran in Najaf, my Government has rejected and condemned such violations and set up investigation committees. I reaffirm before the Council that my Government is committed to providing the necessary protection to all accredited diplomatic missions in Iraq, in accordance with the provisions of the Vienna Conventions on Diplomatic Relations and on Consular Relations of 1961 and 1963, respectively. Remnants of the Da'esh terrorist organization continue to constitute security concerns. The movement of its elements from Syria to Iraq continues to threaten the security and stability of my country. That should be addressed through joint international efforts, which requires the international community to continue to cooperate in the fight against terrorism, support the Iraqi security forces and train them. In that regard, I would like to thank all members of the international community that provided assistance to the Iraqi security forces, without which my country would not have been able to repatriate 80 per cent of internally displaced persons to their places of origin. With regard to dealing with the elements of Da'esh detained by the Iraqi authorities, our country has informed their countries that they are being held by the relevant Iraqi authorities and that the rights of all accused persons during investigation and prosecution are fully guaranteed. We also ensure their right to meet representatives of their embassies during all stages of the trial pending sentencing. Iraq asserts that any assistance in terms of military training, advanced technology and the weapons needed to fight the Da'esh organization should be at the request of the Government, in accordance with bilateral and multilateral agreements. Concerning the repatriation of families of Da'esh elements to their countries, Iraq still needs to develop programmes for their return to their homelands. In that regard, the countries concerned must take urgent decisions pertaining to the return of those families to their countries in coordination with the Iraqi Government. That issue is a great burden for my country. My country thanks Turkey, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan, Azerbaijan, Germany, France, Sweden, Georgia, Belarus, Ukraine, Algeria and Uzbekistan for their response to the request by the Iraqi authorities to receive their nationals who were members of the Da'esh terrorist group, which amounted to 828 extradited persons. From this rostrum, my Government urges other countries that were approached to take back their nationals who are women, young people and children under the age of criminal legal responsibility. In order to completely eradicate terrorism, Iraq looks forward to cooperating with sisterly and friendly countries as well as regional and international security organizations. It hopes for further support from the international community in combating terrorism and acquiring technical assistance for criminal investigations and identifying sources of financing for the Da'esh organization and the accounts of persons and entities that collaborate with Da'esh.Regarding victims of terrorism, there is still an urgent need to step up efforts for the rehabilitation and reintegration of men, women and children affected by terrorism, particularly in the liberated areas. My Government seeks through various relevant institutions, such as the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, the Ministry of Justice and the Department of Women's Empowerment, under the Office of the Prime Minister, to establish, in cooperation with United Nations specialized agencies, all programmes for reintegrating such people into society, including those in camps and detention centres. Iraq looks for more cooperation and support in that area. Cooperation between Iraq and Kuwait is among our top priorities regarding our relations with the sisterly State of Kuwait and in cooperation with the United Nations. We stress that my country is fully committed to implementing the relevant Security Council resolutions and will spare no efforts to fulfil its obligations towards the international community. In that regard, I am pleased to inform Council members of recent developments concerning this issue, particularly regarding resolution 2107 (2013), paragraph 4. My Government has achieved the following. Iraq is making efforts to implement its obligations regarding missing Kuwaiti persons and property. As Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert said, the remains of 21 missing persons were found in Al-Muthanna governorate on 29 January. We hope that the ongoing analysis will yield positive results. A number of remains were also handed over to the Kuwaiti side on 8 August 2019. In that respect, my Government urges the fraternal Kuwaiti side to inform it as soon as possible about the results of efforts to determine the nationality of the persons whose remains were handed over. We stress Iraq's commitment to continuing its efforts to meet its financial obligations in terms of compensating Kuwait, in connection with which Iraq paid an additional amount of $250 million on 28 January. Progress was made in the relations between the central Government and the Regional Government during the recent period. Successful consultations have been held between officials from both sides, in particular after their meetings, which led to an initial agreement on the federal budget for 2020 as well as on issues related to oil revenues. The federal Government is seeking to conclude talks with the Kurdistan Regional Government of Iraq so as to reach a final agreement between the two parties following the formation of the new Government. In closing, I thank the Secretary-General for his support for Iraq through emphasizing the need to respect its sovereignty and territorial integrity. We also thank the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the Head of the Mission for their efforts in this respect. We hope that following the full defeat of Da'esh, the international community will continue its support for Iraq and its people in order for them to remain strong and steadfast as well as to meet their aspirations. My Government thanks France, Germany and Denmark for supporting Iraqi development projects and Iraq's efforts and those of the Mission in the area of mine clearance. Allow me to end my statement by reiterating my Government's commitment to work seriously to ensure the welfare and prosperity of our people through the implementation of our international and national obligations, as well as to uphold good governance in accordance with the Constitution and our national laws, with a view to achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which have a high priority on our Government's agenda. I would note here the statement made by the Ministry of Planning of Iraq on 16 February indicating that the poverty rate in Iraq decreased over the past two years, 2018-2019, compared with 2014. This shows that the Government attaches great importance to developing our country's economy and creating job opportunities despite also combating terrorism. We are confident that the international community will work relentlessly to support my Government's efforts in that regard, because international security is contingent on domestic security in every State of the world. I should also like to thank the members of the Council for supporting Iraq's sovereignty, addressing all the challenges facing it and rejecting its being turned into a battleground for third parties.
