Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I too thank
each of our three briefers today for their presentations
and for the work that they have done in support of peace
and security in the Central African Republic over the
past year. We would also like to extend our thanks
to Ambassador Adom for his exceptional leadership
in bringing the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) to Bangui earlier this month for a
trip that was enlightening and instructive for everyone.
We particularly note his leadership in sharing Cote
d'Ivoire's positive experience with a post-conflict
arms embargo.
One year ago, the United States joined other
Security Council members to support an increase in the
troop ceiling of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) by 900 military personnel,
thereby reaffirming the depth of our commitment to
the peace and security of the Central African Republic.
Despite notable delays in receiving those troops,
MINUSCA continued to make progress on its mandated
tasks, which resulted in significant gains in the security
and stability of the Central African Republic. That
became clear to us when a United States delegation
visited Bangassou earlier this month - something
that would have been impossible year ago. They heard
first-hand accounts of the positive impact MINUSCA
has had there. There is no doubt in our minds that
MINUSCA is making a positive difference in the lives
of Central Africans.

There has also been notable progress in restoring
State authority and building the capacity of the Central
African Government, including the Forces armees
centrafricaines (FACA) and internal security forces.
The fact that there are now four FACA battalions, and
more to come, trained by the European Union (EU) and
deployed around the country, proves that the Central
African Republic is on a positive trajectory.

We further commend the progress of the Central
African Government, assisted by MINUSCA and other
international partners, in operationalizing the Special
Criminal Court. The official opening of investigations
by the Special Criminal Court this month marks an
important step forward in the fight against impunity
and ensuring justice for victims. There are still many
challenges to overcome. We are particularly concerned
about the situation around Bria, with attacks on civilians
in August and September and the kidnapping last week
of United Nations police officers.

Our collective goal should be a political solution for
durable peace and recovery. The United States believes
that the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic represents the best path
to achieving that goal and enabling the conditions for
the extension of State authority to promote development.
However, in order for the African Initiative to be
successful, every actor must commit to transparency
and coordination. As I said at the high-level ministerial
meeting on the Central African Republic peace process,
the Central African people have seen previous dialogues
that produced agreements, but not results. We must all
work together in good faith to change that narrative and
to support President Touadera and his Government as
they strive for peace, justice, accountability and the
prevention of future atrocities.

For our part, the United States will financially
support the African Initiative. We are working in
partnership with the EU, MINUSCA and Central
African officials to ensure that peace talks address
the underlying causes of armed conflict. We are
also carefully considering the Secretary-General's
recommendations for changes to MINUSCA's mandate
and look forward to a conversation about the best means
to achieve our common goals.

The people of the Central African Republic have
already seen multiple peace agreements signed, followed
by collapse. They have heard about programmes to
demobilize, disarm and reintegrate former combatants,
which enriched the few, but not the many. They have
seen previous attempts at security sector reform fail and
they continue to rely on humanitarian aid to survive.
Whatever we agree in the next mandate renewal, it
should be based on the lessons that we have learned
from the past to help the Central African people seize
a brighter future. We look forward to working with
the Council and our United Nations counterparts in
that effort.

