Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We join in thanking Mr. Jan Pronk, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan,
for his comprehensive briefing. We note the progress
made by the Sudanese parties in meeting their
obligations under the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, particularly in the area of security.

We undoubtedly see some positive momentum,
but progress is very slow with regard to many aspects
of the Agreement, and very little progress is being
made in some important areas, including power-sharing
and the sharing of revenues derived from natural
resources, including oil exports. The issue of the north-
south border has not yet been fully resolved. Of course,
that is a complex matter. However, with active United
Nations participation, we must make progress in these
areas as soon as possible.

Of course, the Sudanese parties bear the primary
responsibility in that regard. We have said on a number
of occasions that progress in implementing the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement between the north
and the south would be assisted by the swift and
effective resolution of conflict in other areas of the
Sudan, particularly Darfur. We expect durable progress
to be made soon in such areas, particularly eastern
Sudan. We agree with the assessments made by the
Secretary-General and Mr. Pronk in that regard.

With respect to Darfur, we noted with great
interest the five elements that Mr. Pronk presented to
the Security Council for consideration. In general, they
appropriately reflect the issues that remain unresolved
in the context of a Darfur settlement. It is clearly
imperative that efforts be made to make the Darfur
Peace Agreement as comprehensive as possible.

In that regard, I should like to ask Mr. Pronk what
he believes will be the priority issues for future work
with the Darfur parties that remain outside the Darfur
Peace Agreement. The resolution of those issues will
depend directly on the prospects for stabilization of the
situation in Darfur. An important stabilizing role
should be played by the African Union. We trust that
its mandate will be extended beyond 30 September.

In that connection, my delegation very much
looks forward to the meeting to be held in New York of
the African Union Peace and Security Council. We
hope that that meeting will be a success, both in terms
of decisions to be taken regarding the future of African
Union operations and in general with regard to the
ongoing quest for a peaceful political and diplomatic
solution to the Darfur crisis.

Following that meeting, the Security Council
should probably meet once again to assess the situation
on the basis of the decisions to be taken by the
members of the African Union and the Sudanese
parties.

Here, I wish to emphasize once again that, as my
delegation has often stated both within and outside this
Chamber, it is crucial to continue the constructive
efforts and the dialogue with the Sudanese leadership
in Khartoum to achieve a mutually acceptable
settlement and to promote understanding of the United
Nations peacekeeping role in Darfur. We see no
alternative to that dialogue. We are well aware of the
complexities of what the international community,
including the United Nations, has undertaken in that
regard, but the dialogue must continue. It is
encouraging that the Secretary-General is carrying it
forward and that he is in direct contact with the
President of the Sudan.

Therefore, we expect that this effort of solidarity
will have results that the Security Council will support
with a view to reaching a prompt and comprehensive
settlement in Darfur and throughout the Sudan.

