Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We thank Mr. Moreno-
Ocampo, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), for his report and for his comprehensive briefing.

The establishment of the African Union Panel of
eminent persons, headed by President Mbeki, and the
submission of their report of findings and
recommendations on 8 October in Abuja are major
developments since the Prosecutor gave his report and
briefing in June (see S/PV.6135). We commend the
cooperation of the Panel and the ICC while carrying
out their mandate.
President Mbeki's panel submitted
recommendations on how best the issues of
accountability and combating impunity, on the one
hand, and reconciliation and healing, on the other, could
effectively and comprehensively be achieved, thus
upholding justice by combating impunity while
contributing to ensuring peace, stability and security in
the Sudan.

Uganda warmly welcomes and supports the
recommendations in the Mbeki report calling for the
establishment of a hybrid court that should exercise
original and appellate jurisdiction over individuals who
bear responsibility for the gravest crimes committed
during the conflict in Darfur. We urge the Government
of the Sudan to establish the hybrid court.

The Panel further recommends that such courts
be constituted by Sudanese judges and those of other
nationalities. Such measures would respect the
independent judicial mandate of the ICC and would
allow independent domestic jurisdiction in the Sudan.
That would strengthen judicial institutions in the Sudan
to handle past, present and future violations that
constitute the most serious crimes of concern to the
international community. We believe that the Mbeki
report presents us with a good basis on which to
resolve the outstanding impasse between the Sudan and
the ICC.

Uganda believes that ending impunity is the only
credible deterrent against crimes of the most serious
concern to the international community. We attach
great important to the delivery of justice and the fight
against impunity. Nonetheless, it is important to take
into account the need to resolve conflicts in a manner
that would not drive us back to anarchy. It is therefore
important to take into account that the particular
circumstances of each individual situation. We are
convinced that the Mbeki findings and
recommendations have taken into account the concrete
situation on the ground in Darfur, in the Sudan and in
Africa.

Uganda remains concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Darfur. There is not enough
food assistance. Health services and facilities remain
inadequate. Water supply and sanitation support remain
insufficient. We commend all the United Nations
agencies and other donors that have scaled up their
activities to alleviate the suffering of the people of
Darfur. We are also concerned about reports of sexual
violence, which continues in and around the camps in
Darfur, and about reports of continued recruitment of
child soldiers. We call on the Government of the Sudan
to take appropriate measures to ensure that those
incidents are stopped and that the perpetrators of those
crimes are brought to justice.

Finally, we call on the Security Council to
support the recommendations of the Mbeki report. The
Mbeki report and its recommendations provide a
practical and realistic way forward for accountability,
reconciliation and lasting peace in Darfur.

