President Poroshenko: First of all, I thank you,
Mr. President, for making this summit possible. It is
only fair that this seminal meeting is taking place during
Ethiopia's presidency of the Security Council - a
nation with an outstanding peacekeeping record.

It is undoubtedly true that, to be up to speed
with an unpredictable world, the United Nations
peacekeeping endeavour badly needs reform, as does
the whole United Nations system. That is why it is high
time to assess the current state of play, ongoing reform
efforts and prospects for United Nations peacekeeping.
I sincerely hope that this debate, along with resolution
2378 (2017), which we just adopted, and which Ukraine
co-sponsored, will contribute to this vital exercise.

I must admit that, since the latest discussion of
this issue, at the leaders' summit on peacekeeping in
2015, the world is becoming less and less safe. War and
aggression are spreading, while peace and goodwill
are in retreat. Our Organization, which was created
to secure peace and stability in the world, cannot
afford to stand aside. It must be proactive, as outlined
in the reviews of United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding capabilities, which regrettably remain
under-implemented in practice. In that light, we welcome
and fully support the efforts of the Secretary-General
to develop and implement a robust, comprehensive
United Nations reform agenda that rightly focuses on
strengthening the United Nations peace and security
architecture. I see a number of essential ingredients for
success in that regard.

The first is a truly proactive role for the Secretary-
General in carrying out his responsibilities as set out in
Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations.

No less important is the task ofprotecting civilians,
which has evolved into an integral part of peacekeeping.

Due attention should also be given to securing
proper funding and sufficient capabilities, including
aviation assets, advanced intelligence and modern
technologies. Moving from traditional peacekeeping to
cost-effective smart peacekeeping is long overdue.

Last, but not least, I commend the initiative of the
Secretary-General to eradicate the scourge of sexual
exploitation and abuse, which continues to overshadow
United Nations peacekeeping achievements. As
a responsible Member State, Ukraine signed the
relevant compact with the Secretary-General. We look
forward to its early implementation across United
Nations operations.

I am proud that Ukraine has been a strong partner
of the Organization in peacekeeping activities for
many years. Ukrainian Blue Helmets have participated
in United Nations operations throughout the world.
In many cases they were indeed instrumental in
reaching peace, from the Balkans to Africa. Ukraine's
involvement in United Nations peacekeeping did not
wane even at the height of the armed attack on my
country by the Russian Federation. But today we, too,
need the peacekeeping shoulder of the United Nations.

As the Council is well aware, in 2014 Russia
unleashed an armed aggression against Ukraine and
occupied part of our territory. Russia's mantra that "we
are not there" does not hold water. It is an undeniable
fact that Russia creates, leads, controls and sponsors
terrorist operations in Donbas. Here is further evidence:
these are the identification cards of Russian officers
and soldiers, some of whom are in Ukrainian prisons
for their illegal occupation of Ukrainian land.

The three-year-long Russian aggression has cost
Ukraine more than 10,000 lives, with over 25,000
wounded and about 1.8 million internally displaced.
In order to restore peace in my country, back in the
spring of 2015 I officially requested that the President
of the Security Council initiate the appropriate
procedure for the deployment of United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Ukraine. It has since gained
additional urgency.

The situation is not getting better in the Donbas
region, despite repeated ceasefire initiatives. Ordinary
people continue to suffer. The human rights monitoring
mission in Ukraine recorded 169 conflict-related
civilian casualties in the period from mid-May to
August 2017, leaving 26 dead and 135 injured. Just
think of this number - this is happening in the twenty-
first century, in the heart of Europe. People's right
to life, liberty and freedom of speech continue to be
violated on a daily basis. They can be killed for going
to the wrong church, speaking in the wrong language
or simply for disagreeing. If tragedy of this scale does
not warrant a United Nations peace presence, then
what does?

In that regard, I would like to reiterate my request
to the Council to deploy peacekeepers in Donbas. We
need to move forward on this track, the sooner the
better. I therefore welcome the start of exchanges among
Council members on the way forward. Ukraine is ready
to participate constructively. At the same time, I must
reiterate that the road to efficient peacekeeping - and
eventually to the settlement - lies in the unconditional
withdrawal of all foreign military personnel and
mercenaries and their weapons and equipment
from Ukraine.

Moreover, reliable international control over the
temporarily uncontrolled part of the Ukraine and
Russian State border should be secured. That is key,
as there can be no success in bringing peace to Donbas
without preventing Russian troops, arms, equipment
and mercenaries from continuing to infiltrate Donbas.

The deployment of United Nations peacekeeping
operations should restore justice, rather than freeze
the conflict and cement the occupation. Justice would
be to restore Ukraine's sovereignty over its territory.
Justice would be to make sure that no one can take away
Ukraine's freedom. While designing such a mission,
all United Nations peacekeeping principles should
be observed. We will insist upon that throughout the
negotiation process, no matter how long it takes.

Let me also reiterate our invitation to the Secretary-
General to exercise his authority under the Charter of
the United Nations and send a technical assessment
mission to Ukraine. Based on the mission's analysis,
possible options for a United Nations political and
security presence in Donbas should be elaborated and
presented for further consideration by the Security
Council. We expect such a mission to analyse and
assess the overall situation on the ground.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that
peacekeeping remains one of the most effective
instruments to make our world safer and to secure
peace. In that regard, let me underscore Ukraine's
unwavering commitment to the United Nations
peacekeeping endeavour.

