Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council. I
believe that, under your guidance, our Council will
surely achieve success in its work. I assure you of the
full support of my delegation.

I should also like to thank Ambassador Tafrov of
Bulgaria for his outstanding contribution as President
of the Council last month.

The great importance of today's meeting is
evident in its very long list of speakers. Given the great
number of speakers, I shall be very brief, focusing on
my evaluation of the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC).

The Chinese delegation thanks Ambassador
Greenstock for his presentation on behalf of the CTC.
We endorse his summary and assessment of the
Committee's work to date. My delegation believes that,
during the year since its establishment, the CTC has
done a great deal of effective work. The first-stage
review is essentially complete; the second-stage review
is proceeding on schedule. The Committee's open and
transparent working methods have been greatly
appreciated by the vast majority of Member States.

The CTC's success could not have been possible
without the efforts of its Bureau, its members, the
experts and the Secretariat. We agree with the fifth 90-
day work programme and the focus of work of the
second-stage review adopted by the Committee. We
endorse the renewal of the Bureau's mandate for six
months.

Apart from the two priority areas defined by the
CTC, we believe that the Committee should pay special
attention during the second-stage review to the
question of providing assistance to Member States in
need of such assistance. In this regard, we call on the
relevant donors actively to respond to the Committee's
appeal and to cooperate with the CTC experts in
providing assistance, in a timely and effective manner,
to the countries that have requested it. Moreover, we
also believe that, in its future work in the second stage,
the CTC should continue its review of the national
reports, in strict accordance with the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001), so as to enhance Member
States' counter-terrorism capacity in the legislative and
administrative fields as soon as possible.

The work of the CTC to date has laid a good
foundation for Member States' ability to suppress
terrorism and for international cooperation in that
regard. Meanwhile, we should also note that counter-
terrorism capacity-building is a long-term process
inseparable from international counter-terrorism
practice. The issue of how to integrate United Nations
counter-terrorism efforts into international counter-
terrorism practice requires the Council's attention.

