Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I
congratulate you, Madam President, on your assumption
of the presidency for this month.

I would like to thank the High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Inzko, for his very frank update
on the developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
greatly appreciate the work of the Office of the High
Representative to help the country to achieve greater
peace and prosperity and to strengthen security and
stability in the region.

The United States affirms its strong support
for the mandate of the High Representative as the
final authority under the Dayton Peace Accords on
the civilian implementation of the agreement. We
thank him for his dedicated service and express our
firm commitment to uphold the Dayton Accords,
maintaining the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and promoting continued
Euro-Atlantic integration.

Bosnia and Herzegovina's commitment to Euro-
Atlantic values remains critical. Both NATO and the
European Union (EU) have indicated that their doors
remain open if Bosnia and Herzegovina fulfils its
responsibilities under the Dayton Peace Accords, and
if the country is willing to do the hard work to meet
its standards for membership. The United States urges
further progress towards integration with both NATO
and the EU, which will require stronger political resolve
and dedication.
We commend the continued work of the EU-led
Operation Althea and of NATO to promote security
and capacity-building in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
recognize the authorities' handover of answers to the
European Commission questionnaire in February and
view it as an important step towards the country's
integration with Europe. Nonetheless, the United
States is concerned about the recent uptick in divisive,
nationalist rhetoric in Bosnia and Herzegovina. That
threatens to exacerbate divisions and conflict, the
exact opposite of what the Dayton Peace Accords and
subsequent reform efforts set out to achieve. We urge
all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to embrace key
political, socioeconomic and electoral reforms and
work to enhance the rule of law, tackle corruption and
improve the overall political climate in the country for
the benefit of all its citizens.

Looking ahead to the general elections in October,
we urge Bosnia and Herzegovina to adopt and implement
electoral reforms, especially those addressing the so-
called Ljubic' ruling. Those reforms are vital to the
holding of free, fair and transparent elections, and to
maintaining the stability that the country has worked so
hard to achieve. Without those reforms it may be much
more difficult to form a Government after the elections,
which will complicate efforts to build a secure stable
and prosperous future for the country. We share many
of the concerns voiced by the High Representative in
his report on Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2017/922, annex), including those actions that could weaken the
rule of law, such as destabilizing rhetoric from political
leaders that allude to a break-up of the State and
hypothetical comments about future war. The Council
must remain alert to actions and rhetoric that seek to
undermine and threaten the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina, its two entities
and three constituent peoples.

The United States looks forward to a time
when Bosnia and Herzegovina's status satisfies the
objectives and conditions for the closure of the Office
of the High Representative, as established by the Peace
Implementation Council. When that day comes, we
will be able to say with confidence that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has fully implemented its responsibilities
under the Dayton Peace Accords and is irreversibly
on course for European integration. Until then, we
encourage the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as the international community, to support
the reforms needed to reach that milestone and to
maintain their commitment to the Office of the High
Representative as it works to ensure the success of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

