Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): On
behalf of my delegation, I would like to thank
Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his comprehensive briefing
and Ambassador Tanin for his statement.

We welcome the fact that the Government of
Afghanistan has continued to implement the Kabul
process, including the successful elaboration of 11
national priority programmes, out of 22. We express
the hope that the financing issues related to those
programmes will be successfully resolved in
coordination with donors. The Afghan authorities must
now show tangible results in other important national
priority programmes, including those in the areas of
justice and subnational governance, which are crucial
for the better functioning of the State. We would like to
commend the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its important support for
the implementation of the Kabul process.

With respect to the taking over of the
responsibility of the Afghan authorities for security in
the country, Bosnia and Herzegovina hopes that the
recent incidents in Kabul and other areas will not have
a negative impact on the transition which was
announced in March by President Karzai and is
supposed to start this month. We also took note of the
recent announcement by the United States President,
Mr. Barack Obama, followed by the United Kingdom
and Germany, of a partial withdrawal of troops from
Afghanistan. That means that the coming period will be
crucial to Afghanistan's future and to assessing the
work which has been done by the international
community over these many years. In this regard, we
particularly welcome UNAMA's role in facilitating
dialogue among development partners and the
International Security Assistance Force to ensure that
the development perspective is taken into account in
the transition planning.

Another important element for Afghanistan's
future is the Afghan-led reconciliation and
reintegration process. It is encouraging to see that

efforts to strengthen this process have continued to
receive strong support from the international
community, including the valuable work of the Special
Representative and of UNAMA. Furthermore, the
adoption of resolution 1988 (2011) and the
establishment of the Taliban sanction regime also
represent positive steps in support of reconciliation
efforts.

We reiterate our position that reconciliation and
integration are crucial elements of the peace process.
We fully understand that such a process can be very
sensitive in terms of the human and political aspects
and that, consequently, it has the potential to encounter
diverse obstacles. Nonetheless, we continue to believe
that there is no alternative to an Afghan-led
reconciliation and reintegration process and that such a
process must be a priority in future. The progress that
has been reported on the reintegration of insurgents is
an encouraging sign, particularly because it includes
Kandahar, which until now had not experienced
significant progress in this field.

Although political developments in Afghanistan
continue to advance in the right direction, the security
situation in Afghanistan remains for us a cause of great
concern. In particular, United Nations statistics show
that last May was the deadliest month for civilians,
with the number of persons killed representing a
significant increase compared with 2010. Bosnia and
Herzegovina condemns in the strongest possible terms
the deadly attack carried out against Logar hospital on
25 June. It is simply not possible to justify such a
crime against innocent civilians. We also condemn the
recent attack against a hotel in Kabul and reiterate our
condemnation of the deadly attack against the UNAMA
compound in Mazar-e-Sharif, where three UNAMA
staff members were among the casualties. It is
important to continue to call upon all parties to the
conflict to strictly comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law and protect civilians
while strongly stressing that killing civilians and
innocent people is a crime.

We have also witnessed, as a direct result of the
ongoing conflict, a considerable increase in the number
of displaced persons. We share the Secretary-General's
view that conflict-related displacements and the failure
to provide reintegration support are not only
humanitarian issues but important security concerns
given their potential for destabilization. United Nations
agencies have played a crucial role in supporting the
return of Afghan refugees and displaced persons, as
well as in the sustainable reintegration of those
persons. In that context, we must not forget about the
issue of the removal of unexploded explosive devices,
since only 27 per cent of the areas contaminated with
mines has been cleared.

We also commend the efforts of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in addressing the
problem of illicit drug production, which remains a
lifeline for anti-Government forces and terrorists. We
are actively participating in the Paris Pact process as
part of joint international efforts to suppress, if not
eliminate, drug trafficking, which has a major impact
on the security of both the countries of supply and the
countries of demand.

Finally, we consider that all of the important
issues relating to sustainable peace and stability in
Afghanistan can only benefit from regional
cooperation, including that of its neighbouring
countries: Iran, Pakistan and India. We welcome the
reinforcement of dialogue and cooperation. We also
commend the efforts of Turkey aimed at supporting
Afghan stability and economic development and the
forthcoming Istanbul Conference on Afghanistan, to be
held on 2 November 2011, as well as the commitments
made by Afghanistan's neighbouring countries during
the Fourth Conference of the Least Developed
Countries, held in Istanbul, to the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Afghanistan.

In conclusion, our thanks go to the Special
Representative, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, the staff of
UNAMA and all United Nations personnel in
Afghanistan for their tireless and dedicated work.

