President Abbas (spoke in Arabic): I have come to the Security Council on behalf of 13 million Palestinians to call fora just peace and nothing more. I have come here today to reaffirm the Palestinian position in rejection of the Israeli-United States deal. Our position is supported by the outcomes of meetings held by the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the African Union, which all concluded that the deal must be rejected in totality, in addition to statements issued by the European Union, Russia, China, Japan and other countries around the world. I cite in particular the statements of the Secretary-General, who has reaffirmed the international terms of reference and the relevant resolutions of international legitimacy. The broad rejection of this deal is the result of its unilateral positions and the fact that it flagrantly violates international legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative. It annuls the legitimacy of the Palestinians' rights to self-determination, freedom and independence in their own State. It legitimizes illegality, settlements and the confiscation and annexation of Palestinian territories. I reaffirm that this deal or any part thereof cannot be considered an international reference for negotiations. This deal is a proactive Israeli-United States arrangement with a view to liquidating the Palestinian question. We have rejected it because it removes East Jerusalem from Palestinian sovereignty. That alone is enough for us to reject it. This deal confines our people and homeland in residential fragmented areas and leaves them without any control over the land, air and sea. It would put an end to the Palestinian refugees. It would definitely eliminate all bases for the peace process. It is tantamount to a rejection of all signed agreements based on the establishment of two States along the 1967 borders. This deal will not bring peace or stability to the region, and therefore we will not accept it. We will confront its application on the ground. I have before me a summary of the project that has been presented to us. The map shows the State that they would give us. It is like Swiss cheese. What Council member would accept such a State? This deal dictates its own terms and the entrenchment of occupation, annexation by military force and the strengthening of the obsolete apartheid regime that has now returned to Palestine. The deal rewards occupation instead ofholding Israel accountable for all the crimes perpetrated against our people and our land for decades. In that regard, I would like to thank countries, regional and international organizations, parliaments and members of the Security Council for helping us defend the international consensus based on international legitimacy and relevant United Nations resolutions We also thank Israelis - yes, Israelis - who have also rejected this deal in different ways, and those who stood with us in the House of Representatives and the Senate of the United States. We also thank American organizations and free people who have rejected this deal. We value their commitments and positions in support of peace and upholding international legitimacy. Some 300 Israeli officers have rejected the deal in this document - 300 Israeli officers who have fought for their country and now confirm that they are fighting for what is just. We also welcome Israeli demonstrators who have taken to the streets of Tel Aviv to reject this deal. I have here a letter signed by 107 members of the United States Congress and another signed by 12 members of the United States Senate, including some presidential candidates. They all reject this deal. We salute the Palestinian, Arab and Islamic peoples and all those who champion peace around the world and who have taken to the streets by the thousands and hundreds of thousands in the West Bank and in Gaza. Although it is freezing there, they are taking to the streets by the hundreds of thousands to say "no" to this deal. Some are saying that it is a just deal and that only Abu Mazen and two or three of his supporters are rejecting the deal, but it is not like that. Hundreds of thousands of people are taking to the streets to say "no" to this deal. Tens of thousands around the world are saying "no" to this deal. Some people insist that this deal is a just one. It is not. I have come to the Security Council today to say that peace between the two Israeli and Palestinian peoples is still possible and achievable. I have come here to build an international partnership to achieve a just, comprehensive and lasting peace. We are still committed to that peace as a strategic choice. This deal is not an international partnership. It has come from one State, with the support of another, to be imposed on the world and on international legitimacy, which is represented by hundreds of United Nations resolutions and dozens of Security Council resolutions. We reject this deal. I wonder why there is determination to draft this United States-Israeli plan alone, given that we have been engaged in dialogue with the United States Administration in 2017, and we have spoken about all the final-status issues. President Trump and I had a long discussion. We have spoken many times about international legitimacy and the vision of the two- State solution, and he agreed with me and said that he would announce that. We also talked about the 1967 borders, Jerusalem, security and other issues, which we discussed in Oslo. I was happy to discuss those issues with him at the time. However, I was surprised afterwards when the office of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) in Washington, D.C., was closed, and they declared Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. How is that possible? Hetransferred his Embassy, and called on other countries around the world to do the same. Moreover, he stopped sending us aid, which amounted to $840 million. He also stopped sending assistance to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. I do not know who gave him that abhorrent advice. I know that President Trump is not like that. The President Trump I have met is not like that. I do not know from where he got this behaviour. I would like to recall before the Security Council that we held the Madrid Peace Conference, the Washington, D.C., negotiations, the Oslo Accord and the Annapolis Peace Conference, on the basis of resolutions of international legitimacy that called for negotiations on all final-status issues, including Jerusalem. We should negotiate over Jerusalem. We cannot dictate that Jerusalem is to be given to the State of Israel. No, Jerusalem is occupied land. Who has the right to give it as a gift to one State or another? We are appealing before the Security Council today, which has the highest legitimacy in the world, and we are committed to all Council resolutions. We also have been committed to implementing all agreements with Israel. We have behaved responsibly, which is why the world has respected us. Some 140 countries have recognized the State of Palestine. We have become a part of the international system. We became an Observer State in the General Assembly, although we were unable to become a full Member because of the veto. We have joined more than 120 international treaties and organizations. Last year the Observer State of Palestine became the Chair of theGroup of 77 and China, which includes 135 countries. We do therefore exist. We have continued to build up our national institutions based on the rule of law and international parameters for a modern and democratic State that supports transparency, accountability and combating corruption. We are among the most important countries that are combating corruption. I call on the Security Council to send a fact-finding mission to Palestine to observe our efforts to combat corruption and to see that this emerging State, under the yoke of the occupation, is free from corruption. Anyone who claims that our State is corrupt has only to come and visit and see for themselves. We have empowered women and youth. We have worked on spreading the culture of peace among our Palestinian people. We always call for peace. We reject wars, violence and terrorism, and we fight violence and terrorism around the world. We have signed 83 protocols with 83 countries to fight terrorism, and one of them is with the United States of America, as well as with Canada, Russia and Japan, among other countries. We are fighting terrorism. We are not terrorists, and we will remain committed to combating terrorism. We have held elections three times. We believe in democracy. The last time that we called for elections Israel rejected our request. Why? Because we cannot hold elections in Jerusalem, although we held elections in 1996, 2005 and 2006 in Jerusalem. Now we cannot. A decision has now been taken that Jerusalem is united and is the capital of the State of Israel. However, that will not happen. East Jerusalem is ours, and West Jerusalem is theirs. Nothing can prevent cooperation between both States and both capitals. Some say that we have wasted opportunities for peace. But that is not true. Abba Eban, the brilliant genius, said one day that Palestinians never miss an opportunity to miss an opportunity. We never waste opportunities. Recently, some are repeating those words. Which opportunity have we have lost? Do not utter such stupid slogans. We have accepted all United Nations resolutions, from resolution 242 (1967) to resolution 2334 (2016), which amount to 87 resolutions. We became an active member of the international community. In 1993, we signed the Oslo Accord, with all its details and provisions. We recognized Israel and Israel recognized us. We recognized Israel in Oslo. Yasser Arafat said "I recognize the right of Israel to exist". Yitzhak Rabin also said, and put it in writing, that he recognized the PLO as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people. We have recognized one other. What opportunity for peace did we therefore waste? We responded to the efforts of the United States Administration, international initiatives and all calls for dialogue and negotiations. However, we were never offered the bare minimum of justice in accordance with international legitimacy. The current Government of the Israeli occupation is undermining international efforts. We have seriously seized every opportunity because peace is in the interest of our people and the peoples around the world, and this document shows that. Several countries, including Russia, Japan, Belgium and the Netherlands, invited us to hold a dialogue with Mr. Netanyahu on their territory. While we responded positively to each of those invitations, Mr. Netanyahu never did. I went to Moscow three times, and he did not make an appearance. Therefore, who is rejecting peace here? I therefore cannot help but wonder about the opportunities we have wasted, as Abba Eban said and as others repeated. Successive occupying Israeli Governments and settlers have sought to destroy all chances for peace. They have accelerated their settlement activities and built settlements - with impunity - throughout the West Bank and all other territories occupied since 1967. They have changed the characteristics of the occupied city of Jerusalem and continued to attack Islamic and Christian holy sites, confiscate land and wage war and siege on our people in the Gaza Strip, armed, unfortunately, with the strong support of the United States Administration. The United States has issued a number of decisions that violate international law and have not been accepted by the world and a large number of members of the current United States House of Representatives and many peace organizations, including American Jewish organizations. House of Representatives resolution 326 by rejects the policy of the President and the Secretary of State of the United States on settlements. That was a decision by the House of Representatives - we are not inventing facts or lying to anyone. I also reiterate that we reject all attempts to link economic assistance to a political solution. They said there will be economic aid - forget about the political solution. They went to Bahrain and Warsaw and said that they will give us $50 billion, without bothering with apolitical solution. We reject that. The political solution must come first, and then, if the United States wishes to provide economic assistance, it will be most welcome. However, we cannot accept an economic solution before a political one. We thank all countries that are currently providing us with assistance - without preconditions - so that we can build our Palestinian institutions and an independent State. At this difficult time, and before it is too late, I address President Donald Trump by saying that the proposed plan by the United States cannot achieve peace and security because it has abolished international legitimacy. Who can abolish international legitimacy? Who can abolish the international legitimacy of the highest platform in the world? President Donald Trump has managed to do so. The United States plan eliminated all the resolutions of the international legitimacy and denied the international legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, while placing East Jerusalem outside Palestinian sovereignty. This plan will not be applicable because it fails to meet the aspirations of the two-State solution, Israel and Palestine, which would be sovereign and independent, Believe me, if peace can be achieved between us and the Israeli people, it will be the best form of peace that nurtures the most beautiful relations between our two States, Palestine and Israel. But we need to be given an opportunity to achieve that peace. I know that the peace plan is 180 pages long, and that not everyone is willing to read it all. Therefore, we have decided to provide a 20-page summary that is easier to read, as it is unnecessary to read the remaining parts. I hope that President Trump will be fair and just and support the implementation of resolutions of international legitimacy in order to create an opportunity to achieve a genuine peace between the Palestinians and Israelis. An imposed peace will not work and cannot last. Let us achieve peace by working together, as we began to do in Oslo, without the interference of any other party - I repeat, without the interference of any other party - and even without the knowledge of any other country. I challenge anybody who says that he knew about it. We signed a transition agreement and were ready to uphold it for five years until a final solution was reached. But they killed Yitzhak Rabin. Why did they kill Rabin? May God rest his soul in peace. From this Chamber, I call upon the Middle East Quartet, represented by the United States, the Russian Federation, the European Union and _ the United Nations, including the members of the Security Council, to hold an international conference for peace in order to implement resolutions of international legitimacy, in particular resolution 2334 (2016). Yet I say all resolutions. Pick and choose any resolution and I am ready to accept and implement it. But no single resolution is implemented? Eighty-seven resolutions are not implemented. Where to go? If resolutions of the Security Council, the highest platform in the world, are not implemented, where to go? To whom shall I complain? We call for the implementation of all Security Council resolutions, the two-State solution and the Arab Peace Initiative, which we stress as is part of international legitimacy, resolution 1515 (2003). We are not proposing anything new. An international mechanism must be established based on_ the international Quartet to sponsor negotiations between the two sides. Any other country could join the Quartet, but frankly, we cannot accept the United States as the sole mediator. We welcome it within the Quartet, but we will not accept it alone. We tried that once, and we cannot do it again. I call on the entire international community to put pressure on the occupying Israeli Government to cease its occupation practices and its continuous decisions to annex our territories, or even territories under dispute over which Israel has no right to annex. It will destroy any chance for peace. At this historic time, I would like to again extend my hand towards achieving peace before we miss this last opportunity. I hope to find a genuine partner in Israel, like Mr. Rabin or any other person who believes in peace, in order to achieve genuine peace for current and future generations of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples and other peoples of the world. Let us live together. Our Palestinian people can no longer tolerate the occupation of our country. The situation could implode at any moment. To prevent that, we need renewed hope. I ask the Council to not take that hope away from us - hope for our people and all other peoples of the region for freedom, independence and peace. There is hope that the free world will champion our rights, so do not take away our people's hope.I would like to show a map to Council members. This map shows Palestine as it stood in 1917, 1937, 1947, 1948 and 2020. Each time I look at the map, my heart is torn apart. Is that what we deserve? Is that what the Palestinian people deserve? Why? At some point things were different for us. How did we arrive at these islands? On this occasion, I would like to address the Israeli people and tell them that the ongoing occupation, settlements and military control of another people will not help them achieve security and peace. We have only one choice. We must be partners and neighbours, each in our own independent and sovereign country. Let us remain committed to that just choice before it is too late. I again stress that our conflict is not with the Jewish people. We are not against Jews; we are Muslims not against Jews. A Muslim who says that he is against a Jew commits blasphemy. If a Muslim says that he is against the Jews or the Torah is an infidel, not a Muslim. We are not against Jews. We are against anyone who attacks us, regardless of who he is and the religion he believes in. Our conflict is not with the Jews but with whoever occupies our land. Therefore, we will continue our struggle, in which we have sacrificed thousands of martyrs, prisoners and wounded to end occupation and establish our Palestinian State, while stressing that our people will not surrender. Council members have seen that we will not surrender. We will continue to demand our rights. If we are allowed to enjoy our rights, we will be grateful to whoever grants them to us. However, we will never relinquish our rights or surrender to the occupation, regardless of the time we invest and the sacrifice we have to make. In conclusion, I reiterate that I am ready to start negotiations. I have always been ready, so long as Israel shows itself to be a partner ready for peace and negotiations, under the auspices of the international Quartet and on the basis of internationally agreed parameters. I am serious. I stand ready to begin immediate negotiations here at the United Nations, which represents international legitimacy. I am ready to start those negotiations immediately. I will say one thing - we will not resort to violence and terrorism, regardless of how strong the aggression against us. We believe in peace. We believe in combating violence. We will therefore not resort to violence. There are already 83 countries - soon to be 133. We are ready to cooperate with any country to combat terrorism. We are against terrorism and violence in all their forms and manifestations. We will not resort to terrorism. We will fight using peaceful, popular resistance. One need only look at what is happening now in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Hundreds of thousands of people have taken to the streets, braving the freezing cold to say "no" to the deal. It is not just I or my delegation rejecting the deal. All our people are saying "no, no, no" to the deal. Finally, I ask the world to be careful to not kill the hope of our Palestinian people. I have come for the sake of hope. Do not dash my hope.
