Ms. Pereira Sotomayor (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Republic of Indonesia for
convening this important debate. The protection of
civilians in armed conflict must remain an overarching
objective of the Security Council, along with the
political will of the United Nations to implement
international humanitarian law and human rights law.

My delegation thanks the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Executive Director ofthe Center for Civilians in Conflict
for their briefings, as well as Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres for his report (S/2019/373), updated in May,
which highlights the wide range of effects from which
civilian populations continue to suffer. We regret that,
even though that item has been on the Council's agenda
since 1999, the situation of immeasurable human and
social destruction has not changed, and, even worse,
that the suffering and tragedy of civilians persist.
Ecuador believes that the protection of civilians
must be a rational, unwavering and firm commitment
of the community of States and that the obligations
based on the Geneva Conventions are permanent.
My country attaches the greatest importance to the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts. It considers it
inhumane that the main victims continue to be civilians,
particularly women, children, persons with disabilities,
internally displaced persons and refugees. We have had
international humanitarian law rules for more than half
a century, but it is civilians who are affected by forced
displacement, limitations of humanitarian assistance,
attacks against medical and humanitarian personnel
and sexual and gender-based violence.

In that regard, we appreciate the Security Council's
decision to include and prioritize the protection of
civilians in the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
as in the case of nine missions. It is essential, however,
that they respond to a realistic assessment of the
situation on the ground and be allocated sufficient
resources to ensure their effective implementation
and support activities aimed at resolving conflicts by
peaceful means. Nonetheless, as the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations has emphasized, the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
rests with host Governments, which is why close
cooperation and consultation with national authorities
and field missions are important.

Ecuador also reiterates its deep concern that civilians
are targeted by and subjected to indiscriminate attacks,
violations and damage to or the unlawful destruction of
civilian infrastructure, hospitals, schools, property and
livelihoods of the population, and that those attacks are
increasingly taking place in urban areas.

The humanitarian impact of the use of explosive
weapons on civilian populations cannot be overlooked;
that is why we saw the Santiago communique - adopted
at the Latin American and Caribbean Regional Meeting
on Protecting Civilians from the Use of Explosive
Weapons in Populated Areas, organized by the
Government of Chile - as a valuable contribution.
As those present have already heard, some countries,
including Ecuador, endorsed the communique. The
communique recognizes the need to prioritize the
prevention of the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas and supports the preparation of an international
political declaration that would enable and promote the
best protection of civilians, mainly women, children,
the elderly and persons with disabilities, in armed
conflicts by preventing the use of long-range explosive
weapons in populated areas.

Ecuador's migration policy takes a human rights
approach and our legislation recognizes the same
rights for refugees as for Ecuadorian citizens, with a
View to allowing people in that condition to exit the
welfare system and become agents of development for
the benefit of the society that welcomes them. With that
experiment, we recognize the importance of finding
political solutions to conflicts, the lack of which makes
it difficult to realize opportunities for the safe and
sustainable return of millions of internal refugees.

My country believes that the global compact on
refugees, adopted by the General Assembly in resolution
73/151 last year, offers an innovative and practical model
for promoting solidarity and responsibility-sharing
as a guarantee of the right to return. In that regard, it
is an inevitable obligation to cite the situation of the
Palestinian people and their seven decades of waiting.

Faced with that desolate humanitarian scenario,
Ecuador wishes to acknowledge the excellent work of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees on the international protection of refugees
worldwide and highlight the humanitarian operations
organized and carried out on behalf of 71.4 million
refugees, asylum-seekers, displaced persons and
stateless persons. We also acknowledge and reiterate
our support for the extraordinary work of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in providing assistance to a
total of 6.02 million Palestinian refugees, according to
figures in its report of 1 January 2018.

Allow me to conclude by pointing out that crimes
against civilians should not go unpunished, regardless
of who commits them, where they are committed and
when they occur. The lack of accountability continues
to victimize civilians, destroys the credibility of the
international community's ability to act and foments
disregard for the law. In that regard, we agree with the
Secretary-General's view that it is urgent to adopt more
effective, robust, systematic, universal and coherent
approaches to ensure accountability for the commission
of those serious crimes and respond to the need to
provide reparations for serious violations.

