Mr. Zerihoun: Ithank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on recent developments in
Somalia and on the next stage of the United Nations
engagement in the country.

In the weeks since the finalization of the Secretary-
General's report of 31 January 2013 (S/2013/69),
the Federal Government of Somalia has continued
implementing its six-pillar policy for stabilization and
peacebuilding in the country. President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud has reached out to Somalia's international
partners, with high-profile visits including to the United
States, the United Kingdom and the European Union,
which have raised hopes for enhanced international
assistance on the basis ofa new compact to be developed
over the course of this year.

The United Nations has continued high-level
dialogue with the new authorities in Somalia on
their emerging plans. The Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, met with
President Mohamud in Addis Ababa during the recent
African Union summit and visited Mogadishu on
30 January. He discussed with the Prime Minister of
Somalia and other leaders their priorities for the coming
year, particularly in the areas of security, judicial
reform and public financial management. We hope to
continue to work together to develop ways to support
Somalia in these key areas.

The success achieved by the Government
internationally is matched by daunting challenges
at home. The growing expanse of territory liberated
from Al-Shabaab has created an opportunity for the
federal Government to extend its control over the
country and enhance its legitimacy among Somalis.
The Government is working to fill the vacuum
through an inclusive bottom-up approach, but the
process is naturally contentious. In Kismaayo, the
self-styled Governor, Sheikh Madobe, has yet to meet
with President Mohamud, despite promises to do so.
Meanwhile, in Baidoa tensions are escalating following
the appointment of a new interim Governor by the
Government on 6 February.

It is important that progress be made quickly to build
accepted administrations in the liberated areas and that
the complex political process be accompanied by other
critical stabilization deliverables - notably security,
law and order, and basic service delivery - without
which long-term peace and development will be
difficult to attain. In this regard, the commitment of the
Intergovernmental Authority for Development (IGAD)
on 23 January to support and ensure complementarity
with the approach of the federal Government of
Somalia, as well as the Government's pledge to present
its detailed stabilization plan to IGAD, are welcome
developments.

Despite several attacks by Al-Shabaab, there is
now a tangible sense of security and optimism in
Mogadishu. Across the country, AMISOM. is now
deployed at full mandated strength and has been
effective in degrading Al-Shabaab's operational
capability. However, Al-Shabaab is not yet defeated,
and its presence continues to hamper the freedom of
movement of Somalis and those who would assist them.

The lack of sustainable and predictable funding
for AMISOM. remains a concern. The international
community continues to recognize the sacrifices
being made by the Somali forces, AMISOM. and
other partners, and strongly supports the appeals of
the African Union (AU) for resources and additional
capabilities to continue efforts against the insurgency.

Meanwhile, Council members are aware of the
request of the Somali Government for a relaxation
of the arms embargo to facilitate the development of
the Somalia security sector. The Secretary-General
suggests in his report that it would be important to take
a calibrated approach based on all the factors at play,
including the pressing need to support the development
of the Somali forces while avoiding the proliferation
of uncontrolled weapons that could exacerbate the
security situation. We understand that the Somalia and
Eritrea Monitoring Group is ready to provide technical
advice in the development of options in this regard.

The development of the security sector in Somalia
must also be coupled with enhanced support for the
judiciary and respect for human rights. The Secretary-
General is particularly concerned by the ongoing threat
to journalists working in Somalia and by the number of
reported incidents of sexual violence. The case of an
alleged rape victim and a Somali journalist sentenced
to imprisonment on 5 February underscores the
considerable investment needed to develop a national
framework that promotes international human rights
norms.

This period oftransformation, with its opportunities
and challenges, requires a step change in the United
Nations support to peacebuilding in Somalia. In his
report before the Council, the Secretary-General has
recommended a substantial realignment of the United
Nations presence in Somalia. The recommendations are
based on an integrated strategic assessment conducted
late last year, in which the Secretariat listened extensively
to the Somali authorities across the country, to civil
society organizations and to international partners in
Somalia and in Nairobi. Extensive consultations were
also held with the African Union.

The findings of the review emphasize that United
Nations support to Somalia must now be based on a
new partnership, with the Somalis in the lead and the
United Nations working with side by side with them,
not remotely from Nairobi. That is why United Nations
entities will be steadily relocating to Somalia over the
next 6 to 12 months.

The United Nations Political Office for Somalia
(UNPOS) has played a critical role in supporting the
Somalis to deliver the transition. The political successes
of last year were delivered in part through the hard work
ofUNPOS, and especially the tireless efforts of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Augustine
Mahiga. But UNPOS is not configured to provide the
support required by a new Government seeking to
consolidate its authority across the country. That will
require a new mission with the political and technical
expertise, resources and configuration to support the
Government and people of Somalia. The Secretary-
General therefore recommends to the Security Council
the liquidation of UNPOS and the establishment of a
broader peacebuilding mission based in Mogadishu.

The envisaged tasks of the new mission include
good offices, advice and assistance on security,
peacebuilding and State-building, the preparation
of elections, human rights and the rule of law,
and assistance to the coordination of international
assistance. The United Nations will bring unique
expertise to assist in these areas. At the same time,
there is need for innovative approaches to tackle the
particular challenges of operating in Somalia, and to
tailor our efforts to the Government's requirements. For
this reason, and further to the guidance of the Council,
the Secretary-General intends to deploy a technical
design mission to develop detailed plans for the future
United Nations presence in Somalia. He will report on
the findings in his next report to the Security Council
in May this year.

We appreciate the advice of Member States and other
international partners on the types of structural models
topursuewithrespecttothenewUnitedNations presence
in Somalia. The Secretary-General's recommendation
for a United Nations assistance mission - which
is option C in his report - reflects the best current
option for the Organization to simultaneously provide
enhanced support to peacebuilding and to meet other
development and humanitarian objectives. The option
recognizes the importance of maintaining the high
level of support provided by the United Nations Support
Office for AMISOM. to the African Union Mission in
Somalia, while strengthening the strategic coherence of
the Mission, and tactical planning and cooperation with
United Nations agencies and the African Union.

The Secretary-General remains committed to full
structural integration as soon as conditions allow, and
to keeping the option of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation under review for the future. In view of the
dynamic situation in Somalia, the Secretary-General
intends to revisit the issue of structural integration next
year.

The partnership between the African Union and
United Nations in Somalia has been one of the success
stories in our relationship. We remain committed to
working with our African Union colleagues over the
coming months to ensure that our approaches are
coherent, supportive of each other and, most important,
provide the best support to the Somali Government
and people. The United Nations and African Union
have each conducted their own reviews of their
respective efforts and engagement in Somalia, and our
substantive conclusions are similar. At the meeting of
the AU-United Nations Joint Task Force, held in the
margins of the recent AU Summit in Addis Ababa, we
agreed to pursue ajoint position on the outcome of our
respective reviews, as well as the next steps for our
future cooperation. We will keep the Security Council
informed of these efforts and their outcome.

Only the people of Somalia can realize the
transformation that we all hope for in their country, but
the United Nations can have a significant supporting
role to play. We look forward to receiving the guidance
of the Security Council on the future United Nations
presence and engagement in Somalia.

