Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Ijoin others in
thanking the Malaysian presidency for this opportunity
to exchange views on resolution 1540 (2004). I also
thank the Secretary-General and all the briefers for
their fascinating insights.

The threat of toxic, poisonous or nuclear materials
falling into the hands of non-State actors, particularly
terrorists, is a top priority. It requires the closest
cooperation among all Member States, as well as civil
society and industry. And yet, let us be honest, this is
a complex and technical subject, and we struggle at
times to bring to it the attention it deserves. Resolution
1540 (2004) is not exactly a household name, but it does
have a far-reaching impact, and the briefers did a very
good job today at explaining how far-reaching the new
technologies could be, both as a positive for most people
in the world and as a negative when used by terrorists or
others intent on utilizing those technologies to develop
or to deliver weapons of mass destruction. Therefore,
let us be clear about why we are focusing so much on
the resolution.

Resolution 1540 (2004) boosts the peace and
security of all States. Its full implementation means
action, namely, adopting laws, securing of borders
and safeguarding sensitive materials. We must never
forget those tangible, real world impacts of our work.
I have no doubt that, without resolution 1540 (2004),
the world would be an even more dangerous place. That
is why this year's comprehensive review matters. The
review process has already given us some powerful
food for thought about the progress and challenges of
implementation for States. We now know that since
2010 there has been a 17 per cent increase across all
non-proliferation measures of the resolution undertaken
by States worldwide.

But we also know that we are only halfway in our
efforts. We must work towards full, universal fulfilment
of those obligations. We know that all regions have
increased implementation, with the fastest growth rates
occurring in Africa and Eastern Europe. And yet there
are also marked differences between regions, with some
much further from full implementation than others.
We also know that all sectors - nuclear, chemical and
biological - have seen enhanced controls since 2010.
However, the biological sector lags behind globally,
with about 10 per cent fewer recorded measures than the
nuclear sector. Those are all important non-proliferation
facts. They should shape the next steps that we take.
Working through the 1540 Committee, so ably chaired
by Spain, the Council must now decide how to act.

The United Kingdom looks forward to examining
four areas for concrete progress by the end of this
year. The first is ensuring meaningful analysis of
how resolution 1540 (2004) is being implemented as a
component of the global non-proliferation architecture,
including by assessing each region and sector. The
second is exploring how resolution 1540 (2004) can be
more effectively implemented in the light of the new
and emerging challenges that we heard about, including
both evolving terrorist threats and technological
developments such as 3D printing and drones. The
third is strengthening the 1540 Committee's process
for matching requests with offers of assistance. And
the fourth is revisiting the structure and mandate of
the 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts to ensure
that they have the technical, human and financial
resources they need, including considering a longer-
term mandate. We look forward to discussing all those
issues with all States.

Resolution 1540 (2004) offers tools for States to
prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Tragically, the situation in Syria shows what happens
when prevention fails. The world today continues to
witness horrifying attacks in Syria involving chemical
weapons, including numerous credible allegations of
their use both by State actors and by non-State actors. If
proved, the Al-Assad regime's use of chemical weapons
will be in direct contravention of international law, and
must be universally condemned. As Mr. Kim Won-soo
told us, in the coming days the Council will review a
historic and vital report by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Mission into allegations of chemical weapons use in
Syria. The United Kingdom is determined to hold those
responsible for those crimes to account. We will review
the report very carefully. It will be a first step towards
international justice. We owe it to the victims to
examine unflinchingly the hard evidence before us and
follow up until there is full accountability for all those
responsible for all uses of weapons of mass destruction.

Finally, allow me to echo the grave concerns
expressed by the representative of Japan and others
about the unacceptable nuclear and missile technology
tests conducted by the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea. The United Kingdom unconditionally
condemns those activities and expresses firm solidarity
with Japan and all those in the region that face those
dangerous provocations.

