Mr. Bamba (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Allow me to express my delegation's warmest
congratulations to the President of the Council on his
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of February, and above all on his leadership in
taking the initiative to organize this debate on a topic
of great importance to my country, whose security
situation has obvious subregional dimensions.

That is why I wish to take advantage of this
opportunity to convey the thanks of the people and
Government of C6te d'Ivoire on the election of its
President, Mr. Alassane Ouattara, on 17 February to
head the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), our common subregional organization.
Through that election, the members of that
organization demonstrated once again their support and
encouragement to C6te d'Ivoire in its reconciliation
and reconstruction efforts.

In listing the major challenges facing the
subregion, President Alassane Ouattara explicitly
mentioned the question on the agenda for today's
debate, while setting out his thoughts on the priority
actions to be taken in the areas of strengthening
institutions, democracy, rule of law and good
governance in order to ensure lasting peace and
development in the subregion. In particular, he
highlighted that our subregion faces new threats with
respect to security, including the resurgence of old

conflicts that have weakened entire sections of society
and threatened our defence capabilities. He called for
defining a shared defence policy, for pooling our means
in order to halt the upsurge in terrorism, for
re-establishing control of our coastal areas that are
threatened by marine piracy, and for containing the flow
of arms that aggravate criminality and organized crime.

President Ouattara also stressed that in response
to the security challenges and in order for ECOWAS to
become a true centre of stability and a policy source,
the time is ripe to strengthen strategic partnerships,
especially on military issues and in order to modernize
the Economic Community of West African States
Monitoring Group - the peace forces of ECOWAS. To
follow up, he noted the firm political will of ECOWAS
to combat transnational organized crime, piracy and
terrorism and has taken steps in that direction. In that
context, ECOWAS intends to strengthen its strategic
partnerships to better conduct its actions.

We salute resolution 2033 (2012), adopted by the
Council at the conclusion of the high-level debate
(S/PV.6702) that was organized under the initiative of
the South African presidency of the Council and
presided over by President Jacob Zuma himself. The
resolution enables reactivation of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations and strengthens
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union in particular.

My delegation takes note of the letter from the
Secretary-General in document S/20l2/42, transmitting
the "Report of the assessment mission on the impact of
the Libyan crisis on the Sahel region, 7 to 23 December
2011". It also notes document S/2012/83, containing
the "Annex to the letter dated 8 February 2012 from
the Permanent Representative of Togo to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General: Concept
note on the impact of transnational organized crime on
peace, security and stability in West Africa and the
Sahel region". My delegation naturally supports the
recommendations contained therein.

With regard to the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that the leaders of the United
Nations, the African Union and ECOWAS "move
urgently to lead the efforts to mobilize international
support for the implementation of the
recommendations" (S/2012/42, para. 70), this debate
should be a first significant step in that direction. It
should thus help to strengthen the impetus of the
necessary multilateral partnership in combating
transnational organized crime in West Africa and the
Sahel region.

Furthermore, my delegation fully supports the
assessment in the concept note submitted to us stating
that:

"assistance from the international community that
frames all of these disputes in narrow "security"
terms without also taking steps to address these
broader questions of conflict prevention,
governance and sustainable development will not
provide an effective solution". (S/2012/83, annex, p- 4)

My delegation thus supports the idea of enhancing and
systematizing strategic coordination mechanisms at the
security level, with the establishment of a joint defence
system, to be announced at the upcoming meeting of
Chiefs of Staff of States members of ECOWAS and of
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and countries of the Sahel region, pursuant
to one of the decisions of the fortieth summit of
ECOWAS Heads of State and Government, held on
16 and 17 February.

In addition to the strategic coordination
mechanism to be established at the security level,
similar mechanisms should be implemented in the
12-23593

context of economic and financial issues, as well as
sustainable development. Such an approach would
certainly make it possible to combat poverty and
effectively bolster the fight against insecurity, in
general, and transnational crime, piracy, terrorism, in
particular, since the poverty of populations and the low
representation of national institutions in areas of
difficult access in certain Sahel countries, in particular,
are used by ill-intentioned people and organizations to
destabilize some ECOWAS, ECCAS and Sahel
countries.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that, in
order to overcome all the above-mentioned challenges,
the actions of the international community should be
firmly rooted in the context of establishing strategic
coordination mechanisms involving both States
members of the African Union and States Members of
the United Nations, supported by the expertise of
relevant bodies of the United Nations system and
partner countries.

