Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Gabon would naturally like to associate itself with the
heartfelt words of solidarity and condolence offered by
previous speakers towards the people of Haiti
following the tragedy they have just experienced. The
brotherly people of Haiti should know that we are
shoulder to shoulder with them in these extremely
difficult circumstances. I would also like to offer my
condolences to the Secretary-General on the loss of
United Nations personnel that was caused by this
tragedy.

Mr. President, Gabon welcomes your country's
initiative to hold during its presidency this public
debate devoted to cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security. Although this issue
has been addressed in a number of United Nations
debates, it is still undeniable that its complexity and
the breadth of concerns that it covers mean that we
must continue to reflect on this issue in the light of
recent developments. This debate is thus a further
opportunity for us to have an exchange of views on this
important subject and to take stock of the progress
made.

I welcome the presence among us of the
Secretary-General and of the representatives of
regional organizations, who have come to share their
views on this matter.

We cannot speak of the maintenance of
international peace and security without mentioning
the numerous crises and conflicts in Africa. Africa has
already shown its commitment to turn to African
solutions to African problems. African countries are
deploying their own peacekeeping mission and provide
large numbers of troops to United Nations
peacekeeping missions on the continent.

In many cases and in a variety of areas,
cooperation between the African Union and the United
Nations has yielded significant results. Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, did not fail to mention them in their
statements. The potential for partnership between the
AU and the United Nations is vast. Therefore, it must
be pursued further, so that we can achieve even better
results.

As recognized unanimously during previous
meetings of the Security Council on this subject, Africa
is still facing a shortfall in the financial and logistical
resources that it needs to successfully conduct its
peacekeeping activities. Somalia, for example, is very
worrisome. The difficulty of restoring peace and
stability in that country is due essentially to the
absence of more effective cooperation between the
African Union and the United Nations on the ground.
As we know, the African Union by itself will be unable
to restore stability in Somalia. The deployment of
hybrid forces under United Nations auspices, and
predictable, flexible and sustainable financial
assistance from donor countries to the African Union
are absolutely necessary in order to bring peace to that
country.

The crisis in Somalia clearly shows how
important it is for the international community to
increase its technical, financial and logistical support
to African Union peacekeeping missions. We would
like to welcome the conclusions of the report of the
African Union-United Nations panel of experts chaired
by Mr. Romano Prodi (see S/2008/813). The report
contains important recommendations, including those
pertaining to the financing of African Union-led
peacekeeping missions. My country fully supports the
report's proposals and particularly appreciates the
recommendation to establish a trust fund to finance the
peacekeeping capacities of the African Union. No one
can deny that this fund will give the pan-African
organization the resources it needs to carry out
activities in the areas of conflict prevention and
resolution and peacebuilding.

The maintenance of international peace and
security is at the heart of the political and ideological
mission of the United Nations. Therefore, it is
important that the Security Council take up the
challenge of collective security in partnership with
regional and subregional organizations; only they have
a deep understanding of the underlying causes of
conflicts in their respective regions and the ability to
propose strategies for resolving them. With regard to
Africa, the Year of Peace initiative is an opportunity to
further build on this partnership.

Peace cannot be restored in Africa - or
elsewhere - solely by deploying troops. We must
promote a comprehensive approach to these problems
in order to best develop long-term strategies that will
enable countries to practice the virtues of good
political and economic governance. Here, the
international community should assist our countries in
our search for solutions to our economic problems to
enable us to respond to the aspirations of our people
and to break the cycle of violence and conflict.

As the proposed draft presidential statement takes
into account the views of my country, I cannot fail to
support it or to congratulate you on it, Mr. President.
The draft statement to the press on the situation in
Haiti also has our support.

