Mr. Salame: Allow me to congratulate the Russian
Federation on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month.

I am grateful for the Council's expression of
support on the occasion of the emergency meeting held
on 10 August (see S/PV.8595), the day of the bombing
in Benghazi that killed three United Nations staff
members. I would like to pay tribute to our colleagues
and friends, Clive Peck, Hussein Abdalla Mahmoud
El-Hadar and Seniloli Tabuatausole, whose lives were
cut short by that cowardly attack. Clive and "Tabs",
as Mr. Tabuatausole was known, travelled the world
as United Nations security personnel, enabling the
vital work of peacemaking and delivery of life-saving
humanitarian assistance. Hussein had been with the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) for
nearly six years and was due to be married this month.
As United Nations staff members, their sacrifice for the
benefit of Libya and all Libyans will not be forgotten.

I also want to pay tribute to our two staff members
who are still recovering from serious injuries and the
eight other injured Libyan civilians. In parallel to the
United Nations internal inquiry into the incident, we
are requesting the Libyan authorities to cooperate
with us in the investigation and to swiftly bring to
justice the perpetrators. I would like to call upon
Member States to provide the United Nations with any
information they might have on this horrific attack.
The United Nations will remain in Libya. Of course,
we will work to mitigate further risk to our personnel
and operations. But the tragic irony is that, the worse
the situation on the ground becomes, the greater the
need for our presence, mediation efforts and provision
of humanitarian assistance. The Benghazi hub remains
open, and the limited number of United Nations staff
members continues to operate from there. A longer-
term position concerning the hub will be taken only
once a fuller assessment of the security situation in the
city and associated risks has been made.

Today marks five months to the day since General
Haftar launched his offensive to seize control of Tripoli,
halting an active and promising political process
and returning the country to renewed conflict. Since
4 April, the conflict has spread geographically and has

exacted a heavy toll on civilians and those fighting. To
date, more than 100 civilians have been killed and over
300 injured and 120,000 civilians have been displaced.
There are no confirmed figures on the total number
of fighters who have died so far but, anecdotally, the
figure appears to be in the low thousands. The blood
of yet another generation of young Libyan men is being
spilled on the battlefield, when their skills could be
better used to rebuild their country.

I would like to draw the Council's attention to the
shelling of airports. A disaster was closely averted last
Sunday, when a plane full of pilgrims returning from
Mecca was miraculously not hit by a series ofshells fired
at Mitiga airport. Seven people were injured. I would
ask for the Council's strong support in condemning
such indiscriminate shelling, which threatens the
lives of substantial numbers of civilians. The United
Nations has consistently responded to requests by the
Government of National Accord that we inspect sites
that have been subjected to attacks. We have conducted
multiple visits to Mitiga airport and one to Zuwara
airport and other civilian sites, including the detention
centre in Tajura, which have been subjected to air strikes
or drone attacks or have been hit by various projectiles
since 4 April. Reports from all those visits are shared
with the Panel of Experts and, when necessary, with the
International Criminal Court.

The situation in the southern town of Murzuq
remains grave. More than 100 people have been
killed and many more injured in the fighting between
the Tebu and Ahali communities. That includes the
precision air strikes on 4 August targeting a gathering
of Tebu representatives, in which more than 40 people
were killed. Thousands have been displaced as homes
and businesses have been looted and burned. The local
conflict risks taking on a national dimension as each
party mobilizes national actors behind them. Elders
from outside Murzuq have tried to mediate an end to
the violence but, unfortunately, without success. On
24 and 25 August, following a number of preparatory
meetings, I convened separate sessions with Ahali and
Tebu representatives to discuss ending the violence and
the return of the displaced and to initiate a discussion
on how the roots of grievances could be addressed
to prevent future tensions from again turning into
serious conflicts.

United Nations humanitarian agencies have
delivered assistance to 1,500 families affected by the
violence in Murzuq. Re-establishing local civilian peace
is an integral part of our mission. It is particularly true
in the south, where the events in Murzuq might spill
over to other cities where different tribes and ethnic
groups have lived in peace until recently. Local peace
also needs to be built on stable local authorities. I remain
concerned about the attempts of the unrecognized
eastern Government to assert control over local
municipalities. The efforts of the interim Government
to conduct parallel municipal elections or establish
appointed municipal steering committees, including
in municipalities where elected councils are already
in place, exacerbate local conflict and fragment local
Government structures. That is unfortunate, given that
local Governments are the most resilient institutions
and are expected to play a crucial role in reconciliation,
the delivery of services and reconstruction. Libyans
broadly agree on the need for further decentralization.

Kidnappings and enforced disappearance continue
across the country. I am very disappointed to report that
there has been no news regarding the fate of House of
Representatives member Siham Sergewa since she was
abducted from her home in Benghazi on 17 July. Ireiterate
the call on the authorities in the east to investigate the
enforced disappearance of Ms. Sergewa and make the
findings known. The authorities are responsible for the
safety and security of the people under their territorial
control. They must take all the necessary steps to
determine her whereabouts. The voices of Libya's
elected representatives cannot be allowed to be quashed
through intimidation or enforced disappearance. I
welcome the continued and loud support of the many
Member States demanding Ms. Sergewa's swift return.
I reiterate the absolute need for those found responsible
for violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law to be held accountable
before the competent bodies.

Following my call for the gradual and progressive
closure of all detention centres holding migrants and
refugees, on 1 August the Minister of the Interior
ordered the closure of three of those centres. The
United Nations submitted a contingency plan to the
Government of National Accord on alternative options
to detention. That plan includes release into urban
settings with the provision of assistance, the provision
of necessary health care, access to the labour market
and the identification of durable solutions outside Libya.
Those centres need to be closed through a gradual and
deliberate process in which the relevant United Nations
agencies are provided the necessary means to assist that
vulnerable population.

Despite those calls and Government claims to
have shuttered the Tajura detention centre - which
was the site of the deadly air strike in July - migrants
continue to be sent there. Migrants and refugees
continue to be detained in compounds controlled by
armed groups, thereby placing them in extreme danger.
Nearly 500 of those who escaped the July attack on
the Tajura detention centre spontaneously entered the
gathering and departure facility, which is managed
by the department for combating illegal migration.
With more than 1,000 refugees, the infrastructure in
the gathering and departure facility is overstretched
and the humanitarian situation in the facility is
deteriorating rapidly.

Hundreds of migrants and asylum seekers were
intercepted by the Libyan Coast Guard in recent
weeks. Some are now being freed, while others are
being handed over to detention centres. We know of
at least three cases where the occupants of the boats
were immediately freed when they landed on Libyan
territory. UNSMIL continued to receive reports of the
indefinite arbitrary detention of migrants and refugees,
extortion and beatings, trafficking and inhumane
detention conditions, including severe overcrowding
and shortages of food and water. Urgent funding for
the 2019 humanitarian response plan is necessary to
allow us to continue to respond to the needs of the most
vulnerable in Libya, including migrants.

It is notable that, in response to my 29 July call
for a truce, there was an explicit and positive response
by the Government of National Accord, as well as a
positive, although unilateral and conditioned response,
from General Haftar. As a result of the truce, there was
a substantial reduction in violence along the main fronts
in southern Tripoli and elsewhere. There were certainly
some violations but, broadly speaking, the truce held
for the duration of the Bid Al-Adha festivities.

Despite the subsequent relapse of violence, the
principle has been established that both parties can
commit to a prolonged truce and, without a doubt, the
wide and public support of the international community
played an important role in the lull in the fighting. We
are working to build on the Bid Al-Adha truce through
confidence-building measures to establish a deeper and
more prolonged ceasefire. When such a ceasefire takes
place, it will be necessary that it be sufficiently robust
to enable stability for the benefit of Libyans and the
return to the political process. In that regard, I would
encourage the Council to consider adding a provision
to the Mission's mandate to enable scalable ceasefire
support for whatever form of further truce or cessation
ofhostilities is agreed between the parties. The violence
in Libya is exacerbated by the supply of additional
arms, ammunition and war material into the country.
Violations of the arms embargo have been both
routine and often blatant on the part of both of the main
parties to the conflict and their respective sponsor
member States. The Panel of Experts is reportedly
investigating more than 40 cases of varying magnitude,
despite non-cooperation on the part of most of the
perpetrator member States. It is sadly true to say that
the arms embargo has been ineffective since 4 April
and that there have been no interdictions or searches
conducted at sea, despite such activities being authorized
by resolution 2473 (2019). The reported recent arrival
of thousands of mercenaries into the country threatens
the further extension and escalation of the conflict.

We continue to mobilize national and international
support for a further cessation ofhostilities and renewed
dialogue. After a long tour in the eastern part of the
country, my political deputy recently visited Misrata as
part of our engagement with communities across Libya.
As combat fatigue has become more prevalent on the
ground, we are working to build confidence between
the parties.

Despite the bellicose rhetoric and strong
polarization in the country, there is popular support
for an end to the violence, including among the actual
fighters. In fact, fighters are sometimes more sensitive
to the idea of ending the conflict than some politicians.
Confidence-building measures among the different
groups engaged in the conflict include the exchange of
prisoners, exchanges of mortal remains, family visits to
prisoners and, in some cases, phone calls to establish
proof of life.

In parallel, I have started an intensive campaign
with international stakeholders in order to reach
consensus on holding an international meeting of
concerned parties that would contribute - through
an unequivocal message - to ending the conflict and
resuming the political process. To support that goal,
I visited Germany, Malta, the United Arab Emirates,
Turkey and Tunisia. Two days ago, I had lengthy and
constructive discussions with leading officials in Cairo.
I intend to continue my tour in the days ahead, starting
with the Arab Maghreb.

I am particularly grateful for the strong message
delivered by the Group of Seven major Powers calling
for an international conference bringing together all
the stakeholders and regional actors relevant to the
conflict in Libya, as well as for the recognition that
only a political solution can ensure Libya's stability. It
remains abundantly clear that, without the commitment
of key external actors engaged in Libya, the conflict
will continue.

The international conference is the second
step in my three-point initiative. We would like the
international community to use that meeting to send a
strong message on the need to respect the arms embargo,
to commit to non-interference in Libyan affairs, to
address the main causes of conflict, as formulated by
the Libyans themselves, and to emphasize its clear
and active support for whatever political formula
the Libyans agree to. An international meeting, with
the active support of our partners from the regional
organizations concerned, therefore remains a sine
qua non to gain the commitment of the main external
stakeholders necessary to ending the conflict and
resuming a Libyan-owned political process.

Many Libyans feel abandoned by part of the
international community and exploited by others.
Without the unequivocal support of the Council and the
broader international community for an immediate end
to the Libyan conflict, I believe that we are faced with
two highly unpalatable scenarios.

One scenario is a persistent and protracted low-
intensity conflict that will see continued fratricide
among the Libyans, the immiseration of the
population, the exposure of the vulnerable migrant
and refugee community to further depredations,
the further destruction of the country's already-
battered infrastructure and a growing transnational
terrorist threat.

An equally unsatisfactory scenario is a doubling
down of military support for one side or the other by
their external patrons, resulting in a sharp escalation
that will assuredly plunge the entire region into chaos.
The idea that war should be given a chance and that
a military solution is at all possible is quite simply a
chimera. I believe that the Council is capable of more,
and I also believe that the Libyans deserve better.

