Mr. Holmes: Thank you for this opportunity to
address the Council. I was in Afghanistan for four days
at the end of June to assess the humanitarian situation,
given the growing concerns about the severity of
humanitarian and protection of civilians issues. I
visited Nangarhar and Kunar Provinces in the east, as
well as Kabul, and held discussions with the Afghan
Government at the national and provincial levels, and
with United Nations representatives, international
military force commanders, Member States and
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and others
from the humanitarian community. I also met with
many Afghans who spoke compellingly about the
problems they face in their daily lives.

It is clear that humanitarian needs are indeed
serious and growing. I would single out four areas.
First, food insecurity, fuelled primarily by drought and
compounded by the dramatic rise in global food prices,
is hurting Afghans badly and is a major concern to the
Government and the humanitarian community. Wheat
prices across the country rose by 58 per cent in 2007
and by another 30 to 50 per cent in the first four
months of 2008. Afghanistan, a country with 42 per
cent of its citizens living below the poverty line, is
particularly vulnerable to rises in the price of the staple
wheat flour.

The Government of Afghanistan and the
humanitarian community responded quickly to
deteriorating food security in January by issuing an

initial appeal for $81 million. That has been almost
fully funded and is enabling us to reach about 2.5
million people with immediate assistance. But it is far
from enough. As Special Representative Kai Eide has
just said, a second joint appeal for just over $400
million has therefore been launched today in Kabul,
with a focus both on further immediate food, nutrition
and health assistance and on agricultural inputs. Initial
figures from pre-harvest assessments suggest that the
food gap may grow from 500,000 tons of grain this
year to 2 million tons next year - in other words one
third of the country's annual requirement. I hope
donors will respond quickly and generously to that
appeal too.

Secondly, the plight of millions of returnees from
neighbouring countries remains a major concern. Since
2002, 4.8 million Afghans - representing one sixth of
the population - have returned home. Over 140,000
have returned so far this year. However, the country's
capacity to absorb those returnees is limited, and there
are still 2.3 million registered Afghan refugees in
Pakistan and another 950,000 in Iran, plus economic
migrants who are not registered. Lack of land and jobs,
as well as insecurity, prevent many returnees from
settling in their original communities. Resolution 1806
(2008) calls for enhanced international cooperation in
ensuring voluntary and orderly return, and I hope we
can see a specific effort in the region to respond to
that.

In Nangarhar Province in the east, I visited
Tangi 2, a temporary settlement of 369 families who
had returned earlier this year from a camp in Pakistan
that has now closed. Those families were living in
makeshift shelters, with no agricultural land, limited
access to basic services and very few livelihood
opportunities. They were completely dependent on
outside assistance, with water, for example, sent by
truck every day. The United Nations agencies,
particularly the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, and the NGOs are doing
their best, but the longer-term prospects for those
people are uncertain, at best.

Meanwhile, many others are internally displaced.
One estimated figure is 150,000, most of whom are in
the south of the country. That includes long-term
displaced affected by conflict, drought and lack of
economic opportunities and others temporarily
displaced by recent fighting. Many of the displaced are
in areas that are hard to access owing to continued
fighting, making it virtually impossible to collect
reliable data.

Thirdly, the conflict is placing increasing
pressure on civilians. During the first five months of
2008, a total of 698 civilian deaths were reported by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), compared to 430 in the same period last
year. The vast majority of those casualties were in the
south. Of those 698 deaths, 422 were attributed to anti-
Government elements, with 255 attributed to national
and international pro-Government forces. Another 21
deaths were unattributable. The share of the casualties
attributed to national and international pro-Government
military forces has decreased from 2007 to 2008, and
significant efforts are clearly being made to reduce
those accidental deaths. However, since the fighting
itself has intensified, the overall numbers of casualties
caused by all parties to the conflict have also
increased. The latest reports of civilian casualties
caused by air and missile strikes last weekend can only
add to the concern. I particularly regretted the news
that three International Medical Corps staff members
were killed and one, along with a number of villagers,
severely injured in an airstrike in Nuristan that
reportedly hit a bus last Friday.

Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, also highlighted
during her own visit to Afghanistan in June the terrible
consequences of the fighting for children, too often
among the casualties, and now being recruited into
anti-Government fighting forces in increasing numbers.
Two hundred and twenty-eight schools were attacked
with 75 deaths and 111 injured in 2007. In 2008, a
further 83 schools have already been attacked.

I heard first-hand accounts from tribal elders of
how all that has been affecting communities in Kunar
and Nangarhar, trapped between the warring parties.
They shared their frustration over civilian casualties,
frequent house searches by national and international
forces, based on what they often saw as poor
intelligence and the lack of a clear mechanism for
seeking redress where appropriate.

Fourthly, Afghanistan is highly prone to natural
disasters, notably floods, earthquakes and droughts.
Given the current vulnerability of its people, a major
natural disaster could have disproportionately
catastrophic effects. Meanwhile, we have struggled
even to deal with events like the exceptionally harsh
winter this year.

Faced with the increasing humanitarian needs, the
humanitarian community is finding it progressively
harder to respond because of insecurity and lack of
access. The United Nations Department of Safety and
Security has tracked more security incidents in May
2008 than at any time since the Taliban were expelled
in 2001. As of late June, for example, there had been
137 serious attacks on humanitarian organizations,
seven humanitarian workers killed and 88 staff
abducted this year. The World Food Programme has
already had 13 armed attacks against its convoys this
year alone. Such attacks hurt only the poorest of the
Afghan people and are unacceptable, whatever the
political or military objectives of those concerned.

All humanitarian actors in Afghanistan expressed
great concern to me about the blurred lines between
military and humanitarian activities. Many Provincial
Reconstruction Teams (PRTs) are doing valuable work,
such as constructing and repairing roads and bridges.
However, when PRTs engage in what they themselves
label "humanitarian assistance", that can increase the
risks faced by civilian humanitarian personnel, who are
working to provide humanitarian assistance in a needs-
based and impartial way.

I believe strongly that PRTs should only provide
relief as a last resort in cases where insecurity prevents
civilian humanitarian actors from doing so. It is also
preferable that donors, where possible, channel their
humanitarian funds through mandated United Nations
agencies and NGOs, not through PRTs, to create a
more virtuous circle. United Nations agencies and
NGOs have hitherto had insufficient security, funding
and capacity on the ground to act in some areas,
leaving serious gaps that the PRTs understandably have
sought to fill.

I believe we must do much more to improve the
humanitarian response. First, we need to support
humanitarian actors in increasing significantly their
capacity and in mobilizing additional resources for that
purpose. We will work with all partners, notably the
Government, to put in place a new humanitarian action
plan to that end. We must also build further the
Government's own capacity, particularly in disaster
risk reduction and disaster management and in
internally displaced persons and returnee management.
Secondly, we must do more to improve the
protection of civilians. It may seem there is little we
can do about the actions of the anti-Government
elements, who show little or no regard for civilians and
contempt for international humanitarian law and the
principles of distinction and proportionality, as the
latest bloody attack on the Indian Embassy in Kabul
showed. Nevertheless, any influence that can be
brought to bear would help. The anti-Government
groups must not be allowed to believe that they can kill
civilians with impunity. In any case, I believe the
United Nations, international forces and the Afghan
Government need to work together in a renewed effort
to reduce the impact of the conflict on civilians. There
should certainly be scope for reducing further
accidental civilian casualties and other problems
resulting from the actions of pro-Government military
forces and for making their actions more transparent
and capable of being accounted for. Civilians need to
know clearly where to go for redress. I would also urge
a further effort to ensure that international military
presences are located as far away as possible from
civilian-populated areas.

Thirdly, we need to find ways to distinguish
better between military and political activities, on the
one hand, and humanitarian action, on the other. No
matter how difficult, it is important to find
opportunities to expand humanitarian space, increase
access and reduce the likelihood of attacks on
humanitarian actors. This approach could include a
range of options from days or zones of tranquillity, in
order to conduct vital vaccination campaigns against
polio or other diseases, to more lasting access
agreements in areas of conflict. Arrangements of this
kind have been possible in other complex emergencies,
and could be possible in Afghanistan, too.

The situation in Afghanistan requires a closely
coordinated approach and close partnership between
the Afghan Government and the international
community. Humanitarian efforts need to find their
proper place in this situation. I hope this Council will
support efforts to find new ways to improve our
humanitarian response, while the work of stabilizing
and rebuilding Afghanistan continues.

