Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to warmly
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December. I would
also like to commend you for taking the initiative to
organize this open debate on United Nations-African
Union partnership in peace operations. It is indeed a
very important and strategic partnership, which has
evolved over time in response to the challenges facing
Africa in the area of peace and security.

I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and African Union High Representative for
Mali and the Sahel Pierre Buyoya for their insightful
briefings.

We cannot find words to adequately convey the
indignation we feel over the horrendous terrorist act
carried out in Pakistan today. We condemn it very
strongly.

The changing global security landscape after the
end of the Cold War and the growing importance of
regional and subregional organizations as critical
players in peace and security have made it all the more
imperative for the United Nations to strengthen its
cooperation with those organizations. Certainly, that
will require greater appreciation of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. In that regard, we note
the primary role of the United Nations and recognize
the role of regional and subregional organizations as
first responders to crisis situations in their respective
regions. We are pleased to note that the close cooperation
and consultation between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) in the promotion and maintenance
of peace and security in Africa has been not only
strengthened but institutionalized in recent years.

Let me take the opportunity to express
my appreciation to the Secretary-General for
demonstrating his firm commitment to enhancing the
strategic partnerships between the United Nations and
the African Union and its regional mechanisms in the
advancement of peace and security in Africa.

In the area of peacekeeping,in particular, the
United Nations and the African Union have established
various cooperation arrangements to address conflict
situations. There is indeed growing recognition that
new and emerging challenges confronting Africa
cannot be addressed through the prism of traditional
peacekeeping doctrine alone. Today, the challenges
confronting our peacekeepers, 70 per cent of whom are
deployed in Africa, include fighting terrorists in Somalia
and Mali, combating negative forces in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, protecting civilians in the face
of institutional collapse in the Central African Republic
and South Sudan and assisting communities to continue
to coexist in harmony in Abyei.

Those are but a few examples that illustrate that
peacekeepers are expected to shoulder responsibilities
well beyond the traditional mandates of peacekeeping
operations. The evolving situation therefore dictates
the adoption of innovative and flexible approaches by
the United Nations and the African Union based on
the principles of complementarity and comparative
advantages in the overall context of the United
Nations collective security framework. The African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the African Union Mission in Somalia, supported by
the United Nations logistical package, the Intervention
Brigade in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the protection force in South Sudan could be cited as
examples in that regard. Building on those and other
experiences is absolutely critical for strengthening
United Nations-AU cooperation at the strategic
and operational levels. We hope that the High-level
Independent Panel to Review Peacekeeping Operations,
which will review peacekeeping in all its aspects, will
reflect upon that issue seriously.

Over the years, the African Union and its various
regional mechanisms have demonstrated their political
commitment and readiness to respond immediately
to crisis situations, if and when they arise. However,
challenges abound, particularly with respect to adequate
financial and logistical support for peace operations. It
is certain that the issue carries serious implications for
African-led peace operations with respect to the full
and effective discharge of their mandates. It is time
to find a lasting solution to that critical issue, which
now enjoys only ad hoc arrangements. It is perhaps
time for the United Nations to scale up support to the
AU by providing comprehensive and multidimensional
support to United Nations peace operations, in line
with its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Finally, while we are pleased with the significant
progress made thus far in the cooperation between the
United Nations and the AU in the area of peacekeeping,
we are nonetheless of the view that much is still needed
in the light of both the complex challenges we all
face and the opportunities available for even greater
cooperation in support of regional and global peace and
security. It requires further enhancing of the strategic
partnership between the two organizations in order to
meet the challenges of today.

Ethiopia has been a major contributor to both
United Nations-led and AU-led peace operations.
Today, close to 12,000 Ethiopian peacekeepers are
deployed in Somalia, Darfur, Abyei and South Sudan
under the United Nations and AU umbrella.

I wish to conclude my remarks by reaffirming our
full commitment to much more expanded and effective
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU for
regional and international peace and security.

