Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I would first like to
thank Judge Meron, Judge Mase and Prosecutors Del
Ponte and Jallow for the very impressive and
comprehensive briefing they have given us.

Please allow me to make one remark and to ask
two questions. The remark pertains to the broader
picture of the juridical institutions that we now have in
the international field. There are now various types of
institutions in the field of criminal justice. First, we have
the ad hoc tribunals, such as the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).

Secondly, we have mixed tribunals, such as in
Sierra Leone and possibly soon in Cambodia. Thirdly,
we have national courts or chambers that receive
international assistance, such as has been proposed for
Bosnia, and finally, of course, we have the
International Criminal Court (ICC).

The ad hoc tribunals have been important
precedents and they were the only reasonable choice at
the time they were created. Now, we are faced with a
dilemma. It is not quite clear whether the tribunals will
be able to finish their work within the timeframe set by
the completion strategies. At the same time, we are
increasingly aware that these tribunals are
tremendously costly. The operation of the ICTY will
soon have reached an expenditure of one billion dollars
for trying a limited number of people.

What does this mean? Of course, we must stick to
the ad hoc tribunals and make sure that the completion
strategies are adhered to as much as possible. This
might mean that we need, first, more ad litem judges,
secondly, more flexibility in using the ad litem judges,
and thirdly, increased pressure for cooperation with the
court. We feel it is a scandal that Mladic, Karadzic and
Gotovina are still at large.

Let us also look at the broader picture, now that
we have various options at hand. We should promote
the devolution of cases to national justice whenever
there are sufficient guarantees for judicial standards
and fairness of trial, and the Council should take up the
proposal we recently made here. This proposal contains
four elements. First, the Council should take a realistic
look at the various international and national judiciaries.

Secondly, the Council should encourage the
various actors of international justice to cross-fertilize
and to exchange information, expertise and personnel.
Thirdly, the Council should set up an expert group to
examine the performance of the various actors, which
would also serve to check their comparative advantages.
Fourthly, the Council should take into account in its
future plans that we can now include the ICC.

For example, if Mr. Mladic is arrested only in
2007, that is one year before the supposed end of the
ICTY trials, why would we extend the ICTY with all
the costs involved, provided we could refer the case to
the ICC for less than half the cost?

After these general remarks, I would like to
address two questions to today's speakers. The
establishment of a special War Crimes Chamber within
the Bosnian State Court will contribute towards
decongesting the agenda of the ICTY, which is
important in the interests of compliance with the
completion strategy. This strategy is important, also, in
other instances.

My first question, to President Meron and
Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte, concerns the prospects for
a comparable process in Croatia and in Serbia and
Montenegro to devolve cases from the ICTY to
specialized national courts in those countries. My
second question goes to President Mase and Prosecutor
Jallow. According to the report, 40 Rwandese cases
have been handed over by the ICTR Prosecutor to
Rwandese judicial authorities. Beyond that, can they
imagine an even broader process of devolving cases
from the ICTR to national Rwandese courts?

