Mr. Akbaruddin (India): Sitting here listening
to the speakers makes me realize the validity of a
dictum that I heard many years ago. It is that each
generation tends to confront the challenges of the next
generation, using the tools of the preceding generation,
without even knowing it. Today's debate appears to be
one such instance. The topic refers to the complexity
of contemporary challenges to international peace
and security. It is useful to remind ourselves of the
need to focus on the terms "contemporaneity" and
"complexity".

Seven decades ago - to paraphrase the
unforgettable depiction of the poet W. H. Auden - the
world was emerging from the low, dishonest decades
of depression, tyranny, war and genocide. Those years
of catastrophe were on account of the then-leading
Powers fighting over territories and resources globally.
The threat to international peace and security at that
time came from those competing Powers jostling for
geostrategic supremacy. The primary concern in terms
of peace and security at that time was to prevent a
recurrence of a major war by maintaining geostrategic
balance among the major Powers.

The challenges that are increasingly being
mentioned in the discourse of this Chamber these
days as areas of concern for international peace and
security are different. The emphasis, as we have heard,
is on challenges such as climate change, pandemics,
famines, natural disasters, humanitarian crises and
cybersecurity. That is surely a different agenda from
the one of seventy years ago. Moreover, the power
balance that existed seventy years ago has changed
quite significantly.

Once we recognize the complexity of our times and
how they have changed, it is not difficult to understand
why the structures designed for vastly different times
tend to be ineffective in dealing with the challenges that
are being outlined here. In short, our responses require
a basic reordering of our perspectives.

Such challenges are not new to humankind; humans
have faced them since time immemorial. However,
it is acknowledged that their impact is sometimes
much wider in modern times in an interdependent
world. Technological changes are creating economic,
ecological, political and social globalization that
requires cooperative responses. Disruptions anywhere
tend to impact aspects of contemporary life elsewhere.
The complexity of issues on the global agenda today
is perhaps unique to our times. That has added to the
challenges in the delivery of global public goods. When
global public goods are underproduced and fail to be
delivered, everybody suffers.

At the same time, it is also obvious that some States
are better able and equipped to handle complex threats.
Those who are more vulnerable to such occurrences
lack the basic resilience required. Often it becomes
an issue of the level of economic development and the
availability of financial and other resources.

The disparity in the economic development of
countries cannotbe seen in isolation from an increasingly
globalized scenario that links markets for commodities,
labour and finished products, manufacturing supply
chains, services and financial markets. That points
us to the distortions in the way global governance for
trade, investment and human mobility functions today.

Those are all issues that cannot be addressed
merely by securitization of transnational challenges.
Most of the interlinked issues that are now understood
to be important point to the fundamental need to
ensure that sustainable development is available to all
and to reduce gross disparities. Such issues are rightly
discussed outside the Council by the wider membership
of the United Nations at various levels, not merely in
this Chamber and not only under its rubric of peace
and security.

In this Chamber, we would do well to address
the complexities of the peace and security scenario,
such as those arising from the globalization of terror
networks. Those networks operate across borders with
their hateful ideologies, some of which are based on
deep-rooted perceived grievances. They raise finances,
procure arms and recruit operatives. That is a common
challenge that requires greater focus by the Council,
one in which close nternational cooperation needs to be,
can be and should be expanded for our common interest.

It appears that that common threat to States and
societies is not clearly understood here. Even on
counter-terrorism, cooperation continues to elude this
Council. It is noticed that on an issue as serious as the
designation of terrorist individuals and entities, the
Council-mandated sanctions committees fail to make
concrete progress and in some cases fall victim to
narrow political and strategic concerns. In other cases,
when sanctions committees have designated terrorists,
there are States that mainstream United Nations-
designated terrorist individuals into their political
processes in total disregard of international law, thus
jeopardizing our common security.

The reasons for the lack of success of international
structures designed seven decades ago in dealing with
the complex challenges of today are self-evident. A
non-representative Council, designed many years ago
to maintain the balance of power among competing
rivals, is simply not equipped to handle the challenges
that have changed beyond recognition in the intervening
decades. An instrument that is no longer considered
legitimate and has lost its credibility cannot be our hope
for salvation. New realities cannot be addressed by old
paradigms. To tackle contemporary challenges, we
need to move beyond old moulds. Until then, "speech
acts" like today's debate will remain just speeches, and
will have little impact on the billions of "we the people"
who are striving to live peacefully in a safe and secure
manner well beyond this Chamber.

