Mr. Al Harthy (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): As we
are approaching the end of the month, I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on successfully
presiding over the Security Council during August and
on the activities organized, including this debate.
I would like to associate myself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Turkey on behalf of
the Group of Friends on Mediation, of which Oman is
a member.

We support the efforts of Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres to enhance the concept of sustainable
peace and to establish the High-level Advisory Board
on Mediation, comprised of high-profile persons with
distinguished expertise.

The use of mediation, diplomacy and political
means in resolving disputes at the international level
is a key principle in the work of the United Nations,
including the work of the Council. That is the original
means of taking action; it is the normal course to be
taken by humankind, designed to resolve disagreements
through dialogue and reaching understanding.

Several prerequisites are necessary for any
mediation so succeed. They include, credibility,
sustainability and impartiality towards all disputing
parties. Each party should have its minimum demands
and aspirations met.

In the Sultanate of Oman, we strongly believe that

dialogue is the best means to resolve any dispute. This is
a fundamental principle in Oman's foreign policy. Upon
the directives of His Majesty Sultan Qaboos Bin Said,
the Sultanate has assumed its regional and international
role guided by that lofty principle. The Sultanate is
willing and ready to continue playing this positive role
to help resolve the issues particularly in our region, in
collaboration with international organizations and the
parties concerned.

The world - and our region in particular - faces
many challenges and wars. The peoples of the region
are paying the price, at the expense of their security,
stability and development. Therefore today, more than
ever before, we need to advance mediation, peaceful
settlements and diplomacy to avoid further loss
and destruction.

In conclusion, we hope that the role of the United
Nations - including that of the Security Council and
the Secretary-General, as well as all peace-loving
countries - will be strengthened in order to synergize
efforts for the success of mediation all over the world so
that international peace and security prevail.

