Mrs. PejanovieDurisic' (Montenegro): At the outset,
let me thank the Polish presidency for having organized
an open debate on this important issue of children
and armed conflict. I would also like to thank today's
briefers for their valuable presentations and essential
work in protecting children in conflict situations.

Although Montenegro fully aligns itself with
the statement made by the observer of the European
Union, I would like to make some remarks in my
national capacity.

Once again the latest report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict (S/2019/509)
has shown that millions of children are caught up in
conflicts in which they are not merely bystanders
but constitute an alarming percentage of the overall
number of the casualties of war. Children continue
to face an unacceptable risk of recruitment and use,
killing and maiming, all forms of sexual violence and
abduction, and they continue to suffer as the result
of attacks on schools and hospitals and the denial of
humanitarian access.

The annual report highlights the devastating impact
of new conflict dynamics and operational tactics,
combined with widespread disregard for international
law, on children, in 2018. There were more than 24,000
verified grave violations that year, the highest number
of verified cases of the killing and maiming of children
since the establishment of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. We condemn in the strongest terms the
continued violations against children and urge all
parties to conflict to respect international humanitarian
law and related laws and practices, refrain from
attacking schools and hospitals, and protect those most
vulnerable, particularly children.

Despite the increasing level of grave violations
committed against children, certain improvements in
the situation of children affected by armed conflict
have been made in the past year. We have witnessed
the tireless efforts of the relevant stakeholders,
particularly United Nations staff and civil-society
partners, including child-protection advisers, to ensure
the release and support the integration of more than
10,000 children. We strongly support these efforts, as
the prevention of violence against children, the release
of child soldiers and their reintegration represent
crucial elements in ensuring children's well-being and
the prevention of future conflicts. In that regard, we
welcome the establishment of the Global Coalition for
the Reintegration of Former Child Soldiers.

This year we will mark the thirtieth anniversary of
the entry into force of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and next year the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of its two Optional Protocols, on the sale of
children, child prostitution and child pornography and
on the involvement of children in armed conflict. It is
a crucial time to centre our efforts around ensuring the
universal ratification of those instruments, particularly
the Optional Protocol on the involvement of children
in armed conflict. Therefore, we encourage States to
strengthen the legal foundation on children and armed
conflict by ratifying the Optional Protocol.

Apart from ratifying treaties that lay the foundation
for the safeguard of children's rights and their protection
from all forms of violence, Montenegro is one of the

pathfinding countries of the Global Partnership to End
Violence against Children. In addition, we endorsed the
Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with
Armed Forces or Armed Groups, as well as the Safe
Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and
Use of Child Soldiers. As peace operations plays crucial
role in sustaining peace and preventing human rights
violations, in particular against children, international
child protection provisions, including the prevention
of the recruitment and use of child soldiers, as well as
child protection capacities, should be incorporated in
peacekeeping mandates.

Conflict escalations also cause significant
disruptions to children's education and health care, as
education and health-care facilities are often partially
or completely destroyed. We believe it is crucial
to ensure that children continue to have access to
education, which is an indispensable aspect ofchildren's
socialization and reintegration. Child protection issues
should feature in the overall peace process, while the
perpetrators of violations against children must be
held accountable. In that regard, we encourage further
national and international efforts in bringing the culture
of impunity to an end.

As we mark the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1882 (2009), we must redouble our efforts
at all levels in order to effectively protect children from
violence, abuse and exploitation and ensure that their
human rights are well respected. Only by doing so will
we ensure the well-being of entire generations, thereby
building stable and peaceful societies for the future.

