Mr. Osman (Somalia): First, I want to welcome
the adoption of resolution 2372 (2017), renewing the
mandate of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). I would also like to thank the United
Kingdom, as the penholder, for negotiating and drafting
the resolution.

I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to speak
before the Council today. I am honoured to address
those present on behalf of the Federal Government
of Somalia. I also congratulate you on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. I would also like to take the opportunity to
commend the Permanent Representative of China for
his leadership in guiding the work of the Council for
the month of July.

As the Council has renewed the mandate of
AMISOM. today, I would like to express my gratitude
to AMISOM. troop-contributing countries for their
enormous contribution during the past 10 years in
Somalia. Their deployment has created the space for
political progress, for humanitarian relief efforts and for
Somalia's political and State institutions to grow. There
is no doubt that without their support and sacrifices,
we would not have accomplished what we did in such a
short period of time.
But we are now entering a new phase of transition.
President Mohamed Farmajo is committed to Somalia's
security forces, assuming responsibility for security in
due course and gradually taking over tasks and posts
from AMISOM. He sets out a clear vision for security
based on mutual accountability, hand in hand with our
partners, at the London Somalia Conference in May
this year.

Partnership will be key to a successful transition.
Somalia will need the continued partnership of the
troop- and police-contributing countries of AMISOM,
as well as the partnership and support of donors to help
us implement the Somali national security architecture
in order to build a professional and inclusive security
sector capable of providing security for Somalis to
go about their everyday lives free from the threat of
Al-Shabaab, while providing the country with secure
borders and coastline.

Even though the continued presence of AMISOM
will be necessary to ensure that the progress and
gains of the past 10 years are not reversed, the agreed
transition from AMISOM. to the Somali security forces
should be condition-based, with clear targets dates
linked to the security sector reform milestones outlined
in the Somali national security architecture, which was
endorsed by the National Security Council on 8 May.
It is critical that the transition be undertaken in a
cautious manner, with sustained predictable funding
to AMISOM, since a too early withdrawal based on
artificial and unrealistic deadlines mightjeopardize the
security gains achieved by AMISOM. and the Somali
security forces and send the wrong signal to our enemy,
Al-Shabaab.

The Federal Government of Somalia's leadership is
committed to putting in place the following principles:
the implementation of effective coordination and
cooperation among the military, police, intelligence
agencies and civil administration; the development of
an integrated intelligence network; the use of small and
specially trained forces for precision strikes; and the
continuation of the development of counter-insurgency.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the Security
Council for its unwavering support for Somalia's
progress. The vision of the Somali Government is to
have a Somalia that has fully recovered from being a
failed State and reached lasting peace. To ensure the

realization ofsuch a vision, we are working assiduously
to provide security andjustice, while preserving human
rights, rule of law and good governance. We look
forward to the new chapter of transition in the lead-up
to holding a free and fair election system that is based
on one person-one vote in 2021.

The meeting mse at 10.25 am.
