Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to express its appreciation to you, Mr.
President, for convening this open debate in response
to the renewed violence in the Middle East and the
accelerated construction by Israel of settlements and
the separation wall in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. We align
ourselves with the statement that will be delivered by
the representative of Malaysia on behalf of the Non-
Aligned Movement.

It is now more than a year since the Security
Council last held an open debate on the situation in the
Middle East. During that period new possibilities for
the resumption of the peace process were brought
about by factors such as Israel's decision to withdraw
from Gaza and parts of the northern West Bank and the
reforms initiated by the new Palestinian leadership. For
the first time in many years, the level of violence had
begun to decrease significantly, offering moderate
Israelis and Palestinians an opportunity to seize the
initiative back from the extremists on both sides.

Tragically, as we meet today, there are clear signs
that the parties and the international community are not
taking full advantage of the opportunity for peace. The
resumption of terrorist attacks, military incursions,
extrajudicial executions and acts of defiance directed
against both the Israeli and the Palestinian authorities
suggest that recent gains could be rapidly reversed.
Unless urgent action is taken in support of the peace
process, there is a real danger that the Middle East
could once again descend into anarchy.

A year has passed since the International Court of
Justice definitively ended the debate on the legality of
the Israeli separation wall, forever debunking the myth
that the wall is a necessary and legitimate part of the
defence against terrorism. The international community
endorsed the Court's finding that the wall and its
associated regime are unlawful and that Israel, the
occupying Power, has the obligation to dismantle the
wall, cease further construction activities and make
restitution and reparation for the damage brought about
by the wall's construction. We also acknowledged the
Court's finding that all Member States - and in
particular the High Contracting Parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention - have a clear responsibility to
ensure that the Geneva Conventions and international
law are upheld. Finally, we mandated the Secretary-
General to set up a register of damage brought about
by the construction of the wall. We were guided in
those actions by our recognition that the United
Nations has a permanent responsibility with regard to
the question of Palestine until that question is resolved
in its entirety on the basis of the Charter, relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, international law and
international humanitarian law.

Today, we note with grave concern that Israel has
once again chosen to disregard the will of the
international community and to continue actions that
are both in contravention of international law and
incompatible with the realization of a two-State
solution to the Middle East crisis. During the past year,
Israel pressed ahead with the construction of the wall
and settlements, despite the fact that the security
situation had dramatically improved. At the same time,
the Palestinian Authority, under its new democratically
elected and internationally supported leadership, has
redoubled its efforts to bring about reforms. Israel's
actions therefore clearly contradict its statement that
the wall is a temporary measure necessitated by
security considerations.

In fact, on 10 July 2005 the Israeli Cabinet
approved yet another extension to the wall, this time
around East Jerusalem. When this latest phase of
construction is complete, a further 55,000 Palestinians
will be cut off from their relatives and from hospitals,
schools, shops and places of worship. According to
Israel's Minister for Jerusalem, this project would help
ensure a Jewish majority in Jerusalem.

The inaction by the international community and
the United Nations on the separation wall and on
settlements over the past year has had the effect of
allowing Israel to solidify its occupation of East
Jerusalem and the rest of the West Bank, further
altering the demographic facts on the ground. The
construction of settlements and the wall and its
associated regime has had a grave impact on the
economic and social conditions of the Palestinian
people, resulting in the violation of their most basic
human rights and exacerbating the humanitarian crisis.
Also, our collective failure to provide the Palestinian
Authority with adequate assistance to enable it to exert
its authority and to establish law and order in the
occupied territories has only strengthened the hand of
extremists, who feed off the anger of a people living
under military occupation. At the same time, the South
African Government strongly condemns all acts of
terror and violence directed against civilians, such as
suicide bombings.

We believe that the time has come to empower
the moderates on both sides through our active support.
We should also agree that the ongoing construction of
settlements and the separation wall, and the associated
destruction of Palestinian livelihoods, must not be
allowed to continue. Those settlement activities
threaten to negate any positive aspects arising from the
disengagement process. We therefore reiterate the call
for strict compliance with the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice and for the immediate
and full implementation of the Secretary-General's
mandate to establish a registry of damages caused by
construction of the wall.

We cannot allow the current situation - where
one party enjoys more basic rights and freedoms than
the other - to continue. There should be equality and
protection before the law, and the parties should also
respect resolutions of the United Nations and honour
their commitments under international agreements. In
particular, both sides have a duty to bring an end to all
senseless acts of terrorism and violence directed
against civilians and to work towards reconciliation
and peace.

