Mr. Hague (United Kingdom): The chemical
weapons attack of 21 August in Syria was horrific in
its nature and its scale, and the Secretary-General has
rightly described it as a war crime. So it is welcome
that the Security Council has recognized the appalling
nature of that act and has come together to agree a
serious and far-reaching response. We have done so
today in adopting the first Security Council resolution
(resolution 2118 (2013)) on Syria in 17 months, and I
pay particular tribute to my colleagues Secretary Kerry
and Foreign Minister Lavrov for all the work they have
done to make that possible.

This is a groundbreaking resolution. First, it
recognizes that any use of chemical weapons is a threat
to international peace and security. This establishes an
important international norm that is essential in the wake
of the Syrian regime's appalling actions on 21 August.
It upholds the principle of accountability for that proven
use of chemical weapons. It imposes legally binding and
enforceable obligations on the Syrian regime to comply
with the decision adopted earlier this evening by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). It makes clear that the Council shall impose
measures under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations if there is non-compliance, and it endorses the
Geneva communique of June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex).

We should be in no doubt about the challenges
ahead in implementing the resolution, but, if properly
implemented - and the Council must ensure that it
is - it will prevent a repeat of the atrocities committed
on 21 August or any other use of chemical weapons in
Syria. The United Kingdom will play its full part in
this. I can announce that the United Kingdom is making
an initial contribution of $3 million to the OPCW Syria
Trust Fund. I echo the OPCW Executive Council's call
today that all States in a position to do so should provide
voluntary contributions and expertise to achieve what
will be a challenging but vital task.

Let us not forget that Council action today has come
only after two and a half years of unchecked brutality
and well over 100,000 dead and millions displaced. The
failure of the Council to tackle the crimes committed
on a daily basis has resulted in a culture of impunity in
which a brutal regime believed it could get away with
murdering its own men, women and children.

So it is vital that the Council now build on the
consensus we have reached today to make progress
towards a sustainable resolution of the crisis. With
renewed purpose and resolve, we need to achieve a
political transition, and that is why I welcome the fact
that, as the Secretary-General said earlier, we have
agreed among the permanent members of the Security
Council to aim for a mid-November date for the start of
"Geneva II". That will be a difficult process involving
tough choices and compromises but, crucially, we are
all committed to making our best collective effort to
make it work. The goal is something on which we all
agree - a negotiated transition in Syria, starting with
the formation of a transitional governing body with
full executive powers formed on the basis of mutual
consent.

But no political process can deliver results
immediately. Until it does, we must also make a greater
effort on the humanitarian crisis. The scale of suffering
is truly horrific, with 100,000 dead and millions
displaced. The United Kingdom has provided a total
of $800 million to the humanitarian response so far,
but we are yet to reach those inside Syria. For that, we
need genuine progress on humanitarian access, so we
believe that in the next few days the Council must agree
to apply its weight and authority to securing unfettered
and immediate access to those in need in Syria.

Today's resolution is about ensuring that the horrors
of21 August cannot happen again. The immediate need
now is to focus on the everyday horrors of the dire
humanitarian situation and we need to redouble our
determination to work through the Geneva II process
to end the conflict and secure a better future for Syria.

