Mr. Green (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Haley for inviting me here, and the
Kingdom of the Netherlands and Ambassador Van
Oosterom for convening this briefing.

America sees the humanitarian crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as an urgent priority
for several reasons. The first is fiscal. Many hundreds
of millions of dollars have been generously provided
to alleviate suffering and foster economic development,
but they are being robbed of their full value by crisis,
conflict and poor governance. Last year alone, America's
foreign assistance to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo exceeded $546 million. Our humanitarian
contributions totalled more than $209 million. The
agency that I am privileged to lead - the United States
Agency for International Development - contributed
more than $130 million-worth of food assistance and
more than $130 million for health programmes. Our
taxpayers generously offered that assistance to help
ease the immediate suffering, as well as lay a foundation
for the eventual development journey to self reliance to
which every people aspires. Yet disaster - not natural
disaster like an earthquake or drought, but man-
made disaster in the form of inhumane, authoritarian
governance - is destroying any chance that those
purposes will be met.

The second reason for giving high priority to this
crisis is that it is not solely a crisis of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is an international
crisis. Brutal policies, sweeping corruption, poor
governance and simmering conflict have displaced
millions - 4.5 million internally - and hundreds
of thousands have fled into neighbouring countries,
imposing new burdens and risking regional instability.

Thirdly, and most importantly, like all Council
members, the United States cares about this crisis
because of the breathtaking human suffering it has
inflicted. Some 43 per cent of children are chronically
malnourished, over 57 per cent of women have
experienced physical or sexual violence, and the
maternal mortality rate is among the world's highest.
The messages we just heard from Mr. Lowcock,
Ms. Bandu Bahati and Abbe Nshole are heart-rending.

Now, some will argue that the challenges facing the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are too complex and
too deeply ingrained for lasting solutions anytime soon.
But that does not excuse us from our responsibility to
act or from our responsibility to force steps in a new
direction. We may not have all the answers, but we do
know what is not working - the status quo.

On 18 January, the United Nations launched its
2018 humanitarian response plan, requesting nearly
$1.7 billion to assist the country's most vulnerable. It
is the largest such appeal to date because the level of
suffering is the greatest seen in many years, and all of
us should be ready to respond, but none of us should
believe that merely expanding humanitarian assistance
is actually addressing the country's greatest needs or
its principal causes of suffering. Boosting assistance
without also insisting upon concrete measurable
action from the Kabila Government is the opposite of
compassion. In some ways, it would make us all part
of the problem. We respectfully suggest the following.

First, we must demand that credible elections take
place this calendar year. Ambassador Haley has made
clear that United States support for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is not inevitable, unlimited or
unconditional. It will be sharply re-evaluated if the
elections currently scheduled for December are delayed
yet again. Like many others, we have lost patience
with the excuses that have been offered. They are
increasingly disingenuous. To be clear, these elections
need not be technologically "state of the art". Some of
the most important votes of our time have relied on
purple fingers and simple paper ballots. Countries with
challenges as great and circumstances as difficult as
those of the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
held credible elections and lifted their futures. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo must do the same,
or else we must rethink our support and our approach.

Secondly, we should demand that the Government
foster the conditions that make true democracy
possible. It must take immediate steps to make clear
that citizens will be free to express their will and
choose their own future. It could act this very day to
protect the fundamental rights of speech and assembly.
It could begin restoring basic services and rule of law
this week. Instead of protecting its people from harm,
which is the primary responsibility of any Government,
the Kabila Government has actually been implicated
in over 60 per cent of the nearly 7,000 human rights
violations reported in the last year.

Thirdly, an unshakable demand for the continuation
of assistance must be the safety of the courageous
humanitarian workers labouring under the most
trying of circumstances. Last year, there were 158
reported security incidents targeting humanitarian
workers - kidnapping, road ambushes, robberies,
and so forth. Two United Nations experts - one of
them American - were abducted and killed. There
is no excuse for this savagery or the failure of the
Government to prevent it.

Fourthly, the United States believes that other
countries must step forward and also do more to help.
To be clear, we are proud of the leadership role we
play as a humanitarian donor, but given all the needs
in so many parts of the world, we expect others to
come forward and do their part too. An international
crisis requires an international response. This demand
begins with the Government itself. It has done so little
to alleviate suffering, even as many of its leaders have
apparently been lining their own pockets. According
to the Congo Research Group, the Kabila family owns
either partially or wholly more than 80 of the country's
largest businesses and more than 450 miles of diamond
concessions. At the same time, 27 per cent of primary
age children miss school because their parents cannot
afford the fees.

We make these demands because they will offer the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo their
first real hope of a brighter future. We each represent
humane, compassionate people, but true compassion
requires more than providing money. It requires us
to use our collective influence to demand concrete
actions that will end cycles of misery. The crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is hopeless only if
we do nothing. These are steps we can take, beginning
with the demands we can make as donors. We can insist
upon timely elections, demand the freedoms that make
those elections credible, require protection for brave
humanitarian workers and ensure that everyone does
his or her part to ease citizen suffering, especially
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo itself.

