Mr. Nobilo (Croatia): Allow me to congratulate the
delegation and the people of the Republic of China for the
able manner in which the delegation has discharged its
duties of presidency throughout the month on the many
important issues before the Council, in particular the issue
of terminating the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) in Croatia. I should also like to commend
the delegation of Botswana for its work in the presidency
during the last month.

As the Council decides, at the request of my
Government, to end UNPROFOR's mandate in Croatia
effective 5 pm. New York time, my delegation should like,
most of all, to express its deep gratitude to all Member
States that participated in UNPROFOR operations in
Croatia and to the thousands of brave young men and
women from around the world who saved many innocent
lives and improved many others in Croatia. Too many of
these young men and women have lost their lives,
especially over the past few weeks, in serving the citizens
of Croatia honourably. Their sacrifice will always be
remembered by my Government and by the people of
Croatia.

 

We should like to reflect also on both the gains and
the shortcomings of the UNPROFOR operation. In
evaluating UNPROFOR, it is important to distinguish
between its role and the outcome of its presence in
Croatia. Its role has been positive, but its mission has
fallen short.

By its presence in Croatia over the past three years,
UNPROFOR has contributed positively by keeping
relative peace in Croatia and has given the international
community time to establish a political framework and
binding legal decisions that will assist in reintegrating the
occupied territories and their residents into Croatia
peacefully and in a manner consistent with Croatia's
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

The relative peace has enabled the international
community to consider more closely the origins and
consequences of the war in Croatia. As a result, the
international community has passed binding decisions
that, in Security Council resolution 815 (1993), effectively
recognize Croatia's international borders by declaring that
the United Nations Protected Areas are an integral part of
Croatia; that, in paragraph 12 of Security Council
resolution 820 (1993), recognize Croatia's sovereignty
over Serb-controlled areas in practical terms by deciding
that all international trade in respect of those areas needs
prior approval from the Croatian Government; that, in
Security Council resolution 871 (1993), recognize the
responsibility of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) for the costly situation in
Croatia by linking the international rehabilitation of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
to developments in the occupied territories of Croatia; and
that, in General Assembly resolution 49/43, furthermore
declare that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) must relinquish its illegal hold over the
territories it occupies in Croatia.

The UNPROFOR mission has fallen short, not
because of UNPROFOR itself, but because of the
uncompromising resistance of the local Croatian Serbs
and Belgrade. Consequently, my Government had to make
a decision, as it did. Our objective now should be to
define a new arrangement that would limit the costs of
Serbian intransigence in the occupied territories of Croatia
and in the region in general.

Following the adoption of the draft resolution, as
amended today, we will proceed to define the operational
aspects of the new United Nations arrangements for
Croatia. As I mentioned earlier, our objectives in defining

 

the new arrangements should be focused on mitigating and
overcoming the effects of the Croatian Serbs' intransigence
and protecting the sovereign rights of Croatia, which have
been clearly established in this Chamber and by the General
Assembly, and are strongly reaffirmed in the draft
resolution the Council is about to adopt.

In this regard, I should like to emphasize the letter
from my President of 22 March addressed to the Secretary-
General (S/1995/221) regarding the so-called Vance plan.
The Vance plan has, in many critical ways, become an
obstacle to progress in Croatia. We dispute the Vance plan
per se as a legal basis for the new arrangement, since its
legal ambiguity has inspired the Croatian Serbs'
intransigence.

The Vance plan has become obsolete in the political
and legal senses. It was introduced prior to Croatia's
becoming a Member State, and, moreover, the Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions I mentioned
earlier have become the relevant legal and political
framework for a solution to the problem of the occupied
territories in Croatia. Croatia's sovereign rights cannot be
compromised by the outdated, Vance-plan definition of
"concerned parties".

Nevertheless, Croatia remains committed to the
unfulfilled humanitarian elements of the Vance plan. We
will continue to promote the plan's spirit of cooperation and
good will, but the Croatian Government must emphasize
that it has an exclusive right of veto in the upcoming
negotiations over the operational definitions for the new
arrangements within its sovereign territory. The
international community and the Secretariat cannot deny
this right, granted to Croatia by the Charter of the United
Nations and by the relevant resolutions.

By accepting a new United Nations operation in
Croatia, my Government is reaffirming its constructive role
in the region, with a policy focused on a peaceful
settlement of outstanding problems. This does not mean that
Croatia will accept the shortcomings of the new
arrangement implied in the 22 March report of the
Secretary-General. Croatia expects that the new report by
the Secretary-General will define the operational aspects of
the new arrangement, in substance and tone, respecting the
sovereign rights of Croatia and the resolutions of this
Council and the General Assembly, while creating active
and efficient operational mechanisms.

During the work on the new arrangement and the
present draft resolution, which will be adopted today, one

 

Member State, regrettably, expressed low tolerance for the
legitimate interests of Croatia, a Member State, and
instead directed efforts into forms of short-term political
pragmatism, at the expense of legal and operative logic of
the relevant United Nations documents. This development
puts my Government in a position to begin questioning
the role of that Member State in the peace process, a role
which was positive until recently. Yesterday's official and
media reports that confirmed my Government's earlier
information about the transfer of Yugoslav Army
personnel and materiel into eastern Croatia add to our
concerns. My Government sincerely hopes that the
consequent misgivings will come to naught and that the
upcoming period, during which the operational aspects of
the new arrangement will be defined, will show that the
international community stands united in protecting the
principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a
United Nations Member State.

The name of the new operation itself, the United
Nations Confidence Restoration Operation in Croatia
(UNCRO), implies that this will be not merely a static
peace-keeping operation, but an active, task-specific
operation. The billions of dollars spent on a static
UNPROFOR operation will be turned into a less costly,
effective arrangement, with emphasis on civilian experts
and specialists and less reliance on infantry soldiers alone.
The tasks will focus on restoration of cooperation;
redirection of economic relations; reintegration of people,
by promoting confidence-building programmes;
prevention of foreign interference, by controlling relevant
international borders of Croatia; and normalization of
relations between States in the region.

The success of this operation will be measured by
the effectiveness of the border control mechanisms, as
mandated in paragraph 3(d) of the draft resolution in
document S/1995/242, and by implementation of
paragraph 12 of resolution 820 (1993), as affirmed in the
fourth preambular paragraph. Without effective deterrence
of military support from Serbia and Montenegro, and
redefinition of international trade for the occupied
territories of Croatia from Belgrade to Zagreb, the new
operation will also fall short.

If these two aspects of the new operation are
complemented by successful implementation of
confidence-building measures, outlined in resolutions 871
(1993) and 947 (1994), by timely implementation of the
economic agreement of 2 December 1994, and by the
creation of new confidence-building programmes, it may
be possible to significantly change the present situation in

 

Croatia by the time the mandate of the new arrangement
would expire, and avoid the eventual possibility of war.
Confidence-building measures alone, however, will not
bring us closer to peace in Croatia.
The new arrangement will require the number of
international troops presently in Croatia to be significantly
scaled back. Some troops will have to leave Croatia; the
others may be relocated elsewhere in the region.

My Government has expressed its View - which is
entirely justified from the point of view of operational
efficiency and sovereign rights - that it should have some
say in the structure of the new peace-keeping force on its
territory. There have been many comments regarding this
position of my Government. Some have been negative -
implying the imposition of unacceptable criteria for
selection.

My Government's motivation on this issue concerns
the problem of illegal and unprofessional activity of some
UNPROFOR units, which cannot be described as other than
criminal. This has been a serious problem in some instances
and has caused a lot of consternation in Croatia's public
opinion, thus harming the image and lessening the potential
of the present peace-keeping operation.

This, we believe, also harms the image and potential
of the United Nations in the long run. Therefore, it is also
in the interest of this Organization to address these
problems in regard to the operation in Croatia and all
others. Croatia will continue to insist on this element in
particular, as we work with the Secretariat on finding the
appropriate structure for the new operation.

My Government welcomes the draft resolution, as
amended today, which not only recognizes Croatia's
sovereignty over its occupied territories and defines its
international borders, but calls for control and demarcation
of these borders. The draft resolution gives the United
Nations ample legal ground to fully control the relevant
international borders of Croatia.

We attach the utmost importance to paragraph 3(d),
which should be thoroughly planned and effectively
executed. We firmly believe that a peaceful settlement in
Croatia is possible only if this paragraph is strictly
implemented. This border mechanism can be made effective
by undertaking measures beyond those expressed in the
Vance plan alone and by imposing punitive measures
against violators, in the form of sanctions. We should take
note in this regard that the Council has already established

 

in resolution 871 (1993) that the sanctions regime
imposed on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) can be linked to developments in the
occupied territories of Croatia.
Croatia especially welcomes operative paragraph 5
of the draft resolution, which clearly states that the final
political solution in regard to the rights of the Croatian
Serb minority, whatever form it may take, must be
consistent with the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Croatia. This paragraph, as well as the third and fourth
preambular paragraphs, in no uncertain terms confirms
and supports the territorial integrity of Croatia in its
internationally recognized borders. We sincerely hope that
both Knin and Belgrade will understand this message and
finally accept the only possible way in which the solution
to the occupied territories can be achieved: for Belgrade
through recognition of Croatia, and for Knin through
peaceful reintegration of the occupied territories into the
legal and administrative system of Croatia.

We should also like to emphasize my Government's
satisfaction that the Council came to support our demands
that the name of the operation should confirm that the
new operation will be carried out in its entirety on the
territory of Croatia. The name of the new arrangement -
the United Nations Confidence Restoration Operation in
Croatia - meets the demands of Croatia's Parliament and
my Government. Furthermore, for my Government, the
acronym UNCRO cannot mean anything but United
Nations Croatia.

If there were no rule that a host country cannot co-
sponsor draft resolutions regarding operations on its own
territory, my delegation would consider co-sponsoring the
draft resolution, as amended today, because of its political
significance: it firmly and indisputably confirms the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Croatia and clearly
states that the new operation will be carried out in its
entirety on Croatian soil. This does not mean that we are
satisfied with all parts of the draft resolution. On the
contrary, my delegation has already expressed its
reservations in regard to the wording of some paragraphs,
due to lack of clarity and the way in which some prior
resolutions are interpreted. We are especially concerned
that the draft resolution does not give enough
consideration to the imperative right of the hundreds of
thousands displaced persons and refugees to return to
their homes. We hope that the upcoming report of the
Secretary-General will mitigate these concerns.

 

Finally, we should like to express our expectation that
the new arrangement will be successful, because, unlike the
case of UNPROFOR, it will have a precise political
foundation. We hope that the mistakes of UNPROFOR will
not be repeated, and that UNCRO will, in a reasonable
time, achieve its goals of border control, confidence-
building and reintegration of the occupied territories and
their impoverished people into Croatia.

