Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me begin
by thanking Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed for her briefing and her leadership. I am
happy to note that Ambassador Skoog is with Amina
in Monrovia to celebrate this important moment in the
history of the country and to discuss how to support the
priorities of the new Government in his capacity as the
Peacebuilding Commission Chair for Liberia. Let me
also thank Mr. Mohammed Bila of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission and Ms. Chitra Nagaraj an for sharing their
important perspectives from the ground this morning.

It is with a deep sigh of relief that we welcome
the safe return of more than 100 of the girls captured
by Boko Haram in the Nigerian town of Dapchi. I
reiterate our strong demand for the immediate and
unconditional release of all remaining missing girls.
Rehabilitation opportunities for children and their
mothers, including the sensitization of communities to
avoid stigmatization and to facilitate return, continue
to be of the utmost importance in our ongoing efforts to
address the situation.

National, regional and international efforts
to mitigate the consequences of the Boko Haram
insurgency and to step up humanitarian action in 2017
meant that we could successfully avert the immediate
risk of famine. In that connection, we recognize the
important efforts by the Multinational Joint Task Force
and the Lake Chad Basin Commission. However, one
year after our visit to the region and the adoption of
resolution 2349 (2017), the situation remains one of
the most fragile in the world. Continued international
support and attention to this complex crisis is crucial.

Vast development needs in the region persist.
Chronic poverty, the lack of economic opportunities and
violations of human rights are all factors of instability.
We need a continued focus on sustainable and inclusive
growth, as well as on the empowerment of women.

Effective partnerships spanning the humanitarian,
reconstruction and development nexus that combine
short- and long-term responses are needed to support
sustainable peace. In order to address the structural
causes of the crisis, complementarity and cooperation
must be sought with a multitude of actors, including
national Governments, regional organizations and
international financial institutions.

As part of the efforts to implement resolution 2349
(2017), Sweden is actively supporting the organization
of the Lake Chad governors' forum on peacebuilding,
prevention, stabilization and regional cooperation, due
to take place in Maiduguri in May. The forum should
contribute to the process of developing a regional
stabilization strategy. Those efforts will also support
coherence, coordination and cross-border collaboration
by creating a forum for recurrent dialogue among
governors from affected States and by conducting
consultations with communities - including religious
leaders and women representatives - on the challenges
facing people living in the Lake Chad basin region.

In the light of today's focus on root causes, I wish
to highlight two points in particular.

First, the negative impacts of climate change on
the stability and security of the Lake Chad basin region
have been clearly recognized by the Council - in
resolution 2349 (2017) and in the January presidential
statement (S/PRST/2018/3) on the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS).
Climate change constitutes both a direct challenge and
a threat multiplier, contributing to polarization and
conflict between groups by worsening existing fragility
factors, such as scarce resources, marginalization and
the disruption of livelihoods.
As we have heard today, the Security Council has
repeatedly emphasized the need for adequate capacity
for risk assessments by the United Nations in that
regard. We need to find ways to bring together existing
information from relevant United Nations organs,
including at the country level, and involve research
institutions to provide forward-looking analysis for
United Nations decision-making bodies, including for
the Security Council. We invite the Secretary-General
to take forward those Council requests forward. We
stand ready to support any efforts in that regard.
Conflict prevention efforts would be more effective if
the climate and environmental stress put on societies
is properly understood and addressed. Implementing
the sustaining peace agenda and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development is, of course, a central part of
those efforts.

Secondly, engaging all relevant actors, not least
at the local level, in an inclusive dialogue on root
causes is crucial. Community engagement is also a
prerequisite for effective early-warning systems. In
particular, women's full and equal representation and
effective participation is critical in reconstruction and
stabilization efforts, as they are often disproportionately
affected by the crisis and play multiple roles in society.
With greater influence for women in the design and
implementation of policies and programmes, these will
be better adapted to realities on the ground, thereby
creating better conditions for long-term stability
and peace.

Finally, we look forward to continuing to engage
in discussions on the implementation of resolution
2349 (2017), including within the regular reporting by
UNOWAS and the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa. We encourage the Secretary-General
to undertake a joint visit to the region with the World
Bank, the African Union and the African Development
Bank, as was encouraged in the resolution. I also agree
with the United Kingdom that proposals put forward
this morning by the briefers should be considered and
taken forward. The Peacebuilding Commission could
also be well placed in this regard, while drawing on
its unique membership and a mandate to address root
causes and take regional approaches. Continuous
international attention to the Lake Chad basin region
will be needed in order to find ways to address the
multiple and interdependent challenges in a coherent
manner, in the short-term as well as the long-term.

