Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My Government thanks the Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) for the revitalization
proposals set out in the annex to document S/2004/ 124.
In that connection, we believe all Member States would
benefit if the CTC could be more effective in its work.

Cuba believes that unilateral actions or pre-
emptive wars on the part of one State or a group of
States - however powerful they may be - using the
fight against terrorism as a pretext are totally
unacceptable and deserve categorical condemnation.

There will be progress only through international
cooperation, not through acts of war, aggression or
revenge, which will only lead to more violence. Nor
will any progress be made through the promulgation of
laws authorizing the extrajudicial execution or arbitrary
detention of a country's nationals or of foreign citizens,
through covert actions violating laws and borders,
through the manipulation of public opinion, through
discrimination against or persecution of immigrants,
through disregard of international humanitarian law,
through the violation of human rights or the restriction
of civil liberties inherent in the rule of law, through
unilateral sanctions or through the listing or
certification of countries for dark political purposes.

We need to wage an international fight against all
forms and manifestations of terrorism, with the
participation of Third World countries as equals,
transcending political, religious or other any other kind
of differences, in order to build a just world of free
peoples and sovereign, independent States - a world
without international terrorism.

Cuba was one of the first three countries to ratify
the 12 international instruments on terrorism as a
contribution to the international confrontation against
such acts. In December 2001, Cuba adopted its Law 93
against acts of terrorism and additional effective non-
legislative measures. We have also cooperated, on our
own initiative and in good faith, with the Security
Council and its Counter-Terrorism Committee, to
which we have submitted three exhaustive reports in a
timely manner; we are now preparing a fourth. In
addition, we have actively supported the negotiation of
a comprehensive anti-terrorism convention.

Cuba has never permitted its territory to be used
for terrorist actions against any State, without
exception, and has stated that it will do everything in
its power to prevent that from happening in the future.
Cuba has never carried out, financed, tolerated or
permitted a terrorist act - not even in self-defence -
against the direct authors or masterminds of
abominable crimes against our people that the Cuban
American National Foundation and other groups
belonging to Miami's terrorist mafia have of late
financed, organized and carried out from United States
territory with absolute impunity - including
bombings, attempts to assassinate Cuban leaders and
attacks against targets vital to our economy.

On 15 March in Panama, there will be a trial of
four terrorists of Cuban origin, who, following the
instructions of similar organizations based in the
United States - from where they operate with total
impunity - planned an attack against the Cuban
President during the Ibero-American Summit held in
November 2000 in that country. For more than three
decades, those terrorists carried out horrible crimes
against the Cuban people, who hope that they will be
sentenced in the trial so that justice will prevail over
impunity.

Cuba categorically rejects the insidious
statements of senior United States officials, who have
referred repeatedly to alleged plans in my country to
develop weapons of mass destruction. The most recent
of those statements was made in Japan in mid-
February. Through such false statements, the
Government of the United States seeks to create
conditions enabling it to expand its aggressive policy,
which could even lead to military aggression.
Similarly, we reject the arbitrary inclusion of Cuba on a
United States list of countries that supposedly support
terrorism.

Cuba will comply with the laws it has adopted as
a sovereign Power and expresses its readiness to
cooperate with all countries, with full respect for the
Charter and international law. In that spirit, Cuba has
proposed on three occasions to the Government of the
United States - without conditions and in accordance
with the provisions of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) - three draft bilateral agreements, concerning
cooperation in the fight against terrorism, illicit drug
trafficking and trafficking in persons. Although the
United States has refused - under mere pretexts -
even to consider them, Cuba still hopes that that policy
will change.

It is impossible to eliminate terrorism if we
condemn some terrorist acts while we keep silent about
others or tolerate or justify them. The terrorism against
Cuba must stop. In Miami, with complete impunity and
with the complicity of the United States authorities,
funds are provided and collected to carry out terrorist
acts; bank accounts that finance terrorism operate
openly and normally; terrorists are recruited; supplies
of weapons are provided; safe refuge is offered; and
those who finance, plan and commit acts of terrorism
are allowed to use the territory. While that has been
taking place, five young Cubans have been incarcerated
in the United States for more than five years, having
been subjected to excessive confinement and isolation
for long periods of time. In some cases, they have been
unable to contact their wives and families since their
imprisonment. A spurious court in Miami sentenced
them to imprisonment for life or for many years,
prohibiting them, upon their release, from visiting
places where certain terrorist groups are based -
groups that they had been observing in order to prevent
such acts from being committed in Cuba or on United
States territory. Cuba has provided sufficient
information to the Counter-Terrorism Committee on
this case and has repeatedly denounced the double
standard being applied in the alleged fight against
terrorism by the Government of the United States.

The Cuban delegation hopes that all efforts aimed
at revitalizing the Counter-Terrorism Committee will
lead to its more efficient functioning and will enable it
to respond more effectively to the concerns expressed
by Member States. Cuba, which has presented
substantial evidence of terrorist actions against our
country - in flagrant violation of resolution 1373
(2001) and of other legally binding instruments -
would like to know what practical actions the
Committee and the Security Council plan to carry out
in that respect.

