Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank Special Representative
Angelo for his briefing. I would also like to thank the
Permanent Representatives of Chad and the Central
African Republic. I believe their statements offered
important positive information about the activities and
the results of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINURCAT) and the European
Union-led military force (EUFOR).
My comments will focus on four points. First, the
civilians in North-East Central African Republic and
eastern Chad are still in a very vulnerable situation.
Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, who recently visited the region,
spoke to us about this last week. The Darfur crisis
continues to have humanitarian and security
consequences in the region, many civilians still need
international assistance in order to survive.

Like the representative of Chad, we welcome the
work of humanitarian workers on the ground and urge
all parties to scrupulously respect their security and
their freedom of movement. Naturally, we condemn the
banditry to which they continue to be subject. We are
also very disturbed by information that cites armed
groups recruiting in refugee and internally displaced
persons camps, and we once again call for the respect
for the civilian and humanitarian nature of the camps.

Secondly, we agree with the Secretary-General's
assessment of the positive results of EUFOR in Chad
and the Central African Republic. That operation, in
keeping with its mandate, has helped to improve the
security conditions in which humanitarian assistance is
provided. Mr. Holmes also stressed to the Council that
the international presence had helped to stabilize the
security situation, to reassure vulnerable civilian groups
and to improve security for humanitarian workers. Of
course, not all of problems are resolved - far from it -
and this is certainly no time for the international
community to relax its efforts. Nevertheless, we would
stress in particular the initially encouraging return of
some internally displaced persons in Chad, which was
precisely one goal of the European Union and United
Nations missions. EUFOR, the European Chad-Central
African Republic mission, the largest military operation
of the European Union to date, is thus another important
example of how the European Union can support United
Nations action.

Thirdly, we stress the importance of the role of
MINURCAT and the Detachment Integre de Securite
(DIS) reiterate our full support for the work of the
Special Representative, and welcome cooperation
between the Chad authorities, the United Nations and
the European Union on the ground, as did the Special
Representative himself. We welcome the initial
deployment of the DIS, which was somewhat delayed
at first. We hope that it will be fully deployed very
soon and command Mr. Angelo's personal commitment
in this context. The multidimensional presence created

08-6445]
by resolution 1778 (2007) offers a novel structure in
which one part cannot succeed without the other.

Fourthly, we would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his latest report to the Council on follow-
up to EUFOR once its mandate expires.

In September, the Council expressed its intention
to deploy a military component to take over from
EUFOR in Chad and the Central African Republic. We
welcome the agreement arrived at between the
Secretary-General and President Idriss Deby on the
number of troops to be deployed in eastern Chad to
provide an efficient and effective replacement for
EUFOR and to ensure improved geographic coverage
so as to better protect refugees and displaced and
vulnerable persons. John Holmes himself stressed the
importance of this aspect of the situation last week.

As for the Central African Republic dimension of
the operation, it is also essential to have a credible
military presence in the north-eastern part of the
country so that, at the end of EUFOR's mandate, there
is no recurrence of the security vacuum of two years
ago, which contributed to the destabilization of the
region. It is because the European Union is present in
Birao that the humanitarian and security situation
stabilized somewhat, despite recent evidence of the
precariousness of the situation.

In this context, we believe that the first option on
the Central African Republic offered in the report might
be insufficient. We therefore support a broader option
allowing the deployment of a deterrent force in Birao
that could also cover the surrounding areas. We stand
ready to discuss the modalities of such a deployment.

I reiterate the importance of United Nations
readiness to take over at the end of the European Union
mission on 15 March 2009. From the very beginning of
EUFOR, the European Union has said that this would
be a transitional operation ending on 15 March 2009.
That date approaches; we must prepare for it carefully.
The European Union and the European contributors to
EUFOR in particular are committed to ensuring a
smooth transition. We urge the Secretary-General to
continue his efforts to that end and invite potential
troop contributors to join in discussions on this topic.

On the basis of these observations, the French
delegation will, over the next few days, circulate a
draft resolution to members of the Council. It is our
hope that the Council will be able to adopt it swiftly to

08-6445]
ensure a smooth transition from EUFOR to
MINURCAT on 15 March 2009, as scheduled.

