Mr. Grunditz: Let me begin by expressing my
deepest condolences to the families and friends of all
those who have perished in the Ebola outbreak. I would
like to commend the concerned countries for their
resilience and steadfast determination in these difficult
times. I pay tribute to the many brave health-care
workers engaged in the tireless efforts to counter this
terrible disease. Let me also express appreciation for
the important support provided by the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), members of the United
Nations country team, particularly the World Health
Organization, and other international partners.

The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has an
important role in raising awareness, mobilizing
resources and encouraging coordinated international
support for a Liberia now facing a merciless epidemic.
Yesterday, the PBC Organizational Committee held a
meeting with Mr. Nabarro, the senior United Nations
system coordinator for the Ebola virus disease, and
decided to issue a statement in support ofhis efforts. As
Chairs of the PBC configurations for Guinea, Liberia
and Sierra Leone, we issued a letter on 6 August
highlighting the need for international support. On
18 August, we also held a joint informal meeting via
video teleconference with the United Nations at the
country level, resulting in the issuance of a statement
stressing the need for resource mobilization and for the
coordination of international efforts. At that meeting,
the Secretary General of the Mano River Union,
Mr. Kaba, also underlined the need for closer regional
coordination. The PBC should be well placed to continue
facilitating a regional perspective, as well as to promote
relevant links between the security, humanitarian and
development aspects of the crisis.

The Ebola epidemic is unprecedented. Liberia
is facing an accelerated and multidimensional crisis.
Humanitarian needs are rising fast. Restrictions on
mobility have already had a serious impact on economic
activity, and economic growth is predicted to slow down
significantly, putting further strain on already scarce
Government finances. In Liberia, the crisis has hit at
a time when growth was already declining and fiscal
constraints had started to affect funding in several
areas, including for important peacebuilding priorities.

Despite significant national and international
efforts, this deadly disease, which transcends national
boarders, is now growing exponentially. The challenges
posed by what has become the worst Ebola epidemic in
history would be overwhelming for any single country
to cope with alone. The well-coordinated support of the
international community and regional cooperation are
absolutely critical.

The outbreak has generated challenges in several
areas and demonstrated that, notwithstanding the
considerable progress made over the past decade, Liberia
remains a fragile country in post-conflict transition. It
is fragile in terms of both resources and resilience to
shocks such as this. We have also witnessed incidents
of unrest, the spread of fear among the population,
and some resistance to Government intervention. It
is evident that sustained international support will
be needed to ensure that the important gains made in
development and stability can be maintained, and to
ensure that Liberia continues on the path towards long-
term peace and prosperity.

Our immediate focus should be on supporting
Liberia in combating this deadly virus and coping
with the humanitarian needs it has created. Short-term
interventions, however, need not be short-sighted.
To the extent possible, efforts need to connect with
longer-term objectives. For instance, short-term
health interventions should link up with longer-term
strengthening of the health sector. Furthermore, a
comprehensive approach, addressing the broad array
of challenges will be needed. Government efforts to
ensure the rule of law and the protection of civilians,
as well as effective public communication and other
confidence-building measures to prevent further social
unrest should be encouraged and supported.

Another example, highlighted in the report from
my visit to Liberia in early July, is the urgent need
to resource and address the immediate capability and
mobility gaps ofthe Liberia National Police. A continued
strong international presence on the ground, including
UNMIL, will be important to all these efforts, as will
the provision of adequate, rapid and flexible resources.

Later on, as opportunities again arise and resources
become available, peacebuilding efforts should continue.
While there may well be need for some adjustments
to the agreed peacebuilding programme, national
reconciliation processes and the further strengthening
of national institutions, including the police, justice and
security sectors, will likely remain key priorities. The
decentralization of services and land reform, as well as
the accountable and transparent management of natural
resources, are also fundamental to long-term peace and
stability in the country. As we continue to support these
peacebuilding efforts in Liberia, important lessons
should be drawn from the current crisis, including
with a view to further strengthening resilience and
State-society relations.

Considering the negative impact of the crisis on
the Liberian economy, joint efforts will also be needed
to stimulate future growth and development. The
admission of Liberia to the World Trade Organization
could be important in this regard. While the Liberian
Government will need to provide national resources
for longer-term peacebuilding priorities, the continued
strong support of international partners in this area
will be even more essential during the period of
recovery from the deep crisis Liberia is now facing.
The continuation of work by the Government of Liberia
on a new deal compact could promote streamlined and
simplified donor frameworks for accountability and
the effectiveness of future support. The Peacebuilding
Support Office stands ready to flexibly reorient the
allocation of funds from the Peacebuilding Fund,
should this be needed.

