Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Frankly, I
think that the comments made by Mr. Annabi accomplish
most of the task of answering the questions. I should like
simply to make a few observations.

The process of implementing the Border Service is
still under way. I think it would be accurate to say that
the difficulties in reaching an agreement and in mustering
the political will necessary for some to agree obviously
may be reflected in the implementation process, so it will
be important to be vigilant. I am afraid that, if I say
anything more, I will violate my neutrality.

Secondly, regarding the budget, it may be
appropriate to kick-start some of the financial
requirements with respect to the Border Service, and I
thank countries like Austria and others that have helped
us in this way. However, Dayton also envisioned a
sharing of the resources stemming from customs
revenues, and this ultimately should be more than enough
to cover the budgetary demands of the Border Service.
The difficulty right now is that the resources of the
central Government are so limited. Most of the resources
that come to the central Government do so through the
entities, so of course the central Government has at times
found itself to be the object of the goodwill of the
entities.

I think that one point on which we should expand a
little bit more, because it is a direct responsibility of the
Security Council, is the Judicial System Assessment
Programme (JSAP). How does it continue? The truth is
that it is a long-term process. I would like to emphasize
here not only the issue of making a change in
methodology but also that of addressing the institutional
problem. Unfortunately, the Dayton Accord apparently -
and I emphasize the word "apparently" - has left us with
an institutional vacuum, which is an important factor in
Bosnia and Herzegovina's integration into European
institutions. Bosnia and Herzegovina does not yet have a
link with the appropriate European courts, and particularly
a court of human rights, that would allow cases to

 

proceed from the local level all the way up to the level of
the court in Strasbourg. That is because Bosnia and
Herzegovina does not currently have a centralized judicial
system, except for one narrowly defined court, the Supreme
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which generally does not
handle these types of cases. We would ask J SAP, therefore,
to take a look at this problem and see how we can move
ahead with this process.

Finally, it is absolutely true that the regional situation
has an impact on Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is very
important for us to see further progress in the region,
particularly in Belgrade, towards a commitment to
cooperation and peace. At the same time, I would also be
very careful not to view the region as one indistinguishable
mess. Clearly it is possible to make progress in one area in
Bosnia and Herzegovina when perhaps things do not appear
to be going quite so well in some other regions. It is
certainly not accurate to depict the region as being
somehow characterized by various ethnic hatreds or even
various ethnic compositions. One situation varies very
significantly from the other. I think when we talk of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, ethnicity should be the last consideration
in our dialogue. Rather, it is a matter of making sure that
the resources, the methodology and, of course, the political
will exist. I think the ethnic factor will be, as I said, one of
our advantages and one of our resources, rather than one of
our obstacles.
