Mr. Le Drian (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Russian Federation
for convening today's very important discussion on the
strategic partnership among the United Nations, the
African Union and regional organizations.

The Council is well aware of President Macron's
personal commitment to Africa. In his statement in
Ouagadougou in November 2017, he described the
challenge for France's new relations with Africa - that
of shared responsibility. It means that we cannot rely
on old patterns. Africa does not expect our generosity;
it expects partnership. France will work with Africa
to build lasting economic partnerships among equals
that lead to investment in the private sector, African
innovations and Africa's young people. That will be the
focus of the next Africa-France Summit, which we will
organize in Bordeaux in June 2020.

In our View, that partnership approach also applies to
collective security. Close cooperation among the United
Nations, the African Union and regional organizations
allows us to combine our political efforts and define
our strategies more closely in line with realities on
the ground. It also makes it possible to optimize the
means at our disposal, in the interest of efficiency. We
see today that the partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations today is proving to be
of great value in terms of crisis prevention, mediation
and operations.

We could cite several examples in that regard, such
as recently in the Sudan, and Madagascar, where the
efforts of the African Union have enjoyed the support of
the United Nations, the Southern African Development
Community and other partners, including France and
the European Union. Those joint efforts enhanced the
transparency and credibility of the 2018 presidential
elections and serves as a successful model for crisis
prevention. In the Central African Republic, the joint
effort by the African Union and the United Nations
led to the signing of the peace agreement between the
Government and armed groups on 6 February. The
vigilant and coordinated engagement of all international
partners must continue in order to guarantee the full
implementation of that agreement.

Furthermore, in the Sahel, joint action by the
United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
and the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) is
essential to ensuring that the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali - outcome of the Algiers
process - is implemented, and that the United
Nations and the African Union play a key role in the
Implementation Monitoring Committee. It is also Vital
in the fight against terrorism, where the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali provides logistical support to the Joint Force of
the G-5 Sahel. Such cooperation must be strengthened
and expanded.
France supports the initiatives taken by Heads of
State and Government at the expanded ECOWAS summit
held in Ouagadougou. Heads of State and Government
called for improved coordination between international
efforts and for enhanced cooperation among the States
ofthe region to halt the spread of the threat. It is within
that framework that France and Germany have proposed
the establishment of a new partnership for security
and stability in the Sahel. That partnership will serve
to strengthen coordination among the various defence
and internal security actions, as well as to broaden the
perimeter, enabling further work to be undertaken in
the countries bordering Lake Chad.

But today it falls to us to further strengthen the
partnership among the United Nations, the African
Union and regional organizations in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
and the role of the Security Council. In his Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, the Secretary-General places
great emphasis on long-term partnerships, with good
reason. Our capacity for collective action depends
upon, first of all, our common vision. That is why we
are actively participating in the annual consultations
between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. We must also
enhance information sharing with regard to early-
warning, as has been mentioned already several times,
in order to better anticipate and prevent crises.

We must also go further with regard to joint
African Union-United Nations funding of upcoming
African peace operations. As we know, the current
African members of the Council are asking us to ensure
the sustainability and predictability of our funding.
France supports the African Union's approach, which
is ultimately aimed at the Security Council authorizing,
on a case-by-case basis and in accordance with specific
modalities, the use of mandatory contributions, in
addition to the African Union contribution, to finance
those operations.

We are convinced that African peace operations
meet a triple need: first, a political need, as nothing
can replace the determination of African countries
to advance peace on their own continent; secondly, a
strategic need, because the capacity to conduct peace
operations is still lacking; and, thirdly, an operational
need, as African contingents are best placed to achieve
tactical success, thanks to their knowledge and expertise
on the ground. We must consider how effectively
Nigeria, Chad, the Niger and Cameroon engaged in the
fight against Boko Haram in the early stages.

I therefore wish to commend the work undertaken
by the Secretary-General and the African Union
Commission on this issue. Significant progress has
been made, such as the commitment made by African
States at the Kigali Summit to fund 25 per cent of the
cost of those operations by 2020, through the African
Union Peace Fund. We still have a way to go in several
areas, but we sincerely hope that we can make enough
progress in the coming months to see rapid and
effective results.

