Mr. Kobayashi (Japan): Before I begin, I should
like to take this opportunity to express condolences to
the people of India and of Pakistan for the terrible
losses they have suffered as a result of yesterday's
earthquake.

I would like to express my appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to discuss the
situation in East Timor, as the mandate of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) is about to be renewed.

I would also like to thank Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello for shedding light on the important progress that
has been made and on the challenges that remain on the
ground. We wish to extend our warmest welcome to
Mr. Ramos-Horta, who has come to present to us the
views of the East Timorese people, which the
international community must always respect and heed
as it supports their nation-building efforts. We look
forward to welcoming him in Japan in March.

We also commend Mr. Holkeri, President of the
General Assembly, for his participation in today's
discussion, following his recent visit to the region.

We thank the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund for presenting their views.
Their participation in today's discussion illustrates the
multifaceted nature ofthe activities of UNTAET, which
encompass not only military and police activities but
also a wide range of nation-building efforts.

Since the inception of UNTAET in October 1999,
efforts to prepare for the independence of East Timor
have made substantial progress, with the competent and
resourceful leadership of Mr. Vieira de Mello, the
dedication of United Nations staff and the constant
support of the international community, including non-
governmental organizations, all working hand in hand
with the people of East Timor. My delegation is
pleased to know that, as a result of these efforts, the
goal of independence is now within sight. Although
considerable work still needs be done, my delegation is
confident that, with the commitment and integrity
demonstrated by those concerned, that goal will be
achieved smoothly and successfully. Japan, for its part,
remains fully committed to assisting the process to the
best of its ability.

Japan welcomes the progress highlighted in the
Secretary-General's report, including progress in the
political process, in infrastructure development and in
judicial and human rights matters, and encourages
UNTAET to continue its efforts in all those areas.
Japan fully supports the extension of UNTAET's
mandate.

Today I would like to focus on the political
process leading to the independence of East Timor and
to share some thoughts on the post-independence
phase. First, let me touch upon the political process
towards independence.

Japan welcomes the growing consensus among
the East Timorese people on the political calendar for
achieving independence. It is our fundamental position
that the will of the people must be respected in
deciding how East Timor should be governed. In this
regard, my delegation would like to reiterate the
critical importance of pursuing independence through a
political process that is open, fair and democratic. And,
in order to ensure lasting peace and security after
independence, it will be necessary to establish a
political system that is likewise open, fair and
democratic. We are confident that Mr. Ramos-Horta
and other leaders of the East Timorese people
understand the importance of these goals and will spare
no effort in achieving them.

Although we understand the existence of possible
technical difficulties, as mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report, we urge the United Nations to do its
best to realize the sequence of political steps that are to
be agreed upon by the East Timorese people. At the
same time, we call upon the people of East Timor to
understand that insufficient preparation can result in
compromising the openness, inclusiveness and fairness
of the process. We also fully support the emphasis, as
described in the Secretary-General's report, that is
placed on sustainability and capacity-building in the
election process with a view to enabling the East
Timorese themselves to conduct their future elections.

The issue of East Timorese refugees in West
Timor continues to be a source of concern. Efforts
should be made both by the Indonesian authorities and
by the relevant United Nations agencies to solve the
refugee problem as soon as possible. We should bear in
mind that the political process towards independence
should involve as many people as possible, including
East Timorese refugees who are willing to participate
in the nation-building process.

The recent violent incidents in connection with
political campaigning by the East Timorese parties are
disturbing. We call on the people of East Timor to
ensure that the political process towards independence
is orderly and peaceful, and we urge UNTAET to make
every effort to assist them in this regard. Caution and
sensitivity on the part of UNTAET are required in
dealing with this matter, but violence must not be
tolerated. Efforts to instil respect in the East Timorese
people for the democratic process and its rules can also
be useful. Japan is more than willing to help in this
regard and has decided to sponsor a seminar on
electoral law, to be held by UNTAET in February, with
the aim of promoting discussion and understanding of
the electoral system among the East Timorese.

Next, let me comment on the post-independence
phase. We share the Secretary-General's analysis that
East Timor will continue to require substantial
international support after independence is achieved.
Japan will remain committed to helping East Timor in
the post-independence phase. I would like to stress two
important points in this regard.

The first point is that after independence the
transfer of authority should be complete. In order to
encourage East Timor's self-reliance, it should be made
clear that with independence the responsibility for
administering the country will then rest with the East
Timorese, while the international community and the
United Nations play an advisory role. This, of course,
cannot happen all at once on the day of independence.
But it is imperative, during this transition phase, to
foster a sense of ownership among the East Timorese
and to help them develop the necessary skills and
capabilities for running a nation. From this point of
View, Japan fully supports UNTAET's policy of
accelerated transfer of authority to the East Timorese
people and the so-called Timorization of the
administration. We strongly encourage the continuation
ofthis policy.

The other point I wish to raise is the importance
of the international community remaining steadfast in
its efforts to assist East Timor. Continuity is essential
in order to ensure that the efforts made thus far for the
reconstruction and development of East Timor are
fruitful. The necessary systems and mechanisms must
be in place to ensure continuity in the provision of
international assistance. In this regard, the need for
effective donor coordination mechanisms remains
undiminished. These should include a framework for
the overall assessment and review of the assistance that
is being provided. The well-established practice of
holding donor conferences is one such mechanism. A
coordinating mechanism on the ground, such as the
role currently played by UNTAET, to maintain daily
contact with the donors is also necessary.

Furthermore, in view of the profound shortage of
human resources in East Timor and its implications for
the transfer of the administration, Japan believes that
the United Nations presence in East Timor after
independence should include not only military and
civilian police components but also a capacity- and
institution-building component to provide advice to the
East Timorese. Without such a component, the nation-
building process could be seriously disrupted.

In conclusion, I would like once again to
commend the United Nations staff under the able
leadership of Mr. Vieira de Mello, the members of the
international community and especially the people of
East Timor as they work together to build a promising
future. Japan shares their hopes for a successful
transition to independence and remains determined to
make a genuine contribution to this endeavour.

