Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom is grateful to Canada for organizing this
open debate and for thus following up the discussion of
the Carlsson report which the United Kingdom instigated
among members of the Council in December.

We pay tribute to Prime Minister Carlsson and to his
Korean and Nigerian colleagues on the Inquiry for the
excellent job that they have done and to the Secretary-
General for taking this initiative of commendable
transparency.

It is important that our discussions should look to
the future. We must all, Member States and the
Secretariat, be prepared to learn from the report of the
Independent Inquiry team, to discuss its recommendations
in depth and to explore any other realistic ways to avoid
such humanitarian catastrophes in future. The United
Kingdom is very ready to do that.

We also need to look to the future of the people of
Rwanda. What they need now is political commitment
and practical support in their efforts to rebuild their
country. The United Kingdom Government is committed
to working in partnership with the Government and the
people of Rwanda to build national unity and develop
democratic processes in a society where trust was
destroyed by genocide.

Rwanda also needs to restore the rule of law and
address the devastating economic impact of the genocide.
Given the background of 1994, and before that the legacy
of decades of divisive and exclusionary rule, such a task
will take time. The United Kingdom is committed to
working in an open partnership with Rwanda to keep that
process on track. For instance, we are now providing
long-term development assistance to help Rwanda to meet
international development targets, and I think that answers
one of the points made by the Ambassador of Mali. For
its part, Rwanda has made specific commitments in the
areas of national unity, good governance, conflict
resolution, poverty reduction and economic stability,
commitments which it must fulfil.

The Carlsson report highlights a range of failures
encompassing all those involved, and it puts forward a
number of recommendations for the future. I will focus
on those issues relating to the Security Council. Perhaps
most damning is the apparent failure to face up to the
reality on the ground when it really mattered. This failure
became evident in two important aspects: first, the
original mandate was based on the commitment of the
parties to the Arusha Peace Accords but did not properly
take account of the fragility of those Accords; second,

 

and most important, the Council failed to respond to the
drastically changing situation on the ground.

It is apparent that there were real problems in the flow
of information, including to the Security Council. Some of
the causes were structural. But there also appears to have
been a perception - probably justified - that the Security
Council, and maybe the United Nations membership as a
whole, did not have the political stomach for hearing and
responding to the unadorned truth. This is fundamental. The
Council needs accurate, timely and unfiltered information.
At the same time, the Council and the United Nations
membership as a whole must demonstrate the political will
to act on that information, however unpalatable, to tackle
complex humanitarian emergencies.

It is easy to underline the need for greater
responsiveness and flexibility. In an organization of 188
equal States, that is not always so easy to deliver. But we
as a Council have to be clear that no peacekeeping mandate
is set in stone, that operational changes are part of the
Council's business and that the underlying principles and
responsibilities of the United Nations must not be ignored
or set aside.

We know that for a peacekeeping mission to work,
there must be a peace to keep. And it is right that any
peacekeeping mission must be based on the commitment of
all parties to a peace accord. But at the same time we have
to recognize where fault lines remain - and in any long-
term conflict such fault lines will be deep and extend to the
population at large, not just to political and military players.
This principle is bound to apply in most peacekeeping
operations, not least those currently before us in Sierra
Leone and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We must
also be prepared to recognize and respond to signs of a
major shift in the political or humanitarian situation. As the
report makes clear, this means that any peacekeeping
operation needs to have both a political analysis capacity
and a human rights monitoring capacity. This underlines the
importance, moreover, of the continuing efforts of the
United Nations to strengthen its rapid reaction capability.

We must ensure that lessons learned from Rwanda
inform future Council discussions. The Rwanda and
Srebrenica reports are inextricably linked to wider issues of
United Nations peacekeeping capability and humanitarian
preventive action. These issues have implications for other
United Nations bodies, not just the Security Council. This
point is borne out by current discussions on conflict
prevention, which are detailing the need for a
comprehensive approach going much wider than
peacekeeping.

We therefore applaud the Secretary-General's
intention to tackle these issues in a broad-ranging report
on peace operations due to be issued this summer.
Today's discussion must inform that process and lead to
effective decisions by the Council which draw the right
lessons from this appalling story.

