Mr. Li Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from Chinese): I should like to thank the representative of
Brazil and other representatives for their friendly
statements concerning my presidency of the Security
Council.

The mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL) will come to an end
on 30 April 1995. ONUSAL, which has lasted for nearly
four years, has played a significant and promotive role in
bringing forward the peace process and the national
reconciliation of the two parties in El Salvador, thus being
crowned as one of the success stories of the United
Nations peace-keeping operations.

The experience of ONUSAL is worth summing up
and drawing on in a serious manner. It is our considered
view that there are four major elements for success: first,
to persevere in the peaceful settlement of conflicts
through negotiation and dialogue; secondly, to stick to the

 

agreement once it is reached; thirdly, to strive to achieve
national reconciliation and turn conflicting parties into
partners of cooperation; and, fourthly, to have the full
support of the international community, including the
Security Council. Of the four elements, national
reconciliation is fundamental. Outside help will be of no
use if the internal cause is not brought into full play. The
political will for peace of the parties in El Salvador is the
solid basis for the settlement of the conflict in El Salvador.
This is also the prerequisite for ONUSAL's success. There
is an old saying in China that "Having survived the
disaster, the brothers transcend their own hatred with a
smile". In March this year, when I was President of the
Security Council, the Ambassador of El Salvador and the
representative of the Frente Farabundo Marti para la
Liberacion Nacional (FMLN) came to see me, shoulder to
shoulder. They briefed me on the implementation of the
Peace Accords and expressed their common desire for the
Security Council to continue to support the peace process
in El Salvador. This vivid example still remains fresh in my
mind.

After the withdrawal of ONUSAL the peace process
in El Salvador will enter a new era. At this critical juncture
the international community, including the United Nations,
should continue to offer a helping hand. In this connection,
we support the proposal by the Secretary-General that the
United Nations maintain an appropriate political presence
in El Salvador for the purpose of verifying the continued
implementation of the Peace Accords and providing good
offices. Meanwhile, we urge both parties in El Salvador to
remain committed to its unswerving efforts in pursuing the
implementation of the Peace Accords in all their aspects,
particularly in the areas of land transfers and the
reintegration programmes for ex-combatants.

The Chinese people cherishes fraternal and friendly
feelings towards the peoples of Latin America and wishes
to develop friendly relations of cooperation with them on
the basis of the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations as well as the Five Principles of
Peaceful Coexistence. It is our sincere hope that all States
in Latin America will realize or maintain peace and stability
so as to concentrate their efforts on developing their
economies and raising the peoples' living standards. Based
on this position, the Chinese delegation has all along given
its support to the Government, the FLMN and the people of
El Salvador for their efforts to attain lasting peace and
stability in their own country. We shall continue to do so
in the future.

