Mr. Mpay (Cameroon)(interpretation from French):
First of all let me say, Mr. President, how pleased the
delegation of Cameroon is to see you presiding over the
Security Council at a time when Angola, which has long-
standing historical ties to Portugal, has entered a decisive
stage in the process of peace, unity and national
reconciliation. We are sure that under your presidency,
the Council's work will be successful. We also
congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Zbigniew
Maria Wlosowicz of Poland, on the excellent work he
accomplished as President of the Council last month.

We reiterate to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, the appreciation of
Cameroon and Africa as a whole for his tireless efforts
for peace in the world since he has been at the head of
the Organization.

(spoke in English)

I am speaking also in my capacity as representative
of the current Chairman of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU).

I wish to take this opportunity to express the deep
appreciation of the Organization of African Unity for the
encouraging report (S/1997/304) of 14 April 1997,
submitted to the Council on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III).

Recent developments - the approval by the National
Assembly of legislation concerning the special status of
the President of UNITA, the swearing in of the UNITA
deputies and the inauguration of the Government of Unity
and National Reconciliation - are historic steps in the
direction of peace, stability and national reconciliation.
These developments are great because a window of
opportunity for peace has been opened for the people of
Angola, who have long endured pain, suffering and the
ravages of a fratricidal war.

In the light of these new developments in Angola,
the OAU congratulates the Angolan Government and
UNITA on their vision and determination to enhance the
unity and reconciliation of the people of Angola. The

 

OAU also congratulates the United States, Portugal, the
Russian Federation and other countries for their
steadfastness, commitment and resolve to assist the parties
in arriving at this new day in Angola. To the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative, Maitre Alioune
Blondin Beye, the OAU extends its deep appreciation for
the relentless efforts they have exerted and continue to
exert to bring about lasting peace in that troubled sister
country.

The OAU shares the view that as much of the
international community welcomes these encouraging
developments, there is much more that needs to be done to
consolidate and build upon this manifestation of goodwill
by UNITA and the Government of Angola. In this regard,
therefore, the international community and all who have
played some part in the establishment of the Government of
Unity and National Reconciliation have a moral and
political obligation to stay engaged in the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

The reasons for staying engaged are too obvious to
mention. But if there is one reason why we should all stay
engaged, it is that an uncontrolled fire in your neighbour's
house can reach your house if you do not act in time. In
other words, there is an imperative that requires Angola to
be secure from the crisis at its borders.

The full implementation of the Lusaka Protocol is the
objective the OAU and the international community wish to
see achieved. In this regard, we must persevere in the task
and encourage the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation to resolve all pending issues. If ever there
was a time for the international community to stay engaged
in Angola, it is now. The international community owes the
people of Angola that much, and the OAU enjoins the
Security Council also to be engaged until the objective is
achieved.

