Judge Mose: It is an honour to address the
members of the Security Council and to present the
updated version of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda completion strategy report, which was
submitted on 30 November 2006.

When the ICTR Prosecutor and I appeared before
the Council in June 2006, 55 persons had their cases
completed or ongoing. That number has now increased
to 59. Three further judgments were rendered in
September 2006. Since the report was submitted on 30
November 2006, another judgment has been rendered.
Thirty-two accused have now received
judgments. Let me briefly mention the four Trial
Chamber judgments just referred to.

Jean Mpambara, a bourgmestre, was acquitted of
all charges against him on 12 September 2006. On the
same day, Tharcisse Muvunyi, commander of the Ecole
sous-officiers, was convicted of genocide, direct and
public incitement to commit genocide, and crimes
against humanity. He was sentenced to 25 years of
imprisonment.

On 20 September 2006, Andre Rwamakuba, who
was the Rwandan Minister of Primary and Secondary
Education, was acquitted of all charges against him. On
13 December 2006, Athanase Seromba, a priest, was
convicted to 15 years' imprisonment for genocide and
extermination as a crime against humanity.

The judgments in the Mpambara and Rwamakuba
trials bring the number of acquitted persons at the
ICTR to five.

Let me now turn to the nine trials that are in
progress, involving 25 accused. The five multi-accused
trials continue to represent our main challenge because
of their volume and complexity, and hence the time
needed to complete them. It is therefore important to
note the progress made.

I am very pleased to report that the Military I
case was virtually concluded on 12 December 2006. In
that trial, which involves four alleged senior military
leaders in 1994, a total of 82 prosecution and 157
defence witnesses were heard in the course of 400 trial
days. Three additional witnesses will be heard by video
link in January 2007. Following written and oral
submissions in coming months, judgment will be
rendered in 2007.

Another welcome development since the
submission of the completion strategy report is the fact
that in the Butare trial, the fourth of the six accused has
now commenced presenting his case. The hearing of
the evidence is expected to conclude in 2007.

In the Government trial, which involves four
Government ministers, the second of the fourth
accused is presenting his evidence. It is expected that
the evidence will have been heard by the end of 2007.

In the Military II trial, involving four accused,
the Prosecution closed its case on 7 December 2006,
having presented 72 witnesses. The Defence case will
commence in the first months of 2007, with conclusion
in 2008.

In the Karemera et al. case, involving three
accused, the Prosecution is presenting its case. The
Trial Chamber has taken steps to ensure that the
Prosecution case should be completed before the
middle of 2007 in order to conclude the trial in late
2008.

Turning now to the single accused cases, closing
arguments were heard in the Karera trial in November
this year. Judgment is expected in early 2007. In the
Zigiranyirazo case, the Defence is currently presenting
its evidence.

During the Security Council meeting in June
2006, I mentioned that three new trials were expected
to commence in the second half of 2006. The Tribunal
met this target. The Bikindi and the Nchamihigo cases
began on 18 September and 25 September 2006,
respectively. The third new single accused case,
Rukundo, commenced on 15 November this year. All
three trials are expected to conclude in 2007.

Let me now address the situation of the detainees
who are awaiting trial. Our completion strategy report
mentions that there are 11 accused in this group. I am
pleased to inform the members of the Security Council
that this number is now, in fact, lower. The first of
these cases, Renzaho, is scheduled to commence on
8 January 2007. Secondly, yesterday, Joseph
Nzabirinda, a businessman and youth organizer,
pleaded guilty to a count of murder, as crime against
humanity, thereby increasing the number of persons
having pleaded guilty to 7. Thirdly, the Prosecutor this
week filed a new request to transfer the case of Mr.
Bagaragaza to a national jurisdiction. In his
intervention, he will provide further information.

I am therefore pleased to confirm that the ICTR is
on schedule to complete cases involving between 65
and 70 accused by the end of 2008, as envisaged in our
completion strategy.

In order to achieve this aim, continuity is of the
essence. On 13 June 2006, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1684 (2006), which extended the
term of office of all ICTR permanent judges until 31
December 2008. On 13 October 2006, resolution 1717
(2006) extended the terms of office of all ICTR ad
litem judges until the same date. I would like to
express our appreciation to the Security Council for
having granted our two requests. This provides the
Tribunal with the continuity, stability and certainty
necessary for the efficient planning of trials.

Eighteen indictees are at large. The ICTR will not
be able to prosecute all these accused by December
2008, should they be found, but some of them should
be tried by the ICTR. It is essential that Member States
cooperate in the arrest and transfer of these persons. In
June 2006, the Prosecutor and I referred specifically to
Felicien Kabuga, who is in East Africa. Since then,
many efforts have been made to obtain his transfer to
Arusha, but so far without success. The Prosecutor will
provide further information about this. Let me simply
reiterate, in view of the completion strategy, the
importance of Kabuga being arrested and transferred to
the ICTR as soon as possible in order to determine his
guilt or innocence.

The Prosecutor will address the Security Council
on his plan to transfer some ICTR indictees to national
jurisdictions for trial. This is an important part of our
completion strategy. Member States are encouraged to
be receptive to discussions concerning transfer. The
Prosecutor will also provide updated information about
Rwandan initiatives to abolish the death penalty.

In connection with State cooperation, I have to
come back to the situation of acquitted persons. This
was raised before the Council in June, as well as in the
General Assembly in October, but there is still no
progress. As of today, only one of the five persons
acquitted by the Tribunal has found a country of
residence. The other four are under the protection of
the Tribunal in Arusha. Let me reiterate that the
situation is particularly serious for Andre Ntagerura
and Emmanuel Bagambiki, who were acquitted by the
Trial Chamber in February 2004, and whose acquittals
were confirmed in February 2006. The Registry has
without success made many attempts to find a country
for them. On behalf of the Tribunal, I must again
appeal to Member States to receive acquitted persons
in their territories. There is a need to find solutions to
these problems. Let me add that it may also be
problematic to relocate persons who are released after
having served their sentences following convictions.

I have now described the high level of
productivity in the four courtrooms of the ICTR during
the last six months, with the Tribunal conducting nine
trials involving 25 accused and rendering four
judgments. In parallel with these core activities, all
three branches of the ICTR continue to improve their
working methods. Some of these processes are
described in our report and its annexes.

I am pleased to confirm that Rwanda has
continued to cooperate with the Tribunal by facilitating
the flow of witnesses from Kigali and by providing
documents to the Prosecution and to the Defence.

On behalf of the Tribunal, let me conclude by
thanking the members of the Security Council, the
secretariat and the Member States for their support to
the successful completion of the work of the ICTR.

