Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, and through
you Mexico, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council this month. We wish you success
in the consideration of the issues on the busy agenda of
the Council that you made public at a press conference
on 2 April.

We welcome your initiative to convene this open
debate and to give special attention to the question of
Haiti. The participation in this debate of
representatives of the Economic and Social Council,
the Organization of American States and the Inter-
American Development Bank, among other important
institutions, emphasizes the comprehensive and
pragmatic focus with which the consideration of this
important matter has been approached.

Colombia recognizes the problems and challenges
that Haiti faces, recently exacerbated by natural
disasters and an international economic and financial
crisis, as well as by soaring food prices. We share with
other Latin American and Caribbean countries the
priority and resolve to support Haiti in overcoming the
challenges facing it. To that end, in addition to the
bilateral efforts it has already undertaken, Colombia is
participating in several regional initiatives.

Following the guidelines of the President of
Colombia, we are focusing our participation principally
on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). Responding to an explicit call by the
United Nations, Colombia recently increased its
contribution to the Mission by contributing police
officers with experience in fighting kidnapping and the
world drug problem.

Colombia will broaden its contribution of police
personnel to MINUSTAH and will continue to work
with the other Latin American countries. Recently, we
initiated our participation as an observer country in the
2 x 9 Mechanism, established by the Deputy Ministers
for Foreign Affairs and Defence of Argentina, Bolivia,
Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Guatemala, Paraguay, Peru and
Uruguay. We also participate in the Working Group for
the Latin American coordination and cooperation with
the Haitian National Police.

Allow me to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, Mr. Hedi Annabi, for
the report (S/2009/129) that he presented today for the
consideration of the Council, in which important
considerations, which Colombia shares, are formulated.
We agree with the report to the effect that one of the
greatest short-term challenges facing Haiti is the
upcoming senatorial elections, and with the
recommendation that every effort must be made to
guarantee that this democratic exercise be free, fair and
inclusive. It is likewise important for the Haitian
political leadership to adopt a collaborative approach
that allows the legislative agenda to move forward and
towards longer-term objectives.

Regarding the strengthening of institutions, we
agree with the Secretary-General's observation in his
report that the impact of bilateral initiatives would be
enhanced through improved coordination within an
overarching, nationally owned framework for State
reform. The donor conference that will shortly be held
in Washington, DC, will be a good opportunity to
make progress in that respect.

Colombia, aware of the essential role that
security plays in the consolidation of State authority
and institution-strengthening, welcomes the timely
decision adopted by the Security Council in October
2007 on the enlargement of police personnel in
MINUSTAH.

In March 2009, the Colombian Deputy Minister
of Defence and the Director of the Colombian National
Police undertook a visit to Haiti, where they had the
opportunity to conduct interviews with the highest
authorities of the country, members of the United
Nations team and diplomats of Latin American
countries, with the objective of identifying Haiti's
primary needs and possibilities for cooperation.

As a result of the visit, greater efforts will be
made towards greater cooperation in the area of
security, providing Haiti and MINUSTAH with
Colombia's experience in strategic planning, police
organization and the training of commissioned and
non-commissioned officers and specialized teams, such
as judicial police. As mentioned before, cooperation
with the Haitian police will be broadened in the battle
against drugs, kidnapping and common and organized
crime.

The strengthening of the Haitian National Police
is a step in the right direction and a response to the
present challenges, particularly the fight against crime,
the extent of which calls for a comprehensive police
response. As part of Colombia's contributions to that
process, we have consistently supported the
establishment of institutions with the capacity to
respond to those challenges within the framework of
the protection of human rights.

In the field of natural disasters, which have
affected Haiti's efforts towards economic and social
development, in 2008 Colombia made a contribution of
six tons of food, medicines and other elements of
emergency humanitarian assistance to address the
emergency situation and mitigate the effects of
hurricane Gustav and tropical storm Hanna. Our
cooperation also includes technical education, food
security and environment protection initiatives.
Colombia hopes that the solidarity and material support
offered by the international community will effectively
contribute to the consolidation of democracy, security
and sustainable development in Haiti. We believe that
all of the efforts channelled through MINUSTAH will
translate into better living conditions for the Haitian
population.
