Mr. Kama] (Pakistan): Mr. President, since this is
the first time I am addressing the Security Council under
your presidency, allow me to congratulate you on your
assumption of this important post and to express the deep
admiration of Pakistan for the consistent and committed
manner and the committed interest and support which
your country, Japan, has always extended to Africa and to
African causes.

The participation by a large number of delegations
in today's debate on Africa amply indicates the concern
of the international community over the prevailing
situation in the African region. The gravity of the
situation is also reflected by the fact that over 60 per cent
of the issues currently under active consideration by the
Security Council relate to Africa.

In his report the Secretary General has made a
sincere effort to identify the causes of the conflicts in the
African region. The report lists an array of political,
historical, socio-economic and cultural reasons for these
seemingly unending conflicts. An earnest effort has been
made to suggest plausible solutions to these conflicts, and
they are duly appreciated.

The overriding factor for the sad state of affairs in
Africa has been, and is, the all-pervasive and abject
poverty in the continent. Poverty is deprivation.
Deprivation leads to frustration. And frustration engenders
instability and conflict.

The international community should therefore
concentrate its efforts on poverty eradication in Africa.
What is required is liberal technical and financial support
to augment its human resource development and to build
and enlarge its essential infrastructure for result-oriented
socio-economic development. Despite our own financial
difficulties, Pakistan has implemented a 250 million rupee
Technical Assistance Programme for Africa since the
early 1980s. Under this Programme, we are extending
training facilities to young professionals from African
countries in diverse fields.

Without attaining the objective of sustainable
development, the possibilities of achieving durable
solutions to conflicts in Africa would remain as elusive as
ever. Large-scale migration of populations, recurrence of
epidemics and increasing environmental degradation
underscore the importance of a more focused attention on
developmental issues in the region.

 

Africa remains among the poorest regions in the
world. It lacks both in human resource development and
material resources. Its poverty is further exacerbated by
pressures of debt servicing, deteriorating terms of trade,
declining official development assistance, falling
commodity prices, increasing protectionism in developed
countries and negative effects of structural adjustment
arrangements.

At present the total debt of Africa is around $350
billion. The African countries are unlikely to be able to pay
back this huge amount through indigenous resources. This
high level of indebtedness, coupled with the lack of
infrastructural back-up, is a major impediment to the flow
of private investments in Africa, which are of paramount
importance to achieve sustained economic growth and
sustainable development of the region. We therefore fully
support the Secretary-General's appeal to the donor
community and the international financial institutions to
take immediate steps to reduce Africa's debt burden.

We believe that explicit debt reductions would have a
more positive impact on the economies of the countries of
the region than the routine ritual of debt rescheduling. We
hope that creditors will respond positively to the appeal and
agree to convert all the remaining bilateral debt of the
poorest African countries into grants.

We also support the call to the donor countries to
ensure that at least 50 per cent of their aid to Africa is
spent in the region. This would effectively curtail the
reverse flow of resources from poor African countries to
rich donor countries.

Africa deserves the international community's full
support to break out of the vicious circle of poverty and
underdevelopment. It needs a supportive international
economic environment, including priority access to markets
for its exports and preferential access to technology.

The potential benefits of the information revolution for
Africa cannot be overemphasized. A wealth of ideas and
practical proposals for the eradication of poverty, disease
and hunger has been developed and is readily available.
There is an abundance of models and projects which
demonstrate the success of various developmental
approaches. The African countries can benefit from this
wealth of knowledge according to their own specific needs.
With the help of the United Nations funds and programmes
all this data could be consolidated into an integrated
information system and then progressively linked to an
exclusive Africa help database.

As for the United Nations efforts towards conflict
resolution and peacekeeping in Africa, the response to
incipient crises and even full-blown tragedies has been
slow in the past. The massacre of over half a million
people in Rwanda is a painful reminder of this sluggish
response. The United Nations needs to prepare itself fully
for any future emergencies. The best course to prepare for
such eventualities would be to develop an efficient early
warning system and to build appropriate capacities to
respond effectively to simmering crises in Africa and in
other parts of the world.

The problems faced by the African region are
colossal. These require earnest efforts for political
solutions and liberal support for economic development.
We hope that this debate will constructively contribute to
developing comprehensive responses to the
multidimensional problems being faced by the African
region. Let us join hands to attain this long elusive
objective.

