Ms. Bensouda: Let me begin by congratulating
Cete d'Ivoire on presiding over the Council during the
month of December. I wish you continued success in
that important role, Sir.

I thank you for the opportunity to present my
twenty-eighth report on the situation in Darfur.

Over 13 years ago, on 31 March 2005, at a meeting
also attended by the late Secretary-General Kofi
Annan (see S/PV.5158), members of the Council came
together to adopt resolution 1593 (2005). The Council
considered that the situation in the Sudan constituted a
threat to international peace and security and decided
to refer the situation in Darfur since 1 July 2002 to the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.

Following the adoption of resolution 1593 (2005),
members of the Council made statements that noted
allegations of grave crimes and highlighted the need
to ensure accountability and justice in Darfur. The
representative of Benin, for example, stressed the need
to end the reign of impunity and to ensure credible and
timely action against persons charged with atrocities
and serious crimes. Some members of the Council also
emphasized that the Council's support would be crucial
to ensuring an effective outcome to the referral of the
Darfur situation to my Office. Since the Darfur situation
was referred to my Office, we have consistently striven
to establish the truth and to secure justice for victims

by pursuing accountability for the alleged perpetrators
of crimes under the Rome Statute committed in Darfur.

At the request of my Office, the Pre-Trial
Chambers of the Court issued multiple arrest warrants
in the Darfur situation after independently assessing
the evidence. Today, warrants remain outstanding
for five persons, all of whom occupied positions of
responsibility at the time of their alleged crimes,
namely, officials of the Government of the Republic of
the Sudan Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, Mr. Ahmad Harun and
Mr. Abdel Hussein; militia leader Mr. Ali Kushayb; and
rebel leader Mr. Abdallah Banda. Notably, several of
those suspects continue to hold senior positions within
the Government. Combined, those arrest warrants
include over 60 counts of war crimes and over 50
counts of crimes against humanity. The alleged crimes
include extermination, murder, rape, forcible transfer
and torture. Those are crimes that rightly preoccupied
and concerned the Security Council, resulting in the
referral of the Darfur situation to my Office. Yet the
alleged perpetrators of those crimes remain free, while
the victims and affected communities continue to
await justice.

My Office's investigations in the Darfur situation
continued throughout the current reporting period and
significant progress was achieved. Notwithstanding
the many challenges we face, my investigators remain
dedicated to their mission and continue to identify leads
and to interview new witnesses each month. The body
of evidence is increasing, and my prosecution team
continues to prepare in anticipation of future arrest
warrants and the surrender of any of the Darfur suspects.

My report notes the positive news that levels
of violence against civilians in Darfur continued to
decrease during the reporting period. Nevertheless,
the impunity that resolution 1593 (2005) sought to end
continues in Darfur; regrettably, so does the commission
of serious crimes. Those ongoing crimes include attacks
against personnel of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). In resolution
2429 (2018) of 13 July, the Council condemned the
ongoing impunity for those who attack peacekeepers
and urged the Government of the Sudan to do its utmost
to bring all perpetrators of such crimes to justice. More
than 11 years after Mr. Banda's alleged crimes against
African Union peacekeepers, it is a serious indictment
of us all that crimes against peacekeeping personnel
continue to be committed in Darfur.

Conflict between forces of the Government of the
Sudan and the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid
also continues in the Jebel Marra area. My report refers
to information from UNAMID about the destruction
of villages and the killing, injury and displacement of
civilians. I continue to be deeply concerned by reports
of sexual and gender-based violence against women
and girls in Darfur. In resolution 2429 (2018), the
Council expressed concern that UNAMID is unable to
access areas from which it has withdrawn. I call on the
Government of the Sudan to respond affirmatively to
the Council's request for UNAMID to have unfettered
access throughout Darfur, not least because of the
vital role that the UNAMID plays in monitoring and
reporting violence against civilians in Darfur.

My analysts will continue to assess allegations
of current crimes in Darfur, not for the purpose of
simply monitoring and reporting on the findings of
others, as some assert, but rather to ensure that my
Office is aware of allegations of ongoing grave crimes
committed in Darfur and to feed that information into
our ongoing assessment of the situation of which we
are seized, as well as our independent investigations.
We will continue to make use of reports from reliable
entities and sources operating in Darfur.

I wish to emphasize that, in direct contravention of
resolution 1593 (2005), the Government of the Sudan
continues its policy of antagonism and non-cooperation,
effectively obstructing my Office's ability to conduct
investigations on the ground in Darfur. The Council
is once again invited to urge the Government of the
Sudan to cooperate with my Office in accordance with
its own resolution.

I now turn to the issue of cooperation more broadly.
Regrettably, as I outline in my latest report, my Office
continues to face multiple obstacles and impediments
in relation to that issue. With regard to the arrest
and surrender of the Darfur suspects, the Council
will recall the litigation before the Appeals Chamber
in relation to Jordan's failure to arrest and surrender
Mr. Al-Bashir to the Court when he visited Jordan on
29 March 2017. Pre-Trial Chamber II found that Jordan
had failed to comply with its obligations under the
Statute and decided to refer Jordan to the Assembly of
States Parties and the Security Council. As the Council
is aware, Jordan appealed that decision, which resulted
in extensive litigation during the reporting period. That
involved multiple written briefs and culminated in a
five-day hearing before the Court's Appeals Chamber,
from 10 to 14 September earlier this year. The issues
focused on Head of State immunity, resolution 1593
(2005) and the articles of the Rome Statute relating
to cooperation, consultations with the Court and the
waiver of immunity. In the course of that process,
multiple legal submissions were made, including by
Jordan, the African Union, the League of Arab States,
professors of international law and, of course, my
Office. That comprehensive and inclusive legal process
has now concluded. We await a final determination by
the Appeals Chamber.

During the reporting period, Mr. Al-Bashir
continued to travel internationally, including to
Djibouti and Uganda in July. Both those States parties
were previously referred to the Assembly of States
Parties and to the Security Council for their failure to
arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir to the Court while
on previous trips to their territory in 2016. No action
was taken by the Council in relation to those or, indeed,
any other referrals. It is therefore not surprising that
States parties to the Rome Statute, such as Djibouti
and Uganda, continue to host ICC suspects on their
territory in blatant violation of the Court's findings. In
the absence of any meaningful consequences for such
instances of non-compliance, we are unlikely to see a
change in such regrettable patterns. That status quo
is hardly conducive to advancing the cause of justice
in Darfur.

Yet again my Office calls on the Council to take
meaningful action to give effect to non-compliance
referrals by the Court. My Office took note of the
declaration of 9 July by the High Representative of the
European Union, which called on all United Nations
Member States to abide by and to implement the
resolutions adopted by the Council, notably resolution
1593 (2005). I remain grateful for the principled support
of members of the Council, international and regional
organizations and, indeed, all States that support the
work of my Office in the Darfur situation.

In that regard, I was particularly encouraged by
the recent Arria Formula meeting on the relationship
between the Court and the Council convened on 6 July.
That timely meeting was helpfully co-sponsored and
organized by ICC States parties that are members of
the Council, and I take this opportunity to once again
express my appreciation to them for the initiative.
The meeting provided a unique opportunity for the
President of the Assembly of States parties, Council
members, State representatives, civil society and my
Office, among others, to exchange views on how to
further enhance coordination and synergies between the
Council and the Court. Notably, numerous participants
at that meeting expressed concern about the Council's
failure to act in instances in which a State is referred
to the Council pursuant to a finding of non-compliance
by the Court. Several participants proposed concrete,
entirely workable measures that the Council could
adopt. I remain hopeful that the constructive dialogue
and proposals at that meeting will provide further
momentum that results in concrete action being taken
by the Council on this issue.

As we are all aware, in resolution 1593 (2005) the
Council decided that the Government of the Sudan and
all other parties to the conflict in Darfur shall cooperate
fully with, and provide any necessary assistance to,
the Court and my Office. Yet the Government of the
Sudan continues to completely disregard the Council's
demand for such cooperation. On the occasion of my
previous report to the Council I repeated my offer to
the Government of the Sudan to engage in dialogue in
relation to the situation in Darfur, including with respect
to the issue of the surrender of the Darfur suspects to
the Court. I also note that the Council, in resolution
2429 (2018), urged the Government of the Sudan to
consolidate and expand its efforts to end impunity. Yet,
despite my offer and the fact that the representatives
of the Sudan previously asserted to the Council that
combating impunity is a top priority, the Government
of the Sudan has not engaged with my Office. I also note
that, during the proceedings initiated by Jordan, the
Appeals Chamber invited the Sudan and Mr. Al-Bashir
to file submissions on the issues raised by the appeal.
Yet they chose not to engage with the Court. The Rome
Statute requires my Office to investigate incriminating
and exonerating circumstances equally. If the
Government of the Sudan has such evidence - both
incriminating and exonerating - I invite it to come
forward and share that evidence with my Office.

The Government of the Sudan can rest assured that
the due process rights of any suspects who appear before
the Court will be fully respected. Those include the
right to counsel of their choice and, more important, the
right to a fair, independent and impartial trial. Council
members will recall that, at my previous briefing to the
Council on the Darfur situation, the representative of
Bolivia asked for a report on activities undertaken by the
Court to promote the strengthening ofjudicial organs in
the Sudan. Consistent with resolution 1593 (2005) and in
accordance with the principle of complementarity, my
Office is prepared to support national efforts to combat
impunity in Darfur to the extent that my mandate and
limited financial resources will permit. However, in the
absence of any cooperation from the Sudan, I regret that
I am unable to report any progress in that regard. The
Government of the Sudan can, and must, demonstrate
its stated commitment to ending impunity and to its
respect for the authority of the Council by opening a
new chapter of cooperation with my Office. It should
allow my staff to conduct investigations on the ground
in Darfur and facilitate access to victims, witnesses and
the relevant documentary evidence. I once again invite
the Government of the Sudan to work with my Office
to pursue justice for the victims of the unimaginable
atrocities that have occurred in Darfur.

I will conclude by recalling another statement
made by a Security Council member at the time that the
Council adopted resolution 1593 (2015),

"what the Council said today is that there is no
way, in our times, that anyone, anywhere in the
world, can get away without just retribution for the
commission of serious crimes." (S/PV.5I58, p. 10).

Regrettably, justice and accountability for Rome Statute
crimes remain, for now, unrealized aims in the Darfur
situation. This is undeniably an unacceptable situation,
which must not be permitted to continue. Justice
delayed is justice denied. The judgment of victims and
the critical eyes of history are upon us.

