Mr. Acharya (Nepal): I wish to congratulate you,
Ambassador Apakan, on assuming the presidency of
the Council for the month of September. I would like to
extend my sincere thanks to you for providing me with
this opportunity to speak before the Council.

I would also like to thank Ms. Karin Landgren,
the Representative of the Secretary-General, for her
briefing, although we hold different views on various
issues she has presented here, including the role of the
national Army. We do not accept the sweeping critical
comments levelled at the national Army as trying to
scuttle the process. They are not true; as Ms. Landgren
herself has said, they are based on perverted
"non-papers".

As the Council is aware, Nepal has passed many
milestones in its peace process while moving forward
towards sustainable peace, stability and development
since the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Accord
in November 2006. The promulgation of the Interim
Constitution on a consensual basis, the successful
elections for the Constituent Assembly and the
declaration of Nepal as a federal democratic republic
were indeed some of the historic steps made possible
by a conscious understanding among the political
parties and by wide support from the general public.

It is true that our transition from conflict to a
lasting peace has been arduous, as it is everywhere
else. But what is equally true is that we are
transforming our entire political disposition from
unitary to federal and monarchical to republican, and
making the structure and mechanisms of our
governance more democratic, inclusive and
accountable. These transformations will have far-
reaching effects, and as such are not straightforward
tasks by any measure. Rather, the processes require
assiduous negotiations, confidence-building measures
and public understanding in order to bolster the new
set-up and the sharing of power among all
stakeholders. We all look forward to the successful
conclusion of the peace process as soon as possible so
that we can ensure further peace, stability and
sustainable, rapid economic progress in the country.
The people of Nepal look forward eagerly to
completing the transition to a normally developing
State as early as possible.

At this juncture, while the Constituent Assembly,
with its extension, has the task of writing a new
constitution in time, it is also engaged in the process of
forming a new Government - a democratic exercise
that it has to fulfil in its capacity as the legislative
Parliament as well. We are aware that the current
stalemate should not affect or delay the process of
writing the constitution. We have therefore all been
making efforts to complete the new Government-
formation process from within the Constituent
Assembly as soon as possible. We are hopeful that it
will ultimately bring the political parties to further
negotiations, resulting in the formation of the new
Government soon. This will then allow the
Government and political parties to focus their efforts
on consolidating the peace process by taking care of

the remaining tasks related to it, including the
integration and rehabilitation of combatants and the
writing of the new Constitution.

The Government and the people of Nepal express
their gratitude to the United Nations for having
provided continued support since the beginning of our
peace process. The United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) has witnessed and participated in many
phases of our political events and the peace process
throughout the successive renewals of its mandate.

I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his keen personal interest in the success of
the peace process in Nepal. We have taken note of the
Secretary-General's report on UNMIN contained in
document S/2010/453. I have the honour to state the
views of the Government of Nepal on some aspects of
the report, as follows.

We would have liked to see the report more
balanced, nuanced and reflective of the correct
assessment of the situation on the ground in its entirety.
It is important that we have a well-rounded view of the
situation based on accurate assessments.

The Government of Nepal has been working hard
since the early days of the peace process to push it
forward and thus move from the transition phase to
normal statehood as soon as possible. It has also called
for the cooperation of all concerned and expressed its
utmost commitment to flexibility in promoting the
peace process and accelerating the constitution-
building process in the Constituent Assembly.
Appropriate recognition of those efforts in the report
could have helped provide a balanced view of the
situation.

In paragraphs 2 and 4, and in various other
places, the report should have better reflected the
realities on the ground. With the elections to the
Constituent Assembly and the formation of the Special
Committee, the concept of the two armies no longer
exists. The Maoist combatants should therefore be
consistently referred to as such throughout the report.
A national Army cannot be equated with the
combatants.

In paragraphs 6 and 29, the report refers to the
non-paper that UNMIN circulated in Nepal. The
non-paper created a lot of confusion in Nepal, as it
suggested an action plan that went well beyond the
constitution-drafting timeline and created unnecessary
political complications. At formal meetings called by
the Prime Minister soon after, the political parties
represented in the Constituent Assembly categorically
disowned the non-paper.

Paragraph 9 of the report refers only to the
16-week Action Plan submitted by the Prime Minister.
In fact, the Prime Minister and the Special Committee
prepared a l6-week Action Plan initially; as the
situation evolved, a 60-day plan was also prepared to
take care of the issue of integration and rehabilitation.
That shows the Government's utmost commitment to
accelerating the task of integrating and rehabilitating
the combatants, and should also have been reflected in
the report.

Paragraph 31 of the report does not discuss the
Government's commitment and work towards
democratizing the Nepal Army. It fails to mention the
Cabinet committee headed by the Defence Minister,
which has already prepared a detailed action plan on
the democratization of the national Army. The action
plan has been submitted to the Cabinet and is already
under its active consideration.

The Government of Nepal takes exception to the
questioning, in paragraph 34 of the report, of the
regular functioning of the Government with full
authority as per the Constitution of Nepal. The
Government fully understands that the fundamental
principles of the Charter of the United Nations respect
the national sovereignty of each nation State and its
political system as per its own Constitution.

In conclusion, the Government of Nepal reaffirms
its firm commitment to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and looks forward to
8

contributing, as ever, towards fulfilling the
Organization's mandate to maintain international peace
and security and to promoting economic development,
social progress and fundamental human rights. We will
do so with the continued understanding and support of
the international community for an early, meaningful
and positive conclusion of the country's peace process
in the best interests of the nation and its people.

It is for these reasons that I have just forwarded a
request from the Government of Nepal, from the Prime
Minister, through a letter to the Secretary-General for
the extension of UNMIN, with appropriate focus as
reflected in the letter. The letter sets out in detail the
progress that has been made, or the lack of progress
and the challenges that we face, as well as the reasons
behind the request for an extension of UNMIN with
appropriate focus.

We highly honour and value the sustained support
and cooperation of the Security Council in our peace
process. We feel privileged to receive the continued
support and goodwill of the international community.
We are confident that, with the Council's support and
cooperation, we will succeed in taking our peace
process to its logical end.

