Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by congratulating you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council, and I want to extend very special
thanks to the delegation of Jamaica and to Ambassador
Durrant for their extraordinarily professional work.

We also want to express thanks for the briefing
that Mr. Hedi Annabi has given us and for the
Secretary-General's report on the work of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) carried out over recent months. It is
gratifying to see, in these two reports, the progress the
Mission has made in the implementation of its
mandate. In this connection, we wish to emphasize two
elements that we consider fundamental so that the
reforms under way to create a professional police force
will be structural and lasting.

First of all, the recruitment of members of
minority groups constitutes a guarantee of the
neutrality that should characterize a police force. In
addition, because of the authority that an institution
such as the police represents within a social structure,
its composition must be a model and an example to be
followed. This means that shaping a multi-ethnic force
serves other purposes as well.

We hope that the appointment of the Bosniac
representative as Deputy Station Commander at the
Srebrenica police station will serve as an incentive, as
the Secretary-General mentions, for the return of
minority groups to that region. These efforts should be
imitated in other zones.

Secondly, we want to underscore the work being
accomplished by the State Border Service in
cooperation with the police. The illegal transit of
persons, just like the illicit traffic in various goods, is a
recurring problem in Bosnia and Herzegovina. For this
reason, we want to emphasize the progress made in
recent months in border control. The new international
reality makes this control an indispensable tool in the
fight against terrorism, and we therefore believe it is
necessary for the joint work to continue between the
police and the staff of the Border Service. We welcome
the Secretary-General's appeal regarding the need for
funds for this programme.

We believe that the Security Council must not be
absent from the discussions that are under way on the
future of the international presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, since this will have an impact, to a
greater or lesser extent, on the work that lies ahead.

One of the recurring concerns that we have heard
in our deliberations on Bosnia and Herzegovina is
exactly what the United Nations exit strategy should be
in this peacekeeping operation. Some say that the exit
should occur once the implementation of the Dayton
Accords is complete. Others say that it should be next
year, when the Mission completes its mandate. Still
others believe that there should be a gradual progress,
involving regional actors in the work being done by the
United Nations. All of these alternatives are of interest
and deserve detailed analysis.

We are awaiting the results of the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board meeting that is
being held today in Brussels. The conclusions of that
meeting will have an influence on the new role that the
Security Council is to play in the future.

