Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes you, Sir, presiding over this open
briefing. We thank Secretary-General Guterres and
Mr. Gettu, Associate Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), for their
briefings. China listened carefully to the presentation
by Ms. Blanchett, United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees Goodwill Ambassador.

Recently, with the concerted efforts of the countries
concerned, countries of the region and United Nations
agencies, there have been some positive developments
in resolving the issue of Myanmar's Rakhine state.
In early August, Bangladesh and Myanmar held a
ministerial meeting to discuss the implementation of
the bilateral repatriation agreement. Consensus was
achieved on issues such as verification forms, displaced
persons in the border area and the establishment of a
hotline between ministers. Currently, Myanmar is
ready to receive those who fled to Bangladesh.

Myanmar and Bangladesh received visits from
Special Envoy on Myanmar Ms. Burgener and held
in-depth exchanges with her on the Rakhine issue.
Myanmar agreed to the Special Envoy's regional
office being headquartered in Naypyidaw. The office
is already in operation. The Myanmar Government
signed a memorandum of understanding with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and UNDP. The three parties held
two joint working group meetings and are preparing for
a joint field visit. Recently, the Myanmar Government
also received visits from officials of UNHCR, UNDP,
the International Organization for Migration and the
World Bank.

The Government and the local people of Bangladesh
have maintained their massive humanitarian support
to the displaced people in Bangladesh and striven to
improve their living conditions and to make proper
arrangements to deal with the impacts of the rainy
season and hurricanes. Myanmar established the broadly
representative independent Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State and agreed to its terms of reference.
The Commission has already started its work. The
Myanmar Government is actively implementing the
recommendations of the Advisory Commission.

Both Myanmar and Bangladesh are friendly
neighbours of China. China has always actively
engaged with both countries to find a solution to
the Rakhine issue through bilateral dialogue and
consultations between the two countries. In late
June, State Counsellor and Foreign Minister of China
Mr. Wang Yi held an informal meeting with the visiting
Bangladesh Foreign Minister, Mr. Ali, and the Minister
for the Office of the State Counsellor of the Republic
of the Union of Myanmar, Mr. U Kyaw Tint Swe.
On the basis of the three-phase solution proposed by
China last year - comprising a cessation of hostilities,
repatriation and development - they reached a four-
point principled common understanding on the proper
settlement of the Rakhine issue.

First, efforts should be continued in line with
the three-phase proposal of cessation of hostilities,
repatriation and development towards a rapid
improvement of the situation in Rakhine state. On that
basis, Myanmar and Bangladesh should find a proper
solution through bilateral consultations. That would
serve the fundamental interests of both countries and is
conducive to regional peace and stability.

Secondly, the most pressing task is to address the
repatriation of those who fled to Bangladesh. The two
countries should adopt effective measures as soon as
possible and take substantive steps to repatriate the
first group of people.

Thirdly, in accordance with the will of both countries,
China stands ready to provide further assistance to
improve the living and housing conditions of those
fleeing the conflict, including by providing emergency
supplies and building the necessary infrastructure.

Fourthly, each side should leverage their respective
advantages and strengthen development cooperation in
the border areas of the two countries for the well-being
of those on the ground. China is now working closely
with Myanmar and Bangladesh on implementing the
principled common understanding. Ambassador Sun
Guoxiang, Special Envoy for Asian Affairs of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China, made several
visits to Myanmar and Bangladesh and, through an
in-depth dialogue on the issue, promoted mutual trust
between the two sides and called for resolving the
issue through bilateral channels. Mr. Sun Guoxiang
also briefed members of the Security Council and the
Secretariat on his mediation efforts in New York (see S/2018/726).

China supports the work of Special Envoy
Burgener, who visited China at the end of June at
its invitation and held a frank dialogue with China
on resolving the Rakhine issue. China has provided
humanitarian material assistance to both Myanmar and
Bangladesh to help to improve the living conditions of
the displaced people.

The Rakhine issue has complex historical, ethnic
and religious contexts. Resolving it requires long-term
efforts through a gradual and persistent approach. Given
the current situation, the international community should
cherish the hard-earned progress, fully understand the
great difficulties faced by the countries concerned and
continue to provide constructive assistance instead
of simply pressuring them. The Rakhine issue should
be properly addressed by Myanmar and Bangladesh
through bilateral channels. The two countries should
continue to resolve developing issues as a result of
implementing the repatriation agreement through
dialogue. The priority is to start the repatriation process
as soon as possible as a first step forward. There should
not be any preconditions. Issues such as freedom of
movement and citizenship should be resolved gradually
during the repatriation process.

UNHCR and UNDP should enhance consultation
with the Myanmar Government, overcome technical
difficulties, avoid politicization and implement in
earnest the tripartite memorandum of understanding.
The international community should pay greater
attention and help local communities to eradicate
poverty in order to promote sustainable development,
improve livelihoods and economic and social conditions,
and achieve stability and harmonious coexistence
among all ethnic groups. That is the fundamental way
to resolve issues over the long-term.

China commends UNDP and the World Bank
for their efforts to promote local development. We
hope that the international community will continue
its contribution to the development of Myanmar and
Bangladesh. Council members should remain unified.
United Nations entities should play their respective roles
and improve consultation with Myanmar, Bangladesh
and other countries of the region. The international
community should remain patient, promote dialogue
between Myanmar and Bangladesh, help resolve
practical issues and realize long-term peace and
stability in Rakhine state.

