Mr. Jagne (Gambia): Please allow me,
Mr. President, to also seize the opportunity at this first
formal meeting of the Council following the untimely
demise of the Amir of the State of Bahrain, His Highness
Shaikh Isa Bin Salman Al-Khalifa, to express my
delegation's heartfelt condolences to the delegation of
Bahrain, to our friend and colleague Ambassador Buallay
and through him to the bereaved ruling family, the
Government and the people of the friendly State of
Bahrain. The irretrievable loss of such a great and wise
leader will be felt not only in Bahrain and the Arab

 

world, but also in all peace-loving countries throughout the
world.

My delegation is saddened by the situation in Sierra
Leone. The latest round of violence unleashed by the
Armed Forces Revolutionary Council
(AFRC)/Revolutionary United Front (RUF) is unique in
both the scale and the grotesque nature of the attacks on
civilians. The Secretary General's report speaks for itself.
With no recognizable political agenda, the rebels have been
waging a war of terror against the innocent civilians for
almost eight years now, and there is no end in sight to the
wanton destruction of life and property perpetrated by the
rebels. Not even babies are spared. The perpetrators of
these persistent patterns of gross violations of human rights
should be pursued and brought to justice.

The humanitarian situation is also a cause for grave
concern, in particular the problem of access to those in
need. In this context, we welcome the plan being finalized
by the international humanitarian community and the
Government of Sierra Leone. We equally urge the rebels to
respect human rights and international humanitarian law and
to ensure unhindered access of humanitarian assistance to
the needy.

However, according to the Secretary General's Special
Representative, Mr. Okelo, there have since been some
significant improvements in the military and security
situation. This relative calm could not have prevailed
without the enormous sacrifices made by the forces of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
It is also true that without the timely assistance of friendly
Governments, the marked improvements in the security
situation would not have been possible.

While we welcome the recent reinforcements from
Nigeria, Ghana, Guinea and Mali, we still believe that the
ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) needs to be
further strengthened in terms of logistics and material
support. My delegation is therefore grateful to the United
Kingdom, France, the United States, Canada, the
Netherlands and Argentina for their continued support. We
appeal to others to emulate these generous gestures, which
constitute an ample demonstration of support for, and
solidarity with, the people of Sierra Leone.

This is all the more necessary in view of the fact that
President Kabbah's Government has, despite all the odds,
revived its programme of demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration. With the dual-track approach still a viable
option, renewed diplomatic initiatives on the basis of the
Abidjan peace accords could very well bear fruit. In fact,
the proposed special ECOWAS Summit would create
another opportunity to bring everybody on board, putting
the emphasis again on wider regional involvement in the
quest for a lasting peace in Sierra Leone.

As the situation in Sierra Leone still merits
international attention, my delegation welcomes the
decision of the Secretary-General to re-establish
UNOMSIL in Freetown as soon as possible. We support
an increase in the current number of military observers
and human rights personnel. We strongly believe that the
continued presence of the United Nations on the ground
is necessary. In this regard, my delegation supports the
extension of the mandate of UNOMSIL and will therefore
vote in favour of the draft resolution.

