Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your election as a non-permanent member of the Security Council and on assuming the presidency for the month of January. We believe that Viet Nam will make a significant positive contribution to the work of the Council and we have great confidence in your capable diplomacy. I welcome the presence of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam during our debate last Friday. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate Niger, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Estonia as they begin their terms as non-permanent members and to reiterate my warm thanks to Cete dIvoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, Peru and Poland for their significant contributions to international peace and security over the past two years. I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to the Secretary-General and Mrs. Mary Robinson for their extremely important statements. The theme chosen for this first open debate of 2020 is very symbolic. Indeed, as we prepare to celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, some serious reflection is called for to take stock of the achievements made and identify current challenges. In 1945, at the end of the Second World War, the United Nations was created with the Charter of the United Nations as its founding text, which was conceived as a political contract among nations resting on three pillars: peace and security, development and human rights. The essence of the Charter was and continues to be the maintenance of international peace and security, which today remains the core objective of United Nations operations. The Security Council, which bears the primary responsibility in that area, is dedicated to serve as the guarantor of peace and security in the world. In that context, we welcome the efforts of the Security Council to promote conflict prevention, mediation and the peaceful settlement of disputes, which are fundamental principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. It should also be noted with satisfaction that the Security Council has, over the decades, developed an extensive institutional and legislative framework for tackling emerging global challenges, such as international terrorism and transnational organized crime. However, it is essential that the Council be able to show unity and take joint action when faced with the gravity of current global crises. We also welcome the reforms launched by Secretary-General Antdnio Guterres, which have strengthened the role of the United Nations as the leading and authoritative actor in preventing and resolving conflicts and promoting dialogue and political solutions to disputes. In reforming the peace and security architecture, strengthening the principle of sustainable peace and launching the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, those reforms have made it possible to adapt the various bodies, strategies, mechanisms and departments of the United Nations to tackle today's realities and challenges, with full respect for the provisions of the Charter. Our Charter constitutes the road map of the Organization. It is therefore crucial to safeguard the unity of its message and implement its provisions. To that end, the founding fathers of the United Nations enshrined in the Charter a separation of the functions, powers and prerogatives among the bodies of the Organization and specifically articulated, in Article 12 of the Charter, a distinction between the mandate of the General Assembly and that of the Security Council, by clearly stipulating that: "While the Security Council is exercising in respect of any dispute or situation the functions assigned to it in the present Charter, the General Assembly shall not make any recommendation with regard to that dispute or situation unless the Security Council so requests." Full respect for this separation is therefore a prerequisite for each body to fulfil its respective mandate and, ultimately, for the proper functioning of the Organization and respect for the Charter. In conclusion, I would like to stress that peace and security will be strengthened when the Charter of the United Nations is fully respected and it is therefore crucial to promote and protect the sacrosanct principles rooted therein - sovereignty, territorial integrity and the national unity of States. As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of our Organization this year, I wish to reaffirm the firm commitment of the Kingdom of Morocco to respect for the Charter and the purposes of the United Nations. Our Organization remains the ideal and indispensable venue for the pursuit of collective, multilateral efforts towards the realization of a world that enjoys peace, security, sustainable development and respect for human rights.
