Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the adoption
of resolution 2385 (2017), renewing the mandate of the
Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea for another
year. The United Kingdom should be commended for all
these efforts in facilitating the resolution and in trying
to accommodate as much as possible the comments and
inputs of members of the Council.

This sanctions regime has critical importance to
regional peace and stability, and much significance
should be attached to its full and effective
implementation. In that regard, the Monitoring Group
has certainly provided extensive information and
analysis in its latest annual reports on Somalia and
Eritrea (S/2017/924 and S/2017/925, respectively), and
the Security Council should take this opportunity to
express its appreciation to the group for its dedicated
efforts in monitoring the implementation of the
sanctions regime.

We believe that it is fitting to thank those that voted
for resolution 2385 (2017), because we understand
their gesture as an expression of commitment to peace
and security for the Horn of Africa - a region that is
desperately in need of even a temporary respite from the
overwhelming number of conflicts affecting it. We are
therefore extremely appreciative, not because we are
fond of sanctions, but because for now there is no other
alternative for halting acts leading to destabilization,
which is impossible to ignore in the reports of the
Monitoring Group.

As far as the situation in Somalia is concerned, the
growing influence of Al-Qaida and the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh) is a cause for serious
concern that should give us more reason to continue
intensifying our efforts in combating terrorism and
violent extremism. That cannot be done however
without providing the necessary support for the Somalia
National Security Forces and the African Union Mission
in Somalia. We cannot afford to take for granted the
security gains made in recent years, which, as we have
seen recently, can easily be reversed in the absence of
sustained international support and engagement.

With regard to Eritrea, despite the increased tempo
of lobbying in the run-up to the renewal of mandates,
we have seen no change of behaviour whatsoever in
the country's destabilizing activities in the region. It
continues to Violate the arms embargo and supports
armed opposition groups operating in the region. Based
on corroborating evidence, the Monitoring Group has
documented very well the extent to which Eritrea
continues to violate the sanctions regime in complete
disregard of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
That cannot and should not be taken lightly.

With regard to providing conclusive evidence
of Eritrea's support for Al-Shabaab, we understand
that that continues to be a work-in-progress, as the
Monitoring Group has not been able to make a clear
determination with regard to the investigative work
that it is carrying out. But it has not ruled out Eritrea's
support for Al-Shabaab. It should be understood that,
according to the Monitoring Group's report on Eritrea,
it was unable to find conclusive evidence. The lack of
conclusive evidence does not denote the absence of
evidence, in the least, especially in circumstances in
which the Monitoring Group has not been allowed to
visit Eritrea. We should therefore allow the Monitoring
Group to finalize its investigation.

Eritrea has continued to obstruct the
implementation of resolution 1862 (2009). It should
be called upon to clarify the situation concerning the
remaining Djiboutian prisoners of war. Eritrea has not
even acknowledged the existence of those prisoners of
war, but at one point stated that they had died. We note
what was stated in the mid-term update in the final
report indicating that those prisoners might still be
alive, which contradicts Eritrea's statements. Therefore
it is incumbent upon Eritrea to clarify the situation
concerning the remaining prisoners of war in line with
its treaty obligations and pursuant to resolution 2385
(2017), which we adopted today.

Eritrea has also not given a constructive response
to both the Monitoring Group's request to visit the
disputed area between Djibouti and Eritrea and the
African Union fact-finding mission following the
withdrawal of Qatari forces. The Visit to Djibouti has
already been conducted, while a positive response
regarding the Eritrean portion remains forthcoming.
That is a clear indication that Eritrea does not have any
desire to fulfil its obligations. Although other countries
under sanctions regimes try to cooperate as much as
possible, Eritrea has not shown thus far any willingness
or readiness to extend the necessary level ofcooperation
to the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992)
and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, and
the Monitoring Group. We have to wonder why Eritrea
continues to refuse to allow the sanctions committee
and the Monitoring Group to visit Asmara. That really
does not make any sense unless it has something to
hide. A country that desperately wants sanctions lifted
would logically have to demonstrate the maximum
level of cooperation, but that does not seem to be the
case. Some might be inclined to give short shrift to
that, while ignoring how critical it is for regional peace
and security.

Once again, the Council has urged Eritrea to
facilitate the visit by the Chair of the sanctions
committee and the Monitoring Group. We are hopeful
that that will happen, and even more hopeful that
Eritrea will choose to live in peace with Djibouti and
Ethiopia, which we know would not make some people
happy, but would be in the best interest of the peoples
of the three countries in the region, in general. That is
something we look forward to with great hope.

