Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan abstained in the
vote on the draft resolution adopted by the Council
today, and I would like to explain our reasons.

On 30 July this year, the Council adopted
resolution 1556 (2004). Within a week of the adoption
of that resolution, the Government of the Sudan and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Pronk, agreed on the Darfur Plan of Action. The
Plan acknowledged that the Government of Sudan may
not be able to fulfil all the requirements of resolution
1556 (2004) within 30 days.

In his briefing to the Council on 2 September (see S/PV.5027), Mr. Pronk reported positively on 10 of the
12 areas, in which the Government had made progress
in fulfilment of its commitments. In two areas, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
reported that the Government had not met its
commitments. Humanitarian access had improved
overall, and things seemed to be moving in the right
direction. The Government of the Sudan was fully
engaged with the African Union. Peace talks had
commenced in Abuja. That trend deserved to be
encouraged.

However, the draft resolution presented by the
sponsors was consistent neither with the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2004/703) nor with the briefing
of the Special Representative. It failed to recognize the
progress that had been achieved. We were told that the
central purpose of the draft resolution was to
strengthen the African Union's role. However, the
provisions of the original draft resolution did not
reflect that central purpose.

Nevertheless, the Pakistan delegation remained
constructively engaged in the negotiations. We
circulated our suggestions to improve the draft
resolution's provisions and make it more balanced. We
welcome the reflection of several of those suggestions
in the final text, including acknowledgement of the
steps taken by the Government of the Sudan to improve
humanitarian access, greater emphasis on the
obligations of the rebel groups and reaffirmation of the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Sudan,
which we believe must be upheld unconditionally in
accordance with the Charter. We particularly welcome
the greater emphasis on the central role of the African
Union.

Nevertheless, we have stated from the outset that
Pakistan cannot endorse the use, or the threat of use, of
sanctions, which we believe would be unhelpful in this
situation. That was why we abstained in the vote on
resolution 1556 (2004). Considering that progress had
been made, we did not feel it was justifiable or
necessary to threaten sanctions explicitly and solely
against the Government of the Sudan, sanctions which
are much broader in scope and more stringent in their
potential impact even compared to resolution 1556
(2004). It has also been our concern that apart from
being unfair, such a threat might provoke a response
that would be counterproductive, threatening
international humanitarian relief and eroding the
mediatory efforts of the African Union. It could also
harden the position of the rebels, as appears to have
already happened.

Pakistan agrees that the Security Council can and
must make a useful contribution. We can do so
primarily by supporting the African Union's efforts.
We therefore look forward to the meeting of the
Security Council with the President of Nigeria, the
current Chairman of the African Union, His Excellency
Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, on 24 September.

