Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa would
like to join others in welcoming the Foreign Minister
of Serbia, Mr. Jeremie, to the Council, as well as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Zannier. We also welcome Mr. Hyseni.

We would like to thank Mr. Zannier for his
briefing and the Secretary-General for his report. We
are particularly pleased to note the outcome of the
dialogue between the Secretariat and Serbia on the
reconfiguration of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), allowing
for an increased role for the European Union in
Kosovo. However, we must emphasize that the
reconfiguration should be carried out in a neutral
manner, under the legal framework established by
resolution 1244 (1999) and under the authority of
UNMIK.

With regard to the substance of the report, South
Africa reiterates its concern over the low number of
returns of displaced persons, especially since the report
indicates that that already slow process has become
even slower. We are especially troubled by the
Secretary-General's observation that the Ministry of
Communities and Returns in Kosovo is not functioning
in a transparent manner and is taking decisions that
may divert resources for returns. My delegation is of
the opinion that the issue of returns is central to the
promotion of reconciliation between communities.

South Africa also concurs with the Secretary-
General that the future stability of the Balkans lies with
the European Union. However, achieving that
integration will be difficult if the parties do not engage.
My delegation is concerned over the lack of direct
dialogue between the parties. It is our opinion that the
chapter of the Balkan wars will never be closed unless
and until dialogue is established with the aim of
achieving reconciliation among all parties.

On numerous occasions my delegation has
stressed the need for the resolution of conflicts and
disputes through dialogue and negotiation based on
international law, the principles of the United Nations
Charter and the resolutions of the Security Council.
That approach is important in securing lasting and
sustainable solutions. In that regard, South Africa has
constantly expressed its concern over the manner in
which Kosovo declared its independence from Serbia,
especially at the fact that it was not achieved through a
negotiated settlement. Consequently, we welcome the
decision of the General Assembly to refer the question
of Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence to
the International Court of Justice (General Assembly resolution 63/3). We are of the opinion that the
judgement will assist in clarifying the situation.

