Mr. Schulz (Germany): Germany feels that this
is a welcome opportunity to discuss forward-looking
solutions. We are concerned that the Council should not
be used or abused in attempts to rewrite or reinterpret
history. We should try to come up with solutions in a
concrete way.

In that spirit, Germany affirms its commitment to
the dialogue facilitated by the European Union (EU)
and normalization between Pristina and Belgrade. Also
in that spirit, Chancellor Merkel and President Macron
hosted a meeting in Berlin on 29 April and will continue
their efforts to support the EU-facilitated process and
to restore the trust of both sides in the normalization
dialogue. To that end, Chancellor Merkel also received
Kosovo's Prime Minister Ramush Haradinaj on 6 June
in Berlin.

Pristina and Belgrade share the goal of EU
membership and both sides share the responsibility to
reduce tensions and continue the dialogue - "dialogue"
meaning "real dialogue". Too often, this seems to be
based on a belief in an equation that says monologue
plus monologue equals dialogue. That seems to be a real
problem. We need true, genuine and honest dialogue. We
want to use our good offices to support that wherever
we can. Good relations between both sides are in the
interests of the people of Kosovo and Serbia.

We call upon the Kosovo Government to revoke
the tariffs on products from Serbia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Those tariffs contravene the Central
European Free Trade Agreement and are a clear
contradiction of Kosovo's regional integration efforts.
In that context, the vision of a greater Albania is
counterproductive, and all the more so when it is uttered
by leading politicians. We likewise urge the Serbian
Government to refrain from actions that undermine an
environment conducive to negotiations. This concerns,
for example, efforts to persuade other countries to
withdraw their recognition of Kosovo. Both parties
need to tone down the rhetoric and communicate
more clearly to their respective constituencies why
comprehensive and sustainable agreement is in the
mutual interest. Increased stability in both countries
and the region brought about by such an agreement is
clearly in the interest of all. Our position is well known.
We remain convinced that border changes along ethnic
lines do not contribute to such a solution.

Let me just briefly refer to the police operation on
28 May. Let me be clear regarding our views on this
operation in general. Kosovo has every right to combat
corruption and organized crime with determination and
in accordance with the rule of law. We welcome efforts
to combat criminal activities throughout Kosovo. These
efforts should not be limited to but also include the
north. At the same time, international personnel must
be treated strictly in accordance with international law.
We look forward to a swift and thorough investigation
into the treatment of the personnel of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
on 28 May.

Let me say in general that the immunity accorded
to United Nations officials is very important. We
discussed this in a different case about an expert on the
Panel of Experts for Libya a few weeks ago. That was
very important, and it is equally important here that the
immunity of United Nations personnel in each case be
respected. I say that without prejudging any results of
the ongoing investigation, obviously.

With regard to the strategic review of UNMIK, we
have stated previously that we believe it is high time
for such a review. Since UNMIK was first mandated in
1999, the situation in Kosovo has changed drastically,
and we believe that the Mission needs to adapt to that
new reality. It is the Mission's operating environment
that has changed, and it is time for a transition of many
of the tasks of UNMIK, either to Kosovar institutions
or to other international institutions that have taken
over UNMIK's original role.

Before I conclude, let me cite two examples of
our efforts, together with our partners, to implement
Security Council decisions on the ground and to build
sustainable peace by supporting concrete measures
that meaningfully complement initiatives towards a
comprehensive and sustainable agreement.

The first example I would like to cite is that we
support the effort in Kosovo to adopt and implement
a survivor-centred approach to addressing conflict-
related sexual violence, in line with resolution 2467
(2019). As mentioned by the Secretary-General in
his report (S/2019/46l), the Jahjaga Foundation, the
Embassy of Germany and the United Nations Kosovo
team organized a conference on this topic on 8 March
that adopted the so-called Pristina communique,
focused on conflict-related sexual violence.

Let me conclude by citing another practical example
for the need and benefit of closer regional cooperation.
Together with our French partners, we have started an
initiative to better control small arms, which are all
too readily available in the region. Last week, the six
countries met in Sarajevo to take stock of the situation,
and we are encouraged by the progress achieved and
the commitment to the initiative shown by the countries
in the region.

