Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by
expressing our gratitude to Mr. Robert Serry, the
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for the briefing he provided at the
start of the debate.

Indonesia associates itself with the statement of
the Non-Aligned Movement just delivered by the
Representative of Egypt and with that of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, to be delivered
later by the Representative of Kazakhstan.

The resilience of the Palestinian people is worthy
of recognition. They have endured repression and
endless mayhem for decades, yet they have kept on
moving forward towards achieving their dreams: the
dream of statehood, namely, the dream of our
Palestinian friends, brothers and sisters, to have a place
that they can call their own.

The August 2009 comprehensive plan for
Palestine formulated by the Government of Prime
Minister Salam Fayyad, entitled "Palestine: Ending the
Occupation, Establishing the State", is a component in
the establishment of Palestinian statehood and thus part
of the significant journey to achieve that long-term
dream. We must support that dream, and we must
continue to support the rehabilitation and development
of Palestinian national institutions.

The Non-Aligned Movement ministerial meeting
in Bali in May made a commitment to support the
independence of the State of Palestine. In the same
vein, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation echoed
the same position.

We welcome the important step forward taken in
recent times by several States to extend recognition to
the State of Palestine on the basis of the 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. We urge members of
the international community that have yet to do so, to
confirm their recognition of the State of Palestine
without delay, as justice delayed is justice denied.

Indonesia wishes that in September, less than two
months from now, in the Hall of the General Assembly,
we, the community of nations, shall witness and
welcome the birth of a new nation, the State of
Palestine, in fulfilment of a long dream.

However, the dream of our Palestinian people and
their journey to an independent State has unfortunately
continued to be beset by hurdles and setbacks. Israel
continues with its infamous ingenuity to combine
persistent hostility towards the Palestinians with
determined efforts to frustrate the peace process.
Summary evictions of Palestinians, demolition of their
property, and the expansion of settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, comprise a grand design to construct a new
reality. Such efforts mimic the strategies and tactics of
a colonial Power.

Israel must recognize that we are living in an era
when human rights are to be respected and protected
and that the will of the oppressed will prevail. No
country can live with a clear conscience if it resorts to
brutal repression. No country can wear the mantle of
dignity while ignoring universal democratic values.
Israel must change its controversial policies and cease
its inhumane actions.

Israel has many choices. But the most honourable
and most reasonable choice is to conduct direct
negotiations with Palestine. That choice will garner the
sympathy and support of the international community.
Such direct negotiations must lead to realizing the
dream of statehood - nothing more and nothing less.

Let me conclude by underlining that the path
towards statehood is filled with roadblocks. We can
attest to this. But my delegation firmly believes that
we, the international community, must and can remove
all hurdles to the peaceful and comprehensive
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We must
embrace the significant moment when the international
community, in particular the Security Council, fulfils
its obligation to the Palestinian people - a moment of
remarkable progress and transformation in the history
of the Middle East.

For its part, Indonesia's commitment and support
for the Palestinian cause is total and unwavering. Our
commitment to an independent, viable and democratic
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security with
its neighbours, is absolute.

