Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Russia's initiative to convene this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East. I wish to
thank Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, and Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs O'Brien for their briefings.

The question ofPalestine is at the core ofthe Middle
East issue and the source of the problems in the region.
Safeguarding the legitimate national rights and interests
of the Palestinian people is a shared responsibility of
the international community. The current situation
in Palestine is dire, with constant violent conflicts,
peace talks at a stalemate and a profound humanitarian
disaster. The international community cannot stand by
while the Palestinian people suffer and the Middle East
peace process is stalled. It should take practical steps to
push for a settlement ofthe Palestinian-Israeli issue and
the early realization of the two-State solution.

First, we should remain committed to moving
in the correct direction of building an independent
State of Palestine and achieving peaceful coexistence
between Palestine and Israel. The establishment of a
fully sovereign State of Palestine based on the 1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital is the
inalienable right of the Palestinian people and the key to
the settlement of the question of Palestine. The parties
should work on the basis of the principle of land for
peace, the two-State solution, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and
the Security Council, so as to resolutely push forward
the peace process.

Secondly, Palestine and Israel should exercise
restraint and continue peace talks, which is the only
practical way to resolve the Palestinian-Israeli issue.
The fact that the peace talks are stalled can only serve
to drag Palestine and Israel into a vicious cycle of
esclating violence, which would be a disaster for both
sides. Only through an early resumption of talks will it
be possible to arrive at a lasting settlement and achieve
peace and stability between Palestine and Israel, as
well as in the entire region. Israel and Palestine should
put an end to violent confrontations. Israel should take
the lead to show good faith, cease settlement activities
and put an end to the demolition of Palestinian homes,
so as to create conditions for relaunching peace talks.
The legitimate security concerns of the countries of the
region should be respected.

Thirdly, the international community should
provide guarantees for the advancement of the peace
process. A series of new ideas for a resolution of the
Palestinian-Israeli issue were recently raised, including
the convening of an international peace conference on
the issue and expanding peacemaking efforts on the
Middle East. When Chinese Foreign Minister Wang
Yi attended the Middle East peace process ministerial
conference in Paris, he put forward China's ideas for a
settlement to the Palestinian-Israeli issue. He called on
the international community to explore peacemaking
efforts on a broader scale, take follow-up measures
for peace talks, and establish incentive mechanisms
for peace. China supports all efforts conducive to
easing tensions between Palestine and Israel and for
the achievement of the two-State solution. We support
the establishment of more effective peacemaking
mechanisms for the Middle East. We support the
Council taking practical steps as soon as possible to
actively respond to the legitimate concerns of Palestine
and Arab States and play a larger role in pushing the
parties concerned to put an end to conflict and restart
peace negotiations.

Fourthly, we should continue to push forward
economic reconstruction in Palestine. China urges
Israel to cooperate with international assistance
efforts and comprehensively lift its blockade against
Gaza. The parties should respond actively to the
United Nations assistance programme for Palestine
and engage in economic cooperation with Palestine in
order to improve its humanitarian situation and living
conditions. China will continue to provide assistance to
Palestine and is willing to work within the cooperative
framework of our one-belt-one-road initiative to help
Palestine achieve economic and social development as
soon as possible.
