Mr. Bishnoi (India): We thank you, Sir, for having
organized today's open debate on the victims of attacks
and abuse on ethnic or religious grounds in the Middle
East. I would like to compliment you for circulating the
useful and well-structured concept note (S/2015/176, annex). I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General, the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and other briefers for the background that they have
provided.

At the outset, we would like to lend our voice
to condemning Violence perpetrated in the name of
religion and ethnicity in the Middle East and elsewhere.
Religious, cultural, ethnic and linguistic diversity are
essential and indispensable components of the social
fabric of human civilization. Persecution on the basis
of such diversity strikes at our common humanity.

We express our deep concern over the activities of
proscribed outfits and radicalized and extremist groups
in the region that are critically impacting on peace
and stability while also jeopardizing human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the very lives of ethnic,
religious and other minority groups. Efforts must be
made by all parties and stakeholders in the region to
curb these dangerous sectarian and extremist trends.
We believe the consolidation of political processes and
solutions while building durable State institutions will
be the effective way of addressing such extremism and
radicalism in the region.

The international community is witness to excesses
of terrorism and violent extremism in the Middle East
and elsewhere. This further highlights that there can
be no justification for terrorism or violent extremism.
The need to collectively demonstrate zero tolerance
for terrorism and violent extremism has never been
greater. The international community must take an
unequivocal and resolute position against terrorism and
violent extremism 4 phenomena that are aimed at the
destruction of human rights, fundamental freedoms
and democracy, and threaten the territorial integrity
and security of States.

Further, the issue requires a consolidated,
rather than fragmented, approach, including that of
developing a legal framework for fighting terrorism at
the international level, especially by swiftly adopting
the comprehensive convention on international
terrorism, as well as developing suitable regulatory
frameworks for the prosecution of terrorist outfits and
personnel. We recall that in September last year, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2178 (2014), which
looks into the problem of the foreign terrorist fighters.
We believe that the Council needs to act robustly using
the instruments of law that it has at its disposal and
the information available to it to counter terrorism and
maintain international peace and security.

The primary responsibility to promote and protect
human rights rests with States. It is imperative that
we fully respect the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of all States Members of the United
Nations when considering our response. Member States,
for their part, should continue to take steps that are
policy-oriented and legal in nature, to ensure principles
of equality and non-discrimination for all their citizens
and to combat intolerance, negative stereotyping,
stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to Violence
and violence against persons based on religion or belief.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that there
can be no justification for terrorism in any form. The
menace of terrorism has to be fought on all fronts
and in all places. There is also no place for Violence
in the name of religion and ethnicity. Member States
and the international community should leave no stone
unturned in promoting and protecting the human rights
of all citizens to continue living in their own countries,
in peace, freedom, equality and dignity.

