The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Germany and Sweden, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kastrap
(Germany) and Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
Permanent Observer of Switzerland, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, if I hear no objection,
I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to extend
an invitation to the Permanent Observer of Switzerland
to the United Nations to participate in the discussion,
Without the right to vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, MrStaehelin
(Switzerland) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Assistant-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
The Council will hear briefings from the
Permanent Observer of Switzerland and the Permanent
Representatives of Germany and Sweden.

I would wish to remind Council members of the
understanding reached in our prior consultations that
the format of this morning's meeting is not intended to
set any general precedent.

As there is no list of speakers for this meeting, I
would invite Council members who wish to speak or to
ask questions to so indicate to the Secretariat as from
now.

In accordance with the decision taken earlier in
the meeting, I give the floor to the Permanent Observer
of Switzerland to the United Nations.


