Mr. Kubis: I would like first of all profoundly to
thank all those speakers who have acknowledged the
work of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE). Our cooperation with the United
Nations and other partner organizations is, indeed,
expanding this year rather well under the very dynamic
chairmanship of the Netherlands. I would like once
again to reiterate that there is a strong commitment to
developing such cooperation, and I very much
welcome the pledge made by our Bulgarian
colleague - Bulgaria will, indeed, be next year's
OSCE Chairman-in-Office - to make cooperation
between the OSCE and the United Nations one of the
priorities of the forthcoming chairmanship.

With regard to some of the more specific points
made by previous speakers, I am particularly grateful
to the United Kingdom for a number of ideas, questions
and proposals on how to focus on and enhance
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. I would like to say that in many respects
they very much harmonize with what the OSCE is
trying to do and with its focus in all three areas
mentioned by the United Kingdom. I would like to say
that there can never be enough information exchange.
Again, I cannot speak about what should be done by
the Security Council and its members, including those
in my organization. But I can assure the Council that,
at the OSCE secretariat level, we are engaged in
regular exchange with the United Nations system -
not only with the Secretariat here in New York but also
with specialized agencies. We continue to be
committed to the expansion of this process. The same
goes for our partner organizations. We are expanding
the contacts among our situation centres and
operational rooms. Again, this is one of the features of
our approach - how to improve our very practical
operational cooperation.

With regard to developing capacity and gaining a
better understanding of what we are doing, again I
would like just to reaffirm how warmly we welcome
this excellent and very timely initiative of the Mexican
presidency of the Security Council. This is indeed one
of the ways in which to create a much better
understanding of the capacities of regional and
subregional organizations, which might also be of use
with regard to the objectives and purposes of the
Security Council and the United Nations as a whole. In
my statement I tried to highlight a couple of points
with regard to our capacities.
Indeed, in order to understand better what we are
doing, we also try to engage our partner organizations
in information exchanges as well as mutual visits. I
mentioned our outreach programme with regard to
organizations outside the OSCE area. They are very
much interested in our experiences in the human
dimension, as well as in confidence- and security-
building measures. For example we are engaged in
exchanges and experience-sharing with the African
Union. With regard to developing understanding
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
in the context of this meeting and my presence here, I
will be meeting with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Political Affairs, as
well as the Department for Disarmament Affairs. I
would like to stress that point. Those are our
counterparts here in the United Nations Secretariat.
This is not the first year in which we have been in
touch with them. We have regular staff consultations
and, on the ground, I mentioned Kosovo, where the
OSCE Mission in Kosovo is a part of UNMIK - a
pillar of UNMIK.

We participated in the 6 March meeting of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, and, again, I am glad
that, like a few other organizations, we were
acknowledged as a regional organization that has
developed quite a strong programme of work for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). We will continue in this vein in different areas,
first of all to promote the implementation of United
Nations conventions and protocols; secondly, to
promote the implementation of the OSCE's
commitments; thirdly, to assist our own participating
States to implement resolution 1373 (2001) and our
own commitments; and fourthly, of course, to develop
further contacts and experience-sharing with our
partner organizations.

This is a brief response to the points raised by
many of those present. Once again, I wish to express
my gratitude for this very timely initiative. We look
forward to further cooperation with the United Nations
and its Security Council.

