Mr. Verbaeke: I am honoured by this opportunity
to brief the Security Council, as well as for the
opportunity for the European Union (EU) to address
the Council today, have an exchange with Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic,
and Ambassador Nebie. This is the second time since the
holding of the high-level event on the Central African
Republic on the margins of the General Assembly that
we discuss the Central African Republic. It is crucial
to continue sending out clear signs of interest in the
situation in that country.

We have to acknowledge that presently the country
represents a combination of fragility and instability,
together with a severe and still protracted humanitarian
crisis. That is why we collectively need to engage and
help the country to end violence and achieve lasting
stability. That should also lead to accountability on the
part of local actors. It is crucial that all actors remain
fully focused on peace and reconciliation. The solution
to the crisis is political, not military.

For its part, as expressed just last week by the
European Union Foreign Ministers in Brussels,
the European Union is committed to maintaining
its substantial engagement and support for the
Central African Republic. Our road map is clear: the
consolidation of democratic institutions, the stability
of institutions and security sector reform must go hand
in hand. We have identified the following objectives
in that process: first, the fight against impunity,
including through the establishment of transitional
justice; secondly, the restoration of the rule of law and
of social cohesion; and, thirdly, the provision of basic
services and the restarting of the economy, including
through legal and sustainable use of natural resources.
We welcome the efforts and progress made by President
Touadera and his Government in those areas. We
encourage them to continue in that direction with
greater determination.

We are entering a critical phase in the Central
African Republic that will require the mobilization
of all international actors to coordinate our efforts in
full transparency. The European Union recently held
consultations with several partners, including France,
Russia and the United States, in order to achieve better
coordination in the field.
First and foremost, on peace and reconciliation, I
would like to reiterate the European Union's full support
for the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
under the auspices of the African Union and the
leadership of President Touadera. The work done by the
panel of facilitators under the leadership of Ambassador
Nebie lays the ground for a settlement. We call on all
actors, international and regional, to support the action
of the Government and of the African Initiative in a
properly coordinated and fully transparent manner.

We now need to progress quickly and obtain results.
In that regard, the intention of President Touadera to
launch negotiations with the armed groups is positive.
The process must remain a home-grown one. We
stand ready to support all efforts in that direction.
The decision to appoint a joint United Nations-African
Union envoy is a good sign of increased engagement.
They will complement the work of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA),
specifically the efforts of the Special Representative
and the MINUSCA team in the country. I would like
to take this opportunity to commend their efforts under
very difficult circumstances and to pay tribute to all
MINUSCA personnel.

The renewal of MINUSCA's mandate will soon
be discussed. Its multidimensional role will remain
essential to contribute to further stabilization in the
Central African Republic. It will be crucial that the
Mission remain able to strengthen and expand the
authority of the State throughout the territory of the
Central African Republic. That will not be achieved
without a further build-up and deployment of security
forces into the regions. MINUSCA must be able to
provide operational and logistical support to the
deployed Forces armees centrafricaines (FACA), as
recommended by the Secretary-General.

In that vein, the European Union will continue its
substantial engagement in the area of security. The
mandate of the European Union Training Mission has
been extended until September 2020. A third FACA
battalion was successfully trained. A fourth battalion is
currently being trained. Additionally, most of the needed
laws, decrees and doctrines have been developed with
the support of the European Union Training Mission
strategic advice. About a third of the FACA leadership
has gone through the Training Mission's programme.
That is a testimony to the Training Mission's leading
role in building the capacity of the FACA and in defence
sector reform in general.

European Union Mission activities also aim
at facilitating the redeployment of FACA and the
implementation of the national defence plan in Bouar.
That is one of our priorities. In that regard, I would also
like to stress the need for the mission to be able to work
together with FACA and access all training premises
in order to fulfil its mandate. That support to FACA in
the military domain is complemented by EU support to
the civilian security forces. We are using various EU
instruments to advise the Ministry of the Interior, the
police and the gendarmerie. That is without prejudice
to possible increased support in future in support of
capacity development and the deployment of internal
security forces.

The European Union will also continue assisting
the Central African Republic by strengthening the
resilience of the population and of the State, while fully
applying the approach linking relief, rehabilitation and
development and the humanitarian-development nexus.
The overall European Union development assistance
for the Central African Republic for the period 2017-
2020 amounts to close to €500 million.

I hope I have given you, Mr. President, a fair
account of our commitment to continue supporting the
Central African Republic as an illustration of strong
trilateral coordination and cooperation among the
United Nations, the African Union and the European
Union. I know the European leadership will remain
engaged in the coming months, and I urge all partners
to join our collective efforts.

