Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and
Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

A secure, democratic and prosperous Afghanistan
depends largely on the success of the reconciliation
process in the framework of a comprehensive strategy
to protect and promote human rights. Chile appreciates
the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan to resolve
outstanding differences with the Taliban through
dialogue. The organization of the first official meeting
between the parties on 7 July in Pakistan was a positive
development. However, we note with concern that
conflict and terrorist activities are on the rise, with
a consequent impact on the civilian population. The
Taliban must demonstrate its commitment to the peace
process, renounce violence and choose the table of
dialogue as the only means to advance its interests.

We are concerned about the recruitment and use
of children, increased attacks on schools and the
military use of children by the parties to the conflict.
We believe that the Lucens Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict can provide guidance in this area. We
hope that the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict will address this matter promptly, in support
of the proposals laid out in the report of the Secretary-
General in this regard, and we urge the Government to
implement them.

The launch on 30 June of the National Action Plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) was a
significant development. Afghan women should be an
essential component in all efforts to prevent conflict
prevention and build peace, and must participate in
the electoral process and institutions of law and order.
The establishment of police women Councils makes a
substantive contribution to this aspiration.

Political and social cohesion at the national level are
essential at this important stage. While we understand
that some reforms may generate discrepancies,
progress towards the consolidation of democracy and
peace in the country requires the constructive work
of all sectors, which must come together to prevent
some from seeking to take advantage of the political
divisions. It is essential that the Special Electoral
Reform Commission keep the consultation process
inclusive and comprehensive, involving civil society
and religious leaders, with the support requested of the
United Nations and international organizations.

At the regional level, we support the ongoing
constructive dialogue among Afghanistan's neighbours
to combat terrorism and drug trafficking and its
financing, and to resolve bilateral issues. It is critical
to build relations based on trust and cooperation.
In that sense, we also recognize the importance of
coordination between UNAMA and the Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy in Central Asia and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and we
appreciate the recent visit of the Secretary-General to
the region.

