Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I had wanted to welcome the presence of His
Excellency the Secretary-General here with us, but he
has now left the Chamber. I shall therefore proceed
directly with my statement.

Since the beginning of the crisis, the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic has been eager to improve the
humanitarian situation of its people. Therefore, on the
basis of its constitutional and international obligations,
it has continued to work day and night to fulfil all the
humanitarian needs of its citizens. In parallel to that,
the Syrian Government has worked to restore peace and
stability to the entire country.

The Syrian Government is fully committed to,
and fully abides by, its international commitments,
including its commitment to cooperate with the United
Nations and its agencies in the humanitarian field, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 46/182
and the guidelines laid out therein, first and foremost of
which is respect for the national sovereignty of States.

Accordingly, in the context of the Syrian
Government's implementation of the presidential
statement of 2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15), the
Syrian Government has implemented a number of
administrative and logistic measures that enable the
United Nations and humanitarian organizations to
expand their activities and increase their effectiveness.
That would not have been possible had it not been for the
cooperation of the Syrian Government and the measures
it has taken to facilitate them as a full partner. I would
like to give just one example in that regard, namely, the
agreement by the Syrian Government to open a third air
bridge to carry humanitarian assistance from the Iraqi
city of Erbil to the Syrian city of Qamishli. That air
bridge entailed 11 flights, while the first and second
had 13 and 10, respectively. The Syrian Government
has also offered to use its own air fleet to carry out
those flights as a gesture of goodwill.

In addition to the partnership I have just detailed,
I would like to remind the Council of the fact that
the Syrian Government has borne the brunt of the
distribution of humanitarian assistance in Syria. We
have covered 75 per cent of such assistance, whereas
United Nations bodies and other international
organizations operating in Syria have covered only
25 per cent of the total amount of assistance distributed.

Certain Governments, some of which are
members of the Council, have, in response to Syria's
openness, cooperation and positive commitment in the
humanitarian field, persisted in and maintained their
campaign of deception, sowing doubts and spreading
crude claims. That clearly reveals their evil intentions
in principle against Syria. That has also revealed that
some of them have sadistic intentions. They want
to prevail in international relations at the expense of
the pain, suffering and destroyed hopes of the Syrian
nation.

Some States have exposed their deep frustration
at the emergence of positive developments in the
humanitarian and political fields. That frustration was
reflected in destruction and terrorism. The Syrian
Government has paid the price, and continues to do so.

In addition, there has been a campaign of
increasingly provocative statements and inflammatory
meetings to encourage and provoke, clearly and
crudely, the armed terrorist groups, which are under
the command of certain Member States. Those States
sponsor and train the groups with a view to depriving
Syrian citizens of their daily bread and livelihoods. The
Syrian people are left to sink deeper into suffering, as
my dear colleague from Argentina said.

The fact that some members of the Council have
sought to reduce the situation in Syria to a politicized
humanitarian issue alone itself exacerbates the
humanitarian crisis and trades on the suffering of the
Syrian people. It is also a biased and subjective reading
of the situation, which masks the serious interventionist
agenda that seeks to manipulate the humanitarian crisis
and mislead international public opinion. Suffice it to
say that some members of the Council have objected
eight times to the adoption of even a press statement
denouncing terrorist acts that have taken the lives
of thousands of innocent Syrian civilians. Those
same States that are so very eager to discuss the
humanitarian situation in Syrian have also refused to
provide ambulances and wheelchairs for people with
special needs.

The Syrian Government has long welcomed all
sincere efforts to improve the humanitarian situation
in Syria and has cooperated positively with the United
Nations. We also welcomed the presidential statement
of October 2013 and abided by its provisions.

Humanitarian support to the Syrian people cannot
be effective unless it is accompanied in word and deed
by an end to the efforts to politicize humanitarian
issues and an end to terrorist acts. The activities of
the armed terrorist groups, including those associated
with Al-Qaida, are the main cause of the humanitarian
suffering of the Syrian people. Those armed terrorist
groups systematically target infrastructure, destroying
the country and bleeding it of its resources. In addition,
they are intentionally targeting in a premeditated way
humanitarian convoys, which they have repeatedly
plundered. They have also attacked and killed several
humanitarian workers, in addition to mounting attacks
and blockades against a number of areas of Syria,
depriving the civilian inhabitants of humanitarian aid
for long periods. Such use of civilians as humanitarian
hostages and human shields seeks to prevent the Syrian
security forces and army from taking action against the
terrorists.

In that context, the Syrian Government, like those
of all other States Members of this Organization, is
upholding its constitutional right and obligation to
fight terrorism, which is indiscriminately targeting
Syria. It is doing so based on international law and the
resolutions of the Council.

Law enforcement is at the heart of State authority,
and that includes countering terrorist activities carried
out on our territory. No one can deny the duty of and
exclusive right of the State to do so.

In addition to the terrorist activities I just
mentioned, it is well known that the coercive unilateral
economic measures illegitimately imposed by certain
States against the Syrian people have had a negative
impact on the livelihoods and living conditions of the
Syrian people.

There is also the additional obstacle of the lack
of humanitarian financing. The financing of the
humanitarian response plan for 2014 has not exceeded
7 per cent of the required funding, in spite of the highly
publicized conferences being held left and right. The
amount of financing for the regional response plan for
Syrian refugees has not exceeded 13 per cent.

The Syrian Government announced early on that
it was serious and sincere in seeking to resolve the
crisis through a political process built on dialogue with
all political actors and civil, cultural and economic
constituencies within the country, including the national
opposition and those armed groups that lay down their
weapons and give priority to the language of reason
and law in order to preserve the country and safeguard
its institutions. In that context, the Government has
provided genuine judicial, security and political
guarantees to those who wish to be involved in that
national process. Indeed, the Government approach has
led to concrete results on the ground in several areas
of Syria. Recently, a number of local reconciliation
processes have been implemented, sending a clear
message to the world that the people of Syria are
capable of resolving this crisis by themselves, free of
any outside manipulation of their interests.

What we have just heard from a colleague - that
the security forces arrested some Syrians following
their surrender within the reconciliation process - is
entirely untrue and I hereby deny it in front of all present.
In that context, the Government is working round
the clock to make sure that all service facilities in
those areas will be ready to provide for the needs of
the residents and to receive the remaining displaced
persons who are willing to return to their homes to
live in peace and stability. In the end, their homeland
is the final refuge for its people, especially if we take
into consideration the fact that the suffering of Syrian
refugees has become a political commodity to be traded
crassly; likewise for the suffering, deteriorating health,
living and security conditions and unethical indignities
imposed on the Syrians living in refugee camps.

The Syrian Government has abided by all of the
provisions of the presidential statement issued by
the Security Council on 2 October 2013. I myself
welcomed it a few minutes after its adoption. Many
of its provisions are reiterated in the resolution just
adopted by the Council. That resolution, in turn,
clearly and unequivocally confirmed that international
terrorism was being carried out by groups associated
with Al-Qaida, after having denied, in an unjustified
and incomprehensible way, its existence throughout the
Syrian crisis.

The time has come for the Council to carry out
seriously and firmly its duties in dealing with the
roots of the humanitarian situation, namely, the
terrorist activities perpetrated by Takfirist groups
against civilians in Syria with the support of well-
known Governments, individuals and entities that have
become known to everybody - support in which the
Israeli occupying forces are taking part publicly and
with the knowledge of the peacekeeping department in
the disengagement zone in the occupied Syrian Golan.

Delivering humanitarian assistance across borders
can never be done in a manner that violates Syrian
national sovereignty as guaranteed by the Charter of
the United Nations. Here we would like to warn against
going beyond the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 46/182 and the guidelines for the provision of
humanitarian assistance, creating the false impression
that merely allowing cross-border humanitarian
operations, with neighbouring States that are involved
in escalating the humanitarian situation, supporting,
arming, training and funding Daesh, Al-Qaida, the Al
Nusra Front and the "Islamist" Front as well as others,
would resolve and put an end to the humanitarian crisis
for millions of Syrians - this is nothing more than
a delusion, a parody of the children's bedtime story,
"The magic wand", that is told to them to make them
fall asleep. That is because these borders with some
neighbouring States are the source of terrorism into
Syria and bloodshed of the Syrian people.

Yes, as my dear colleague the Ambassador of
Nigeria said, the violence has reached the threshold
of nonsense and illogic, that is true. But the more
important question remains, why is this happening
in Syria, and why this unjustified silence concerning
forms of the flagrant external intervention in Syrian
internal affairs? The prevailing mentality among some,
unfortunately, is that of a diplomacy of hyenas, not of
international humanitarian law.

One last remark. A colleague stated that the Syrian
Government delegation in Geneva had rejected the
draft agenda submitted by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi. I am
here formally denying that, because I was there in the
room and I approved the draft agenda one minute after
it was presented. It was the other party that rejected
the draft agenda, and you can ask the international
mediator, Mr. Brahimi, when he meets with the Council
soon, about the details of that story.

