I would like to express my appreciation to the Estonian presidency for holding this important debate to discuss the current state of and challenges to the protection of civilians in armed conflict, including implications connected to the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I would also like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for presenting his report on the issue (S/2020/366) as well as his timely initiatives aimed at protecting the most vulnerable from the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic. The call for an immediate global ceasefire, which Ukraine, whose population suffers from an ongoing foreign armed aggression, immediately supported, is directly linked to our today's discussion. This initiative is an important part of our common fight against the pandemic, which has already adversely impacted the international community's efforts in the maintenance of international peace and security. The Secretary-General's report this year provides a detailed description of both current risks as well as opportunities in the area of protection of civilians, including the role of digital technologies and social media in conflict situations. We know from our own experience how damaging the impact can be of cyberattacks on critical infrastructure, of blockades against alternative sources of information, of the deliberate spreading of disinformation and of incitement to violence. We note the emphasis in the report on the environmental impact of conflicts on civilian suffering. In this regard, we value the reference to the International Law Commission draft principles on the protection of the environment in relation to armed conflicts, in the deliberations on which Ukraine took an active part. Unfortunately, since the first Security Council open debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (see S/PV.4312), the situation has not improved, and hundreds of recommendations presented over the past 20 years remain unimplemented despite their enduring relevance. As aresult, this year's report records unprecedented figures for losses among civilians. In 2019 alone, more than 20,000 civilians were killed or injured in 10 conflicts, including that caused by the Russian aggression against my country. Accountability for each loss of life should be established. This is one of the main preconditions for achieving sustainable peace. We agree with the Secretary-General that these figures clearly signal to the international community the need to change the approach to accountability and to strengthen collective responsibility to prevent, stop and ensure non-repetition of attacks against civilians in conflict situations. At the same time, we regret that the report did not pay due attention to the protection of civilians in occupied territories or to the insufficient implementation of relevant thematic United Nations resolutions. In the second part of my statement, I will address some of these gaps. Unfortunately, Ukraine has become an example of the consequences of the violation by a permanent member of the Security Council of norms and principles of international law, including international humanitarian law. For more than six years, Russian aggression has continued to claim the lives of civilians in my country. That international armed conflict and the temporarily occupied territories of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions as well as the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol turned the protection of civilians for my country from an academic subject to a very practical daily issue. In the resolutions of the General Assembly on this question, special emphasis is placed on the necessity to ensure respect for international humanitarian law. Referring to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and Additional Protocol I thereto, of 1977, the General Assembly qualified Russia as an occupying Power and urged it to uphold all of its obligations under applicable international law. Meanwhile, according to the twenty-ninth report by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) on the human rights situation in Ukraine, during the entire conflict period OHCHR recorded a total of 3,052 conflict-related civilian deaths: 1,812 men, 1,056 women, 98 boys, 49 girls and 37 adults whose sex is unknown. Taking into account the 298 persons who perished on board Malaysia Airlines flight MH-17 on 17 July 2014, the total death toll of the conflict on civilians has reached at least 3,350. The number of injured civilians so far is estimated to exceed 7,000. The armed conflict continues to affect the civilian population's enjoyment of economic and social rights, especially by the more-than 5 million residents of the conflict-affected areas and internally displaced persons. Children, older persons and persons in vulnerable situations are at increased risk of being left behind in achieving sustainable development because of the conflict, the OHCHR report stated. The dire humanitarian situation in the conflict-affected areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions continues to deteriorate. Furthermore, the harassment by the Russian Federation of commercial vessels passing through the illegally constructed Kerch Strait bridge between Russia and temporarily occupied Crimea and its restriction of international shipping there further aggravate the economic and social situation and the suffering of the civilian population in the broader region already affected by the attempted annexation of Crimea and the ongoing armed conflict in Donbas. More than 3.4 million people are expected to require humanitarian assistance in 2020. Over half a million people live in the areas directly affected by the armed conflict, while another 2 million people are exposed to landmines and explosive remnants of war. This area, according to the United Nations, has already become one of the most mine-contaminated stretches of land in the world. We are particularly concerned at the latest reports of shelling of civilian infrastructure by the Russian occupation forces, as well as the use of civilian facilities to hide military equipment. It reminds us of a well-known practice of the Russian armed forces of hiding behind the civilians, widely used in the orchestrated occupation of the Crimean peninsula back in 2014. In the context of the spread of the acute respiratory coronavirus disease (COVID-19), the state of the protection of the life and health of civilians in the temporarily occupied territories has become even more alarming and requires special attention from the international community. As party to the conflict, Russia persists in disregarding its duty as occupying Power under international humanitarian law to ensure and maintain the public health of the population, and is using the recent aggravation of the humanitarian situation as a smokescreen for further attacks on the rights and freedoms of the residents of Crimea. The spread of the pandemic did not stop the Russian authorities from announcing another conscription into the occupying army of the Russian Federation, which is a war crime. In March 2020, a decree by the Russian President to deprive Ukrainian citizens of the right to own land in Crimea became yet another uncouth demonstration of Moscow's disregard for its responsibilities under international humanitarian law. Moreover, for more than three years, the occupying Power has shown the utmost disrespect for the International Court of Justice by ignoring its order, which demands the restoration of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar People and the protection of the identity of the Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar communities under temporary occupation. In addition, Russia continues to block proper and unhindered access for international monitoring missions, primarily by OHCHR, to the occupied territories. Given this situation and in order to enable the provision of the necessary medical assistance to the civilian population in the occupied areas, we demand that the Russian Federation ensure unhindered access there to Ukrainian competent authorities and medical staff, and provide, on a constant basis, exhaustive information on the spread of COVID-19 in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine and on measures it is undertaking to assist the population of these territories to cope with the pandemic. Russia should make all efforts to prevent the spreading of the COVID-19 from the occupied territory to other areas and neighbouring States. Last year, we celebrated the seventieth anniversary the Geneva Conventions, the cornerstone documents that brought greater protection of each individual from the scourges of war. Ukraine pays special attention to issues related to compliance with international humanitarian law and human rights in armed conflicts, as well as to preventing and responding to forced displacement and protecting women and children affected by armed conflict, including combat conflict-related sexual violence. As a party to core international instruments related to the protection of civilians, we constantly promote and support all efforts aimed at strengthening their implementation and advocate respect for human rights and international humanitarian law be ensured at both bilateral and multilateral forums. In contrast, the other party to the conflict, the Russian Federation, ignores General Assembly resolutions and OHCHR recommendations, taking a cherry- picking approach to its obligations under international humanitarian law. Last year, Russia recalled the statement made at the ratification of Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts. That statement recognized the competence of the International Fact-Finding Commission, which is a key mechanism for achieving the objectives undertaken by States parties to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and to Protocol I to respect and ensure respect for the provisions of those treaties. That move was quite revealing in that it exposed Russia's disregard for international humanitarian law and its aversion to the Commission's mandate to investigate alleged facts of grave breaches, as defined in the Conventions and the Protocol, or other serious violations thereof. Russia takes a similar approach to evading responsibility vis-a-vis the implementation of European Court of Human Rights decisions. In the light of all the above, the dangerous trend of Russia's abdication of its legal obligations has to be duly reflected and assessed in the next Secretary- General's report. Time and again, we urge Russia to uphold all its obligations under applicable international law as an occupying Power, in particular to ensure proper and unimpeded access for international human rights monitoring missions and human rights non-governmental organizations to Crimea, pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 71/205, 72/190, 73/263 and 74/168; immediately release without preconditions Ukrainian citizens who have been unlawfully detained; end the practice of transfers of its own population to the occupied territories and forcible transfers and deportations of protected persons, including detainees, to areas outside the occupied territory; and refrain from compelling residents of Crimea to swear allegiance to and serve in the armed forces of the Russian Federation, to name but a few. To conclude, I would like to quote Judge and former President of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals Theodor Meron, who, in his essay "Closing the Accountability Gap: Concrete Steps Toward Ending Impunity for Atrocity Crimes", wrote that, "ensuring accountability for atrocity crimes should not be seen as a mere political option: one choice among many facing national authorities and diplomats. It should be understood as a political, legal, and fundamentally human and humanitarian imperative".
