Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/208) and
his Special Envoy, Mr. Said Djinnit, for his briefing
today and his efforts to see the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region implemented. I would also
like to commend him for exercising his good offices
and advocating with regional partners, as well as his
efforts to include meaningful participation by women
peacemakers in the implementation of the Framework.

The situation in the Great Lakes region remains
volatile and unstable. Many of the challenges are
transnational, transcending national borders. Violations
of international humanitarian law and abuses of human
rights, carried out with impunity, contribute to the
cycles of conflict. The scale of displacement, with
9.5 million refugees and internally displaced persons,
is a clear indication of the political and security
challenges that still plague the region. It is clear that
a regional approach is needed if the interconnected
nature of the crisis is to be addressed. The Great Lakes
region has witnessed some success in its integration in
recent years, especially in terms of trade and economic
activity. We also commend the generosity and solidarity
of the people and countries of the region in hosting
their displaced neighbours, often for very long periods.
However, more must be done to overcome the obstacles
to peace and stability facing the region and to come
to terms with the armed groups in the area, including
through improved implementation of the Framework.

We are deeply concerned by the continued and
increased levels of violence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as well as by the deteriorating humanitarian
situation there. There is a risk that political uncertainty
and the lack of progress in the implementation of the
comprehensive political agreement of 31 December
2016 will exacerbate instability. That includes the
situation in the east and the activity by armed groups;
the resurgence of the Mouvement du 23 mars M23 is one
such example. The Council has repeatedly and clearly
signalled to the Congolese parties how important it is
that they implement their agreement. That includes
the need for a transitional Government supported by
all the parties in order to prepare for elections. The
legitimacy of the Government is linked to respect for
the agreement. The active participation of women,
including in the elections, also adds both legitimacy
and sustainability to the political process.

Regional actors have an essential role to play in
moving the political process forward. We welcome
the efforts of the Southern African Development
Community to support progress in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. A visit by representatives of the
Southern African Development Community's Organ
on Politics, Defence and Security has the potential to
provide momentum for the implementation of the New
Year's Eve agreement and that momentum is urgently
needed. The Regional Oversight Mechanism meeting
in Luanda in 2016 and the African Union Peace and
Security Council statement in support of the reactivation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
and the Nairobi Declarations-related mechanism to deal
with the security challenges in the region are examples
of positive regional efforts. Influential regional actors
should coordinate so as to ensure coherent messages. It
is important that the Security Council provide backing
for and align itself with such efforts. We should support
Mr. Djinnit's efforts in the same way.

Constructive regional engagement in Burundi
by the East African Community (EAC) deserves full
support, in particular the inter-Burundian dialogue
under the Mediator, President Museveni, and the
Facilitator, Mr. Mkapa. An EAC summit, including on
the situation in Burundi, at the earliest possible time,
is important, as it would add further momentum to the
quest for stability and progress in Burundi. Meanwhile,
the political and human rights situation continues to
cause concern. It is therefore important for agreements
to be reached to allow for the full functioning of the
Office ofthe High Commissioner for Human Rights and
African Union military and human rights observers.

Despite some progress, the challenges in the Great
Lakes region remain significant. The international
community remains committed. However, ultimately it
will up to the countries of the region to find peaceful
solutions. We must fully support the constructive

actions of regional actors who seek to move the region
beyond insecurity, uncertainty and political division.
