Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): Allow

me to explain the vote that my delegation will cast

shortly in connection with the very sensitive issue of
compliance with the nuclear non-proliferation regime.

Since it began its term on the Council, Congo has
understood that the unity of the Security Council is
essential to give the necessary authority to the
messages it sends to the entire international community
or to individual Member States. It was with that
concern in mind that Congo participated constructively
in the debates that took place prior to this meeting on
this issue. The decision we are about to take is of
particular importance.

Congo believes that this is basically and only
about ensuring compliance with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). It is
important to keep in mind that the NPT is based on
three pillars that must be equally observed. The first is
non-proliferation, which is the subject of this meeting.
The second is nuclear disarmament, which would send
a strong message as to the genuine desire of nuclear
Powers to firmly commit themselves to the path of
confidence-building measures. And the third is the
inalienable right of signatory States to develop and
have access to nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
Congo reaffirms its commitment to the full
implementation of the Treaty and the need to respect
the right of every State party - including the Islamic
Republic of Iran - to use civil nuclear energy and to
develop the capacity to produce it.

However, we understand that the main problem in
this case is the lack of trust in the strictly peaceful
nature of the Iranian nuclear programme. According to
the International Atomic Energy Agency, that
programme has been outside the scope of any controls
for almost 20 years. Congo believes that the solution to
this crisis is to be found through dialogue and
negotiation, without any threats to use force. It is for
that reason that Congo urges the continuation of
negotiations within the existing framework or in
another context.

The vote we will cast shortly should therefore not
be interpreted as an expression of any sort of hostility
or punitive measure. The role of the Security Council
is not to become an instrument of coercion. Through its
vote, Congo would like to signal the steps that Iran
should take, which should include the suspension of its
uranium enrichment programme. That would not be a
07-28152

sign on weakness, but rather a reassuring gesture
allowing the rebuilding of confidence in order to find a
peaceful and lasting solution. Congo therefore urges
Iran - a country with which we have normal
relations - to heed our call and to opt for dialogue and
cooperation.

