The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Poland for his kind words addressed
to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Honduras.

My delegation wishes to express its concern at the
lack of progress achieved in the implementation of the
provisions of the Lusaka Protocol and the timetable agreed
by the parties, as well as at the mistrust between the
Angolan Government and UNITA, factors that continue to
jeopardize the achievement of lasting peace in Angola.

Notwithstanding the efforts of the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, in cooperation with the
representatives of the three observer States, and of the
States members of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) to accelerate implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol, as well as the repeated appeals of the
international community to the parties to fulfil their
commitments, there have been delays attributable to one of
the parties.

Although the observance of the ceasefire throughout
most of Angola is a positive sign, my delegation considers
that limited compliance with outstanding military and
political issues has had a negative impact on the Angolan
peace process. In particular, my delegation is concerned
about the delays in implementing the agreed timetables for
completing the quartering and disarming of UNITA forces,
incorporating those forces into the Angolan Armed Forces
under the National Programme for Demobilization and
Reintegration of Ex-Combatants, disarming the civilian
population and extending State administration throughout
the country. We are also concerned at the lack of solutions
to some of the pending political issues in the Lusaka
Protocol, such as the return of UNITA members of
Parliament who left in 1992, the reintegration of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation and the
granting of special status or position to the leader of
UNITA.

In general terms, my delegation views the political,
military, economic and social situations in Angola, as
discouraging. Until the parties, and UNITA in particular,
fully implement the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol and
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and fulfil
the commitments made at Libreville, Gabon, on 1 March

 

1996, we feel that there can be no lasting solution to the
Angolan problem. The leaders of UNITA must show that
they are acting in good faith and that they have the
political will to meet their commitments to causing no
further delays in the peace process. As on previous
occasions in the Council, my delegation appeals to them
to meet their obligations forthwith and to take the
necessary remedial measures. At the same time, we
welcome the steadfast political will of the Government of
Angola to find a solution through dialogue to all the
problems related to reconciling all Angolans, with a View
to preserving the stability and unity of the country. We
urge both parties to meet as soon as possible to settle all
outstanding questions.

My delegation is also aware of the serious social and
economic crisis in Angola, which requires immediate
assistance from international financial institutions and the
support of donor countries. The rehabilitation of war-
devastated communities, the rebuilding of Angola's
national economy and the demobilization and social
reintegration of some 100,000 ex-combatants are
prerequisites to a restoration of peace in Angola. It would
be unfortunate were a lack of support for the peace
process to affect international assistance.

Lastly, my delegation wishes to acknowledge the
important work done by the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) in all its observer
and verification activities, its human-rights training for
quartered UNITA soldiers and its valuable contribution to
demining and road restoration. We believe that, in the
current situation in Angola, the presence of UNAVEM. III
continues to be necessary to consolidating the peace
process. Accordingly, we support the Secretary-General's
recommendation in his report to extend its mandate.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are still a number of speakers on my list.
However, given the lateness of the hour, I now propose,
with the consent of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 pm.

The meeting was suspended at 1.40 pm. and
resumed at 3.25 pm.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): I
should like to inform the Council that I have received a
letter from the representative of Lesotho, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of

 

the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite that representative to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mangoaela
(Lesotho) took the seat reserved for him at the side of
the Council Chamber.


The President (interpretation from Spanish): The next
speaker is the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Portugal, His Excellency Mr. J ose Lamego. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.


