Mr. Amon Tanoh (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the outset, allow me to express on behalf
of the President of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire, His
Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara, and the Government
of Cote d'Ivoire, our best wishes for the succcess of the
Ukrainian delegation during its presidency, and to pay
homage to all Council members for their tireless efforts
to maintain international peace and security.

I would also like to reiterate the congratulations
of the Ivorian Government to Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres for his outstanding election as head
of our Organization.

I also commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. A'ichatou Mindaoudou, for
the quality of her briefing and the report submitted
for consideration by the Council (S/2017/89). We also
wish to congratulate and thank the entire staff of the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI)
for its dedication to the cause of peace in our country.
With four months ahead until the closure of UNOCI, on
behalf of the Ivorian Government I take note with great
interest of this thirty-eighth report of the Secretary-
General and welcome the thorough implementation
of resolution 2284 (2016), our road map. Since the
adoption of that resolution, our country has undergone
a substantial transformation that makes the definitive
return to peace and our path towards development
irreversible, in spite of the twists and turns that are
inherent to the lives of nations and that can be seen
around the world.

Since our last meeting (see S/PV.7681), the
conditions that led to the lifting of the sanctions regime
and the decision to draw down UNOCI have been
consolidated further. The country inaugurated the Third
Republic on 8 November 2016, following the adoption
by referendum of the new Constitution on 30 October
2016. The Constitution of the Third Republic turns a
final page on the crisis that our country experienced
over the past decade. It strengthens national cohesion
and the stability of the country. It provides Cote d'Ivoire
with solid, credible and democratic institutions. That
is demonstrated by the plurality of the first National
Assembly of the Third Republic, which is characterized
in particular by the return of the opposition and the
presence of numerous figures in Parliament who are
independent of political parties.

Cote d'Ivoire is a country that is secure and at
peace. The mutinies of a small faction of the army,
based on old demands of a corporate nature, cannot
call that conclusion into question. However, they have
motivated the Government, in particular through
training and greater discipline, to accelerate the
necessary professionalization of the armed and security
forces with the entry into force of a law on military
programming and internal security forces. The first
decisions taken in that framework, which include the
appointment of new leaders at all levels of our armed
forces and security forces, as well as the improvement
ofthe living and working conditions of our soldiers, will
transform their daily lives and capabilities in a lasting
way. The President of the Republic, who is fully aware
of these events, is working daily to resolve the deep-
rooted causes. These measures also put the finishing
touches on the ambitious reform of the security sector
and consolidate the achievements of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, which our
country courageously carried out in record time and for
which we provided more than 70 per cent of the funding.

Cote d'Ivoire is riding an undying wind ofoptimism.
The rate of growth of the gross domestic product over
the past five years has been on average 9 per cent per
year, and the cumulative amount of foreign direct
investment remains high - an eloquent testimony to
the renewed confidence of our partners in our country.
The Government now seeks to redistribute, through its
inclusive development policy, the fruits of that growth to
Ivorians, in particular to the most disadvantaged, while
taking into account all the imperatives of development.

The forthcoming drawdown of UNOCI should not
end our collaboration. On the contrary, it should allow
us to place our collective action in the framework of
the fight against regional and global challenges. That
includes terrorism, which struck my country in March
2016, following many others, and which constitutes a
major threat to peace and security in our region and
beyond. That notwithstanding, the terrorist attack in
Grand-Bassam enabled my country to highlight the
great ability of its forces to respond appropriately to
this type of threat.

We therefore welcome the deployment within
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali of the Senegalese rapid
reaction force battalion, which has long served in our
country, and whose capacities, together with those of
all other forces, will be decisive against the terrorist
groups that are destabilizing Mali and exerting great
pressure in terms of security on our country and all
the neighbouring countries of Mali. I have faith in our
ability to go further in preventing the terrorist threat
and strengthening the ability of our States to respond,
if we remain unified.

The countries represented here and the entire
international community have given a great deal for
the peace and reconstruction of Cote d'Ivoire. The
time has come for Cote d'Ivoire to serve the cause of
peace everywhere. Our country wishes to increase
its participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations; in that regard, it is counting on the support
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
strengthen the capacity of its forces in that area.
Already, a deployable battalion will soon be able to
participate in United Nations operations, with the help
of our main strategic partners.

Above and beyond that, and with its experience
in crisis management and the philosophy of dialogue
and peace - which has always underpinned its action
in Cote d'Ivoire and throughout the world - the
Ivorian Government asks Security Council members
and all Member States to support its candidature for
a non-permanent seat on the Security Council for
the term 2018-2019 in the elections scheduled for
June 2017. As those present know, our candidacy
was endorsed by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union. It
embodies the values that are at the heart of the work of
the Security Council and of our Organization at a time
when our world must show more solidarity and mutual
understanding in the face of new threats.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the Security Council on the steadfastness
it has shown in managing the crisis in The Gambia and
for its crucial support to ECOWAS. This made it possible
to uphold the free choice of the people of The Gambia
in electing President Adama Barrow. The management
of this situation demonstrated that we - the United
Nations, regional economic communities and the
African Union - must work together in order to ensure
that democracy and the aspirations of peoples to freely
choose their leaders prevail everywhere.

UNOCI will remain a success story - a tremendous
achievement whose lessons will inspire United Nations
peacekeeping operations and the commitment of our
Organization to peace around the world. The country
that UNOCI will leave behind in June is a country that is
standing on its own feet - a prosperous nation. It is the
largest economy among the francophone countries of
West Africa and one of the largest in the region. Its fate
will be determined by the Ivorian people. The vision of
the President of the Republic, which he has consigned
me to convey, is clear. In his capacity as guarantor of
our country's institutions, he will continue to work
tirelessly to ensure the development of a modern,
united and strong nation, led by rejuvenated Ivorians
aware of the impact of their actions on the progress of
their nation.

In conclusion, on behalf of thc Ivorian people and
the lvorian Government. 1 would like to once again
reiterate to the members of the Security Council and
to the entire United Nations system my sincere thanks

and profound gratitude for the enormous sacrifices that
have been made for my country.

