Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we thank you, Sir,
for having convened this meeting. We also thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her detailed briefing on the
recent events in Venezuela.

At the outset, we reiterate what we said in this
same setting exactly a month ago (see S/PV.8452). The
Dominican Republic served as mediator to encourage
dialogue between the opposition and the Venezuelan
authorities, in an attempt to reach an understanding to
resolve the political crisis in the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela. Despite initial optimism, neither the
political will nor the maturity needed to reach an
agreement prevailed. We therefore understand that there
is no other possible solution than the holding of free and
competitive elections without delay, with guarantees for
all political groups and actors. Those elections can be
held only in an environment of respect for human rights
and with the support of the international community.

In that regard, we believe that the good offices of
the United Nations are appropriate for building the
trust necessary for the electoral process' success. We
are increasingly concerned about the tragic situation
experienced by Venezuelans, who are suffering from
a general climate of insecurity as well as a shortage of
goods and basic medicines. As a region we have shown
solidarity with the millions of Venezuelans who have
been forced to leave the country. However, we cannot
ignore the high cost incurred by flows of impoverished
people, which could threaten the stability of host
countries and the region. We cannot lose sight of what
is at stake in the medium and long term.

Before concluding, we would like to make one
important point. In recent days the Dominican
Republic has been prejudicially accused of allowing
its territory to be used for third-country military
actions against Venezuela. Specifically, Cuban and
Venezuelan authorities have claimed that foreign planes
have landed at a military airbase near Santo Domingo
to participate in such manoeuvres. We would like to
make our position very clear: military intervention is
not a solution to the Venezuelan crisis. Therefore, such
claims are absolutely false and continuing to repeat
them will not make them true. We hope that those who
promoted that disinformation campaign will correct the
information and have the decency to apologize. I repeat,
we hope that those who promoted that disinformation
campaign will correct the information and have the
decency to apologize.

Lastly, we deplore the events that took place this
weekend at several border crossings in Venezuela. We
call for moderation on the part of all those involved,
not only in the abuse of force against unarmed persons
but also in the use of inflammatory rhetoric that
escalates day after day. We would like to end with a
call to create the conditions for the unhindered delivery
of the aid needed to alleviate the grave humanitarian
crisis affecting our Venezuelan brothers and sisters.
We reaffirm that the Dominican Republic hopes that
Venezuela will find a democratic and peaceful solution,
in accordance with international law - one that helps
rebuild national trust and cohesion in Venezuelan
society for the future.

