Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
At the outset, allow me to welcome the presence at this
meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremie, and of Kosovo,
Mr. Skender Hyseni. I also duly thank Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his briefing.

It is with great relief, if not satisfaction, that we
see calm prevailing in Kosovo, although some
incidents have occurred in the northern part of the
country with respect to land and the rebuilding of
homes destroyed during the war. Fortunately, such
incidents were contained thanks to the prompt
intervention of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), in
coordination with the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), the Kosovo Force and
the Kosovo Police, to protect those places and
encourage both communities to find lasting peaceful
solutions to their differences. It is in the interests of the
authorities of Pristina and Belgrade to take all steps
necessary to resolve such incidents peacefully.
Moreover, we hope that the capacities provided by
NATO to the Kosovo Security Force will soon make it
operational, allowing it fully to shoulder its security
responsibilities.

My delegation welcomes, inter alia, the
constructive cooperation extended by the Kosovo
authorities to UNMIK, despite some reticence
concerning the latter's presence. One thing is clear.
Even reconfigured, UNMIK, which enjoys the support
of the Security Council and the entire international
community, will always have a critical role to play in
building security in Kosovo.

It goes without saying that the issue of the status
of Kosovo remains the key bone of contention between
the parties. However, Serbia's involvement in technical
discussions on justice, the police and customs is an
encouraging sign. We also welcome the significant
progress made in addressing urgent cases before the
Mitrovica courthouse and the normalization of the
functioning of the legal system in northern Kosovo.
Similarly, progress has been seen in the area of
restoring and protecting the Serbian cultural and
religious heritage in Kosovo. We are also convinced
that the emergence of opportunities for regional
cooperation in many areas, including the cultural, will
allow the ultimate achievement of rapprochement and
reconciliation.

One key factor in strengthening the reintegration
process is clearly the revival of the economy, the
creation of jobs and the improvement of the living
conditions of the people of Kosovo. We emphasize and
commend UNMIK's very important contribution in that
regard. It follows that the entire international
community must contribute its share of critical support
in helping Kosovo to build a solid and viable economy.

We commend the effective assumption by
EULEX of an operational role in the rule of law, the
police, justice and customs, although we believe that
UNMIK should continue to shoulder certain
responsibilities in the field ofjustice. We also wish to
thank UNMIK and all the regional and international
partners for their support on the issue of missing
persons.

Lastly, I wish to commend and encourage all the
players working on the ground for the stability of
Kosovo, and to express our desire to see all parties
demonstrate the resolve and political vision necessary
to pursuing a concerted approach that will ensure peace
and stability throughout the region.

