Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): It is very difficult to be
the first speaker after having heard sobering stores
and strong appeals from the Secretary-General, the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) and the International President of
Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF), but I will try my best.

My delegation is very proud to have worked with
other authors in the preparation of resolution 2286
(2016), which we adopted this morning: Egypt, New
Zealand, Spain and Uruguay. 1 also thank the many
Member States that have joined us as sponsors of the
resolution. I am very happy to note that there are 19
sponsors from the Asia-Pacific Group. Finally, I would
like to acknowledge the work of the Group of Friends
of the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict, led by
Switzerland, as well as the initiative taken by Uruguay
as President of the Security Council in the month of
January to hold an open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (see S/PV. 7606).

The Geneva Conventions provide that medical
personnel and medical facilities shall be respected and
protected at all times. Therefore, they shall not be the
object of attack. There is no room for argument on this
point. Today's resolution does not focus on any specific
conflict areas. However, I have to say that the situation
in Syria, in particular in Aleppo, vividly illustrates the
importance of this issue.

Despite this universally accepted legal principle,
medical personnel and medical facilities are exposed
to attacks in armed conflicts, and the situations are
getting worse. In its effort to tackle this question of
compliance with international humanitarian law, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2175 (2014), which
aims to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel. However, as the Secretary-General, Mr. Peter
Maurer of the ICRC and Ms. Liu of MSF brought out in
detail, attacks against medical personnel and medical
facilities are considerably increasing. To add but one
example, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and UNICEF documented 125 incidents
affecting access to health care in Afghanistan in 2015,
which included 20 health workers killed, 43 injured and
66 abducted. That is more than double the number of
incidents in 2014, which was 59.

Facing this grave situation, we believed it
urgent and necessary to adopt a resolution focusing
exclusively on the protection of medical personnel and
medical facilities. I was very pleased to witness the
unanimous adoption of the resolution today. Resolution
2286 (2016) sends a strong message from the Council
condemning attacks on medical personnel and facilities
and demanding that all parties to armed conflict ensure
respect and protection for these personnel and facilities.

The next step is the implementation of the
resolution by the international community. All States
Members of the United Nations should demonstrate
their commitment to strengthening compliance with
international humanitarian law. In this context, I would
like to see further deliberation on the comprehensive
mechanisms to encourage relevant parties to undertake
such compliance. Although this subject was discussed
intensively at the International Conference of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent in Geneva last December,
we failed to reach an agreement. I hope that viable
mechanisms for ensuring compliance with international
humanitarian law could be established in the near
future through an inclusive process.

With resolution 2286 (2016), the Security Council
strongly urges States to develop effective measures
to prevent attacks against medical personnel through
the development of domestic legal frameworks. This,
I understand, is ICRC President Maurer's number-
one proposal. I believe that this approach would lead
to ending impunity and ensure accountability. In this
regard, I wish to share with the Council that Japan has
provided assistance to such countries as Myanmar,
Cambodia and Iraq, for the purposes of developing
domestic legal frameworks by sending experts and
conducting training programmes. The role of States with
influence on the ground is of particular importance for
the effective implementation of today's resolution. The
role of the Secretary-General to alert the Council on
any obstructions or acts of violence is also important.

I wish to conclude by paying tribute to all the
humanitarian personnel who are working under very
serious circumstances of conflict and by stating
that Japan will continue to play an active role in the
area of humanitarian assistance and international
humanitarian law.

