The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.

Mexico is deeply commited to nuclear
disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful use of
nuclear energy - the three pillars of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We are
concerned by any actions that could undermine the
non-proliferation regime that the international
community itself has adopted, particularly when they
represent new threats to international peace and
security in regions where tension, conflict and distrust
among States prevail.

The case of Iran is not a new one for the Security
Council, and unfortunately it is difficult to dissociate
the debate on its controversial nuclear programme from
its foreign policy pronouncements which run counter to
the Charter of the United Nations and which give rise to
concern and mistrust among a large portion of the
international community.

The peaceful use of nuclear energy must be
accompanied by a commitment - freely undertaken by
each State - to respect the legal obligation not to
carry out any activity related to a nuclear programme
that has purposes other than peaceful ones. Iran must
comply more transparently with the decisions of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
responding to all requests for information on its
nuclear programme. And Iran must also comply with
the resolutions of the Security Council, with an express
and above all verifiable renunciation of the possession
of nuclear weapons. The Iranian Government must
make every effort to redress the shortfall of confidence
that a large portion of the international community
feels with respect to the lack of transparency in the
development of Iran's nuclear programme. This would
unquestionably contribute to dialogue and cooperation
as a way of resolving disputes in the region. It is Iran,
not the Security Council, that must earn the trust of the
international community.

We reaffirm the importance of continuing to deal
with the Iranian nuclear case through dialogue and the

importance of Iran continuing to cooperate with the
IAEA to clarify pending questions about its nuclear
programme in conformity with Security Council
resolutions.

Today, we voted in favour of a resolution
imposing sanctions on specific individuals and entities,
sanctions that do not seek to harm the general
population. These sanctions target nuclear proliferation
activities and are completely reversible if the
Government of Iran meets the requests of the Security
Council. We urge the Government of Iran to meet those
requests.

In our view, recent diplomatic initiatives on this
matter are insufficient because they do not include a
clear commitment to putting an end to nuclear-material
enrichment activities and do not address the concerns
of the international community. It is spurious to say
that we are faced with an ultimatum or a dilemma
between a peaceful solution and the use of force. In
fact, after three rounds of sanctions, the path of
dialogue with Iran remains open. A diplomatic solution
is not incompatible with the adoption of sanctions,
when the situation calls for it, and sanctions in no way
close off dialogue and negotiation.

Mexico considers that the agreement we have
reached is balanced. It puts greater pressure on Iran to
fulfil its obligations under previous Security Council
resolutions and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), while leaving open the path
by which Iran can return to the negotiating table and
reach a diplomatic outcome if it meets its obligations
under Council resolutions and the NPT.

In that context, Mexico is convinced that the
creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle
East, as emphasized at this year's NPT Review
Conference, should be part of a broader political
understanding guaranteeing peaceful coexistence
among the sovereign States of the region, including a
future Palestinian State, and addressing the legitimate
security concerns of those States.
In line with our pacifist outlook and our tradition
of devotion to international law, we believe in the
negotiated resolution of disputes. Mexico will continue
to be committed to dialogue, peaceful means and the
rejection of the use of force to resolve this issue.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now invite the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.

