Mr. Vollmer (Austria): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the members of the Human Security
Network, a cross-regional network composed of Chile,
Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway,
Panama, Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand and my own
country, Austria, and South Africa as an observer. The
Human Security Network is an informal group of States
that advocates a people-centred, holistic approach to
human security, complementing the more traditional
understanding of national and international security.

Let me first of all thank today's briefers for their
comprehensive statements. I would also like to thank
the French presidency for convening this open debate on
children and armed conflict, a topic that has long been
a priority for the Network. We welcome the particular
focus of the debate today, since the overwhelming
majority of parties listed in the Secretary-General's
most recent annual report on children in armed conflict
(S/2014/339) are non-State armed groups.

In order to ensure that perpetrators, including
non-State armed groups, national armed forces and
peacekeepers who commit grave violations against
children, are brought to justice, we need to take
concrete measures. We call for more efforts to address
impunity and to investigate, prosecute and punish all
those who commit grave violations against children.
In particular, boys and girls continue to be affected by
rape and other forms of sexual violence during armed
conflict. National justice systems, subregional and
regional cooperation and the International Criminal
Court have an important role to play in this regard.
The Network stresses that the presence of local female
police officers and women peacekeepers can encourage
victims to come forward to report such crimes.

The signing of action plans must be facilitated, and
efforts towards their implementation must be made.
The number of action plans concluded with non-State
armed groups must increase further. For this purpose,
the United Nations and concerned Governments should
cooperate closely. Furthermore, child protection
provisions have to be integrated into peace talks and
agreements.

Every child should have access to education,
including in regions of armed conflict. In that context,
the Network reiterates the importance of resolution
2143 (2014). Recent events have shown the timeliness
of a focus on protecting schools against attacks and
avoiding their military use. The Network welcomes
the draft Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools
and Universities from Military Use during Armed
Conflict and efforts to disseminate and promote
their implementation. Furthermore, we take note
with interest of the ongoing consultations on the so-
called Safe Schools Declaration to provide a broader
framework for the Guidelines.

The Human Security Network calls for the
inclusion of specific child protection provisions in
peacekeeping mission mandates. Moreover, soldiers,
police officers and civilians who participate in United
Nations and other international peacekeeping missions
should receive special training in child protection and
children's rights. The Network encourages the United
Nations and its Member States to work together to build
this capacity further.

Monitoring on the ground and accurate and timely
reporting can be crucial to ensuring that perpetrators
are held accountable for violations committed against
children in armed conflict. Peacekeepers can make
an important contribution by effectively applying the
monitoring and reporting mechanisms established in
accordance with resolutions 1612 (2005), 1882 (2009)
and 1998 (2011), in situations where parties to conflict
have been listed in the annexes of the annual report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.

The Network condemns the extremely worrying
mass abductions of children. Girls are particularly at
risk of abduction and recruitment by armed groups for
sexual purposes and forced marriages. Furthermore,
the Network strongly condemns the recruitment of
children by armed forces, supports the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers and
children affected by war, and reiterates its commitment
to the United Nations "Children, Not Soldiers"
campaign, launched one year ago. Moreover, the
Network encourages States that have not yet done so to
ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict.

We further commend the work of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, chaired by
Malaysia. In the year of the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), we encourage the
Working Group to make full use of its tool box in
order to move the agenda forward in significant ways.
We would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Zerrougui, and all the other actors involved
for implementing the mandate for the protection of
children in armed conflict and ensuring an effective
and thorough monitoring and reporting mechanism.

Finally, the Human Security Network looks forward
to the second open debate dedicated to children and
armed conflict, in June.

