Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the French presidency for its initiative to
organize this very important open debate on children
and armed conflict, with particular emphasis on child
victims of non-State armed groups.
(spoke in English)

As we are about to celebrate the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which
established the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, it is deeply shocking that we continue to
witness the increasing recruitment and use of children
in armed conflict, in violation of international human
rights and humanitarian law. While we speak today in
the Security Council, thousands of children are trapped
in armed conflicts all over the world. The deliberate
targeting of schools by non-State armed groups, the
military use of schools and children being used to carry
explosive devices are just some of the most dramatic
and horrifying cases. In that regard, we welcome
the Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict,
which provide concrete and relevant guidance for State
and non-State armed groups alike in order to minimize
the impact of the military use of schools during armed
conflict and reduce their vulnerability to attacks. We
must follow all cases in conflicts, especially in the
Security Council, to prevent unlawful attacks or the
threat of attacks against schools, students and teachers,
and to refrain from actions that impede children's right
of access to education.

We have noted some encouraging results since
the launch in the past year of the United Nations
global "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign to end the
recruitment and use of children in national security
forces by the end of 2016. However, despite increasing
international efforts to prevent the recruitment of
children as combatants, non-State armed groups still
constitute the largest majority of perpetrators. Children
with low levels of education are often the easiest targets
of armed groups. Strengthening educational systems in
areas of armed conflict should be one of our utmost
priorities.

Girls in particular are under the constant threat of
sexual violence and other forms of abuse in conflict
situations. They are often deprived of education rights,
raped and forced into marriage. Recent barbaric attacks
committed by Boko Haram and Daesh, including the
kidnapping and selling of girls to terrorist fighters,
challenge us all and call for greater coordinated efforts
on the part of the international community. We should
continue to give specific attention to the protection
of girls as they are at greater risk of sexual violence,
sexual exploitation and abuses. Long-standing peace
will never be achieved unless we give children the
means, skills and education to rebuild a society and
institutions torn apart by armed conflict.
Peacekeeping missions have an important role to
play in the protection of children in situations of armed
conflict. It is therefore essential that peacekeeping
missions receive the necessary training and requisite
resources to effectively perform that critical task. In the
context of peacekeeping processes, we strongly believe
that specific provisions on the protection of children
in armed conflict should be included in all peace
negotiations and/or peace agreements. Indeed, for
example, the agreements on peace and reconciliation in
Mali, signed in Algiers at the beginning of this month,
contain specific provisions related to the protection of
children from armed conflict and the engagement of
communities to support the return and maintenance of
children, especially girls, in schools. Such provisions
should inspire all ongoing peace processes.

Finally, the increased number and scope of
conflicts heighten the importance of cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and the
regional organizations, especially the African Union.
In advocating for the promotion of children and
civilians, we commend the tremendous work done by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and her team, who deserve greater
and broader support, both politically and in terms of
providing her Office with the appropriate means and
resources.

