Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to begin by greeting everyone here and
thanking France for the initiative of convening this
debate and for the concept note (S/2015/ 168, annex) that
was circulated to guide our discussions. I wish also to
convey my congratulations to the delegation of Malaysia
and Ambassador Hussein Haniff for their leadership of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
I also welcome the Secretary-General's briefing; the
presence and briefing of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui; and
the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF, who was
very eloquent this morning. We also note the presence
of high representatives of UNICEF. I am also grateful
for the presence of and the experience shared with us
by Ms. Bodin and for the commitment of Mr. Nzita to
continuing to deepen awareness-raising activities in a
global community that is very often violent.

We stress the progress made in the area of
prevention and in the promotion of the rights of children
through the coordinated actions of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
and the efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, with the cooperation of UNICEF
and other United Nations system entities. We firmly
support the need to agree on the implementation of
measures to bring additional pressure to bear on State
and non-State actors that continually violate the rights
of children.

In that context, Argentina reiterates the need for
greater coordination and consistency between the
system for protecting children in armed conflict and
the various sanctions regimes, so as to make it possible
for us to impose sanctions on those responsible for the
most serious violations against children in situations of
armed conflict, as well as among the various agencies
in the United Nations system and the international
organizations working on the ground in implementing
plans to protect the rights of children.

As we have heard everyone say throughout this
debate, this year will mark the anniversary of resolution
1612 (2005), whose adoption was firmly supported by
Argentina, which at the time was a non-permanent
member of the Security Council. What does this tenth
anniversary mean? It means that we have to rethink and
re-evaluate the progress made as well as the challenges
ahead. Argentina therefore firmly supports the efforts
of the Security Council to prevent grave violations of
the rights of children in situations of armed conflict.

This commitment has been evident since Argentina
became one of the first countries to ratify the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
It also actively promoted the adoption of each of the
resolutions adopted by this body.

But it also seems to me that we have to see where
we are individually as States in terms of preventing
the violation of the rights of children and adolescents.
In our country, we were not born wise and so we have
learned and continue to learn about democracy; we are
a party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
to its Optional protocol on the involvement of children
in armed conflict. Furthermore, our democracy has
enabled us to make enlistment in my country's military
voluntary, at a minimum age of 18.

The worst forms of child labour are unfathomable
to my country; what could be the best forms of child
labour? We say no to child labour. This is not to give
ourselves as an example but to say that whenever there
is a situation of armed conflict, be it State or non-State
violence, the basis of democracy must consist of the
rights recognized by that society and that the authorities
abide by and honour.

Protecting children as a human rights focus must
continue to be one of our priorities. It is for this reason
that we must take it into account, as we see it being
done in the mandates of peacekeeping operations and
special political missions. It is essential, but we also
have to do more than just include defenders of the rights
of children and adolescents in the various missions;
rather, we also have to ensure that we make this a
cross-cutting issue in all military, civilian and police
components of the forces and actors that take part in
peacekeeping missions or special political missions.

Ms. Zerrougui and UNICEF could be additionally
supported if we all fully immersed ourselves in the
issue of the rights of children and what this means in
terms of all those who are involved in peacekeeping on
the ground. It is for that reason that it is also important
to underscore the importance of the preventive
measures that can be adopted by each State, including
the establishment and implementation of a legal
framework that effectively ensures that children are
not and cannot be recruited as soldiers. Therefore,
proper birth registrations are very valuable. It may be
that some children have been unable to access certain
programmes because their age was not recognized, and
therefore they have been used as child soldiers.

It is also critical that within the framework of
reparation and reintegration programmes, children
who have been victims in armed conflict situations
be recognized as rights holders and not just as being
in need of guardianship, which could deprive them of
liberty. They must be recognized as rights holders, not
just wards.

Therefore we must avoid any guardianship-focused
intervention efforts in the area of the reintegration of
children as well as any efforts that might victimize
them further. We also stress the need to involve
various actors in order to advocate for an end to be
put to the involvement of children in armed groups
or forces, including human rights activists, teachers,
representatives of civil society, family members, health
practitioners and religious and community leaders.

We must also combat impunity. In that regard,
we rely on the International Criminal Court, which
in March 2012, as the Ambassador and Permanent
Representative of France stated this morning, handed
down the first decision in which it found Thomas
Lubanga Dyilo guilty of war crimes and of recruiting
children under 15 years of age to engage in conflict
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Argentina,
along with the rest of the international community, is
clearly aware of the devastating effects on children,
adolescents and society when children are victims of
armed conflicts. In some countries in armed conflict,
we continue to see children being treated not as victims
but as victimizers. That must end. We must help to put
an end to that.

Let me close with this comment. This morning, as I
was listening intently to the debate, I thought of Lewis
Carroll's Through the Looking-Glass. Alice dares to
ask the Queen, "What sort of things do you remember
best?" The Queen responds naturally, "Oh, things that
happened the week after next". The Queen responded
naturally. Why am I saying this? Time is always too
short for us to prevent; however, there is always time to
find military solutions to conflict.

