Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
convey our sincere condolences on the loss of life, the
injuries and the destruction caused by the earthquake in
Haiti. Let me also express our deep concern for the
troops and staff of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti who are still missing. Our thoughts
and prayers go out to all those who have been affected,
and we stand ready to assist the people of Haiti.

The United States would like to express its
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for organizing this
important and timely debate. We also welcome the
Secretary-General's initiative to convene, earlier this
week, a meeting of regional organizations to advance
dialogue and cooperation. We thank the representatives
of organizations present here today for their comments
and for their contributions to the maintenance of peace
and security.

We share the goals set forth in the draft
presidential statement prepared by China, namely, to
promote greater cooperation between regional and
subregional organizations and the United Nations.
While the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of peace and security remains with the Security
Council, regional and subregional organizations play
an important role in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts. That role is clearly spelled out
in Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter, and its
importance has been emphasized in various Council
resolutions and presidential statements.
With this in mind, I would like to make four
points. First, regional organizations have unique
perspectives and local understanding of conflicts,
cultural norms and security challenges within their
regions. This knowledge often gives them a
comparative advantage in the prevention or resolution
of conflicts. In many cases, they also have enormous
influence over parties to a dispute.

The United States is a proud member of three of
the organizations represented here today: the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
the Organization of American States (OAS). We
contribute to NATO operations that provide security
and stability in Afghanistan and Kosovo and that
combat piracy off the coast of Somalia. We also work
closely with the participating States of the OSCE, an
organization that strives to prevent, mediate and
resolve conflict situations in an area that stretches from
Vancouver to Vladivostok.

The OAS is the oldest regional organization,
predating the United Nations, and its leadership in the
western hemisphere is renowned. The leadership of the
OAS has been critical in supporting stability in Haiti
and in peacefully restoring the democratic
constitutional order in Honduras.

Let me say a word about the European Union
(EU), which is a critical partner in managing crises in
Europe and beyond. The United States congratulates
the European Union on the implementation of the
Lisbon Treaty, which will enable it to be an even
stronger partner.

My second point is that it is in the interest of the
United Nations to work with regional and subregional
organizations to prevent conflicts or to resolve them
once they occur. The United States welcomes the
cooperation among the United Nations, the African
Union (AU) and the Economic Community of West
African States in managing the recent crisis in Guinea,
including the work of the United Nations Commission
of Inquiry.

We welcome the growing role of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in its region and
the steps it has taken to confront the challenge that
Burma poses to the organization and to the
international community. As Burma prepares for
elections this year - the first since 1990 - it will be
important for the United Nations and ASEAN to press
for internal political dialogue as a step towards
credible elections.

We also applaud the cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union, in particular the
AU-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the
Organization's support for the AU's peacekeeping
force in Somalia.

Thirdly, we support United Nations to strengthen
the capacity of regional organizations to maintain
peace and security, in particular in the area of
peacekeeping. In that respect, we will continue to
support efforts to enhance the African Union's capacity
to plan, manage and sustain peacekeeping operations,
as well as efforts under way to enhance strategic ties
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council. The United States will also remain a
major bilateral contributor to African peace operations
by training and equipping initiatives.

Finally, we encourage regional and subregional
organizations to help to ensure the effective
implementation of recent Security Council resolutions
on women and peace and security, on children and
armed conflict and on the protection of civilians. We
also encourage them to play a greater role in
peacebuilding efforts.

Our discussion today highlights the existing
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in addressing crises. The
United States welcomes further discussions and actions
to deepen that cooperation.

