Mr. Klein (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Tanin for his update on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

We appreciate the United Nations efforts over the
years to help Kosovo build multi-ethnic, democratic
institutions that uphold the rule of law and respect
human rights. We are pleased that these efforts have
largely been accomplished. However, even given
those accomplishments and the requests of several
Council members during our briefing in November
(see S/PV.7811) for the United Nations to seriously
reconsider UNMIK's resources, we were surprised
that the report of the Secretary-General notes the
"importance of ensuring that UNMIK is appropriately
resourced to address current and emerging challenges"
(S/2017/95/Rev.1, para. 41).

We believe that UNMIK is overresourced
and overstaffed incomparison with its limited
responsibilities. Last year, UNMIK had high levels
of underspent funds in its budget. The Mission should
return such resources to United Nations Headquarters
rather than create unnecessary projects. And yet
UNMIK, a mission that should be drawing down, is
putting permanent solar panels on a building that it is
renting. Kosovo is a success story and UNMIK deserves
a lot of credit, but it would be unfortunate for UNMIK
to be remembered not for its brave work in supporting
the establishment of a new country but for lingering
past its relevance.

It is time for the Secretariat to downsize UNMIK's
structure, size and tasks in line with realities on the
ground. The situation in Kosovo is drastically different
from what it was in 1999, when the Security Council
created the Mission, or in 2008, when the Secretariat
restructured it. We are aware of the frictions and
provocations that have occurred over the past few
months, but we also note that they have been resolved
calmly, collaboratively and without violence.
Recent frictions highlight the importance of the
efforts of Kosovo and Serbia to pursue the normalization
of relations through the Brussels dialogue, facilitated
by the European Union (EU). We appreciate the recent
convening by EU High Representative Mogherini
of both Kosovo's and Serbia's leaders at a high-level
meeting. We continue to support the vital role of the
EU as a facilitator of the dialogue. Leaders in Belgrade
and Pristina must continue taking the needed steps and
making the difficult but necessary decisions in order
to progress in the talks. We call on both Belgrade
and Pristina to fully implement dialogue agreements
without further delay, and to work more actively
towards the normalization of relations.

The United States reaffirms its support for
Kosovo as it develops as a prosperous, peaceful and
mult-ethnic democracy. A democratic, stable and
independent Kosovo is a force for regional stability.
We continue to strongly support full international
recognition of Kosovo and Kosovo's membership in
all relevant international organizations, including the
United Nations. We encourage United Nations Member
States that have not yet done so join the more than 100
Members that have already recognized Kosovo as an
independent State.

The United States is pleased to see progress
towards establishing the Kosovo specialist chambers,
and we encourage Kosovo to continue its commitment
to that body. Kosovo needs to make greater progress
in strengthening the independence of its judiciary
and improving the rule of law to combat corruption,
attract foreign investment and accelerate its
overall development.

Finally, we again strongly urge the Council to
adjust the reporting and briefing period for UNMIK
from three months to six. That longer reporting period
would reduce the burden on the Secretariat and the
Council, both of which have far more pressing business
at hand.

