Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Egyptian presidency of the Security Council for
bringing us together today for this public debate on
the situation in Syria, and more specifically in Aleppo.
France took the initiative with the United Kingdom
to call for this meeting. I also thank Mr. Feltman and
Mr. O'Brien for their briefings.

The diplomatic process that was initiated in Vienna
raised hopes when it ended on 27 February with the
entry into force of a cessation of hostilities across
the entire Syrian territory. France voted in favour of
resolution 2268 (2016) and welcomed the agreement as
a contribution to de-escalation and as an opportunity
for Syrians to finally see the diplomatic process lead
to a reduction in violence and an improvement in
the situation for civilians. For almost a month, the
cessation of hostilities helped the population enjoy an
improvement that had not been seen since the conflict
began five years ago, even if humanitarian progress has
never yet met their expectations.

Since last month we are seeing that the fragile
vessel of the cessation of hostilities is full of holes and
today threatens to sink. Let us not mince words. The
Damascus regime is the main party responsible and the
new offensive launched by the regime on Aleppo city
on 22 April is a flagrant and tragic example of that.
In many respects, Aleppo is to Syria what Sarajevo
was to Bosnia - a symbol, a crossroads, a martyr.
Aleppo - a symbolic city that is thousands of years
old and considered to be part of the world cultural
heritage - is a crossroads where so many civilizations
have clashed and merged, leaving a deep and diverse
imprint. The city is now suffering martyrdom. That
bastion of the moderate opposition has for four years
resisted the continual assaults of Bashar Al-Assad's
regime and of Da'esh.

We cannot turn a blind eye on those who seek
to seize Aleppo by using the cessation of hostilities
agreement as a smokescreen. That is all the more true
because in its offensive against Aleppo the regime is
using all means possible, including deliberate attacks
on civilians. We are now seeing the consequences of
that. The resumption of fighting has left over 280 dead
in just a few days and caused a new flow of displaced
persons to the Turkish border. The use of barrel bombs
on populated residential areas, the very purpose of
which is to spread terror among the population, has
resumed. France has repeatedly denounced such acts.

Although the Security Council yesterday
unanimously adopted resolution 2286 (2016) to
protect medical personnel and facilities, the regime is
deliberately, systematically and methodically targeting
them. On 25 April, five White Helmets were killed
after their centre at Al-Atareb, near Aleppo, was
deliberately attacked. On 27 April, the Al-Quds hospital
was deliberately bombed by the regime, with a raft of
casualties. On 29 April, the Al-Marjeh health-care
centre in Aleppo was completely destroyed. The regime
of Bashar Al-Assad bears the full responsibility for the
breakdown in the ceasefire in Aleppo. Faced with this
spiral of violence, France and the United Kingdom felt
duty-bound to call on the Security Council to convene
this meeting.

At this very hour, the fragile agreement between
the Russians and Americans that just entered into force
is an encouraging sign, but it needs to be confirmed
and then translated into facts on the ground. To restore
the ceasefire across the entire Syrian territory and
maintain the political momentum, we must do a great
deal more to ensure the cessation of hostilities is
effectively respected. Otherwise, we will see a return
to the horror and the resumption of clashes that, let us
not forget, have led to over 400,000 deaths and millions
of refugees and destroyed an entire country.

France believes that the Security Council has an
important role to play in monitoring the observance of
the ceasefire and to punish the most serious violations
by mining the information to be relayed on a monthly
basis by the Geneva task force, as requested under
resolution 2268 (2016). In the meantime, the supporters
of the regime must shoulder their responsibilities and
use their influence on Damascus to ensure that the
weapons are effectively silenced, because too often the
regime pays lip service to an agreement only so as to
violate it more thoroughly.

Last week, Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura alerted
us collectively, stressing that the cessation of hostilities
was in danger. We are convinced that a collective
mobilization is necessary to respond urgently to that
warning. For its part, France will spare no effort in that
regard, on the basis of three major axes in particular.

After this meeting, we hope that the Council will
be able to send a clear message on the need to end the
fighting in Aleppo and to strengthen the cessation of
hostilities. That will require nothing less than ensuring
compliance with resolution 2268 (2016), which was
adopted unanimously as a joint proposal of Russia and
the United States. We must also continue to mobilize the
international community to bring pressure to bear on
the regime and to seek to rebuild positive momentum.
It is in that spirit that the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of France, Mr. Jean-Marc Ayrault, and his German
counterpart met today with Special Envoy De Mistura
and the head of the moderate opposition, Riad Hijab.

Finally, as Staffan de Mistura did before this
Council last week, France has been requesting for
several days now that we organize, in short order, a
ministerial meeting of the International Syria Support
Group with three objectives in mind: first, to secure
a more robust guarantee of respect for the ceasefire;
secondly, to reaffirm the need to protect and provide
assistance to civilian populations; and thirdly, to resume
negotiations with a view to finding a political solution.

Ultimately, a single lodestar should guide
us - to do everything to end the violence, in Aleppo
and throughout Syria, and enable the resumption of
negotiations aimed at implementing resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva communique of 30 June 2012
(S/2012/523, annex). There is no other alternative if we
are to put an end to the Syrian tragedy.

