Mr. Brencick (United States of America): We,
together with other members, welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jessen
Petersen, back to the Council and thank him for his
encouraging report on progress in Kosovo. He has done
an outstanding and exemplary job in his position in the
leadership of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
regret his departure on 30 June, but wish him all the
best in his future endeavours.

We welcome the progress that the Special
Representative has documented in Kosovo. In
particular, the United States congratulates Kosovo's
President Sejdiu and Prime Minister Ceku on for their
bold calls for ethnic reconciliation and for actions
taken to improve the lives of Kosovo's minority
communities.

We recognize, however, that more work needs to
be done, particularly in the short term, to build
confidence among Kosovo's minorities. This is critical
while negotiations on Kosovo's future status are under
way. Symbolic overtures are important, but we also
need to see more results on the ground. Kosovo's
leaders must continue to demonstrate, through their
actions, a commitment to reconciliation and an ability
to govern effectively. The first steps are encouraging,
but the Kosovo Government needs to maintain this
momentum.

We welcome the decline in potential ethnically-
motivated crimes, as reported recently by UNMIK. We
urge leaders of all groups to condemn all violence and
to vigorously prosecute acts perpetrated against ethnic
minorities. We also urge leaders to refrain from
alleging ethnic motives for crimes until facts are
known.

We note that Belgrade has important
responsibilities to help improve the situation in Kosovo
as well. In particular, Belgrade can cease obstructing
Kosovo Serbs from participating in Kosovo's
institutions. Participating in those institutions will
allow Kosovo Serbs to advocate their own interests
most effectively.

The implementation of standards must continue
after Kosovo's status is determined. Full
implementation of the standards will be an important
part of Kosovo's long-term democratic development
and of its future integration into Europe. We continue
to support Martti Ahtisaari, the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy, leading the Kosovo status process. We
look forward to his consultations with the Security
Council this summer.

The United States calls on both sides to engage
seriously and constructively with Mr. Ahtisaari,
particularly on the issues most critical to Kosovo's
long-term stability, such as decentralization and the
rights of minorities. We urge both sides to be realistic
about the outcome of the status process. I would only
repeat what the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Saren Jessen-Petersen, just said:
there will be no return to the Kosovo of the pre-1999
situation, no partition of Kosovo and no union of
Kosovo with any other - or part of any other -
country. Kosovo must remain multi-ethnic, and a
settlement must be acceptable to the people of Kosovo.

Finally, all possible efforts must, in our view, be
made to achieve a negotiated settlement in the course
of 2006. Further delay would prolong instability, as
just noted by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

