Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Hearing
the views of our colleagues can only help us to gain
a better understanding of any subject, but refusing to
listen to the ideas of others does not help in a practical
or constructive way to promote peace and security. We
represent States that enjoy full sovereignty, and while
we may fail to listen to others the relevant diplomatic
norms are clear.
(spoke in English)

We have a strong sense of dignity. We may ignore
others if we want to do so, but diplomatic norms will
not allow us to.

(spoke in Arabic)

Thus, with respect to the issue under consideration
and in accordance with those diplomatic norms, every
delegation must listen very patiently to the others and
respond logically on the basis of clear and precise
arguments.

The Sudan has consistently cooperated with the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) since its establishment. The peace
process in Darfur has enjoyed achievements that hold
great promise for the future. We hope that it will achieve
its aim of allowing Darfur to enjoy lasting peace in
the near future, if God so wishes. We will pursue our
cooperation with UNAMID in the future until peace is
attained.

That will not prevent us, however, from raising
serious reservations with respect to paragraph 17
of resolution 2063 (2012), extending the mandate of
UNAMID, in which reference is made to the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA). These reservations arise
from the fact that no evidence is presented in any
report of the Secretary-General that the LRA is present
in Darfur. Even his most recent report (S/2012/548)
contains no indication of an LRA presence in the
province. Moreover, when Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Joint
African Union-United Nations Special Representative
for Darfur, addressed the Council on 24 July (see S/PV.6813), he made no reference whatsoever to an
LRA presence in Darfur.

Therefore, and on the basis of the logical argument
that I am making with respect to the LRA, we believe
that the resolution adopted today unfortunately does
not address certain important and substantive issues
relating to Darfur, which is at the heart of the Mission's
mandate, yet raises an issue that has no connection with
the province.

The resolution contains no clear, strong and direct
condemnation of the Sudan Revolutionary Front, which
is the primary cause of the instability, lack of peace and
injustice in Darfur today. How can that be justified? I
appeal to the conscience of Council members. How can
the Council fail to seriously condemn rebel movements
that promote instability and undermine peace? Why
does the Council address issues that have no evidentiary
or logical basis? Is that fair?
(spoke in English)

Where is the clear and explicit condemnation of the
so-called Sudan Revolutionary Front? There is a total
absence of a clear, explicit reference to the Front; there
is only a very oblique, between-the-lines allusion to it.

(spoke in Arabic)

The Front has clearly affirmed its readiness to
violently overthrow the Government of the Sudan.

Finally, in order to ensure that the Council's
resolutions are logical, wise and based on the lawful
principles that the Charter has laid down for the Council,
it should be clearly indicated, where the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) is concerned, that
the Council calls for cooperation and emphasizes the
issue of rebel groups in the Sudan.

(spoke in English)

Although the Council is calling for an exchange of
information and cooperation between the peacekeeping
missions in the region, it does not do so where the
resolution concerns UNMISS in the south. We
would have expected it to include a call on UNMISS
to cooperate and exchange views and information
regarding all the Darfuri rebel groups being harboured
by the Government of South Sudan. This is strange.

(spoke in Arabic)

Lastly, we will cooperate with UNAMID, but we
have major reservations concerning paragraph 17, and
hope that the Council will reconsider its position in the
future.

