Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): Let me begin by
informing the Council that Azerbaijan commemorates
today the anniversary of the so-called "Black January"
tragedy that took place exactly 14 years ago in my
country. We are paying tribute to the innocent victims
of the Soviet invasion. On 20 January 1990, Soviet
troops, 35,000 strong, stormed the capital of
Azerbaijan, the city of Baku, in a desperate, extremely
brutal and yet futile attempt to strangle the ever-
growing independence movement and to stop the
demise of the Communist regime in Azerbaijan.

One hundred and thirty-three persons were killed,
744 wounded: these are the tragic and telling figures of
the massacre committed by the brutal and totalitarian
Soviet regime. What is of special relevance to today's
meeting is that a large number of those killed and
wounded that night were children. This scar is still
fresh in our memory and we mourn today, with
millions of Azerbaijanis around the world, those who
sacrificed their lives for the freedom and independence
of Azerbaijan.

Regarding the topic of today's discussion, allow
me to join previous speakers in expressing our
gratitude to the Chilean presidency of the Security
Council for convening this debate on this agenda item,
which is of particular interest to the broader
membership. I would also like to thank Mr. Olaru
Otunnu, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, and
Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive Director of the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), for the
outstanding commitment and admirable
professionalism with which they have been discharging
their difficult but very important duties, and I thank
them for their very informative and interesting
briefings.

We also commend the report of the Secretary-
General on the subject (S/2003/1053), which we view
as a considerable improvement over last year's report
and which contains a series of concrete, clear-cut and
action-oriented recommendations.

Azerbaijan shares the view that the
comprehensive frameworks established for addressing
this issue in the United Nations need to be regularly
reviewed and updated. Overall, over the course of the
past few years, significant progress on this path has
been achieved, and we welcome the important
advances presented in the report.

But there should be no room for complacency. We
have to admit that consistent application of this wide-
ranging set of tools and standards on the ground
remains the ultimate challenge for the international
community, and in particular for the Security Council
as the organ bearing primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
clear to all that the gap between theory and practice
must be dealt with first.

Indeed, children continue to be the main victims
of conflicts and their suffering takes many forms,
including murder, imprisonment, recruitment as
soldiers and hostage-taking. Deep emotional scars and
traumas inflicted on children as a result of hostilities
are no less painful, especially among children who
have been forced into being refugees and internally
displaced children, whose number in Azerbaijan is in
the thousands. The consideration of situations of armed
conflict and their consequences for children is of acute
relevance and primary concern to Azerbaijan, due to
the realities of the ongoing conflict in which we are
involved with neighbouring Armenia.

In this regard, we fully support the proposals
contained in section III D of the report on systematic
monitoring, reporting and action, especially the
recommendation that the Security Council "should
encompass all situations of conflict" (S/2003/1053, para. 83). In that regard, we appeal to the Council and
to the Secretary-General to take due note of the
continued grave situation of the conflict-affected
children of Azerbaijan. In this context, the Secretary-
General's report to the Council should serve as an
important channel for conveying information gathered
through the monitoring framework. Such information
should serve as a trigger for action, which might range
from calls for compliance to condemnation of
violations and the application of targeted measures. In
order to put an end to the ever-growing culture of
impunity, it is critical that violations lead to concrete
measures being taken by the Council.

Although no active combat action is taking place
on the ground for the time being, one of the many
consequences of the aggression of Armenia against my
country is the fact that more than 50 Azerbaijani
children are still being held in Armenian captivity and
that many others have died after being subjected to ill-
treatment. These are figures of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, whose representatives
have been denied access to all the places where
Azerbaijani children are imprisoned. According to our
information, their number exceeds 100. Some of those
imprisoned Azerbaijani children have been forcefully
recruited by the Armenian side into the Armenian army
for participation in military activities against
Azerbaijan, which is not only inhuman, but also in
gross violation of many international instruments, in
particular the Optional Protocol to the Convention of
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict, to which Armenia is a signatory.

This horrible fact was made known in the press
document issued on 15 January 2004 - a couple of
days ago - by the Committee on the Rights of the
Child, which last Thursday reviewed the second
periodic report of Armenia. The Minister of Social
Security of Armenia, admitting this fact in response to
a question, noted that

"there might have been cases where children
below the age of 18 were called up before 1994
when the conflict with Azerbaijan was sparked
over the Nagorno-Karabagh issue".

While we expect the official records of that meeting of
the Committee on the Rights of the Child to be made
public, this fact deserves proper assessment not only by
the Committee, but also by the Security Council and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict.

Having said that, I would appreciate it if the
future reports of the Secretary-General on the matter
would reflect the situation of Azerbaijani children who
have suffered as a result of the conflict between
Armenia and Azerbaijan.

In conclusion, I would support the words of
Mr. Olara Otunnu, who earlier today said that only the
end of conflict is a sure way to start alleviating the
suffering of children in armed conflict. I could not
agree more with that statement and we again turn to the
Security Council, which 10 years ago adopted four
resolutions on the conflict between Armenia and
Azerbaijan, with an appeal to make every effort to
ensure their implementation, which will open the way
to a resolution of that frozen conflict and immediately
disentangle many other knots, including that related to
the situation of children in armed conflict. Let me
repeat again here the concept that the notion of
forgotten conflicts is an insult to those who are
exposed to international neglect.

