The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of September, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Vitaly Churkin,
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to
the United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of August 2010. I am
sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Churkin
and his delegation for the diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2006/920)

Report of the Secretary-General on the request
of Nepal for United Nations assistance in
support of its peace process (S/2010/453)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Nepal, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Acharya
(Nepal) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Karin Landgren,
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Mission in Nepal.
There being no objection, it is so decided. I invite
Ms. Landgren to take a seat at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with its previous
consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/453, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the request of Nepal for
United Nations assistance in support of its peace
process.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ms. Karin Landgren. I now give the floor
to Ms. Landgren.


