Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): On behalf of the
Chairs of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning Counter-Terrorism;
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), on the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction; and the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, 1 have the honour to
brief the Council on the continuing cooperation among
the three Committees and their respective expert
groups.

I would like to address three key areas of such
cooperation: information sharing and joint meetings,
outreach activities and country visits, and participation
in a broader counter-terrorism framework.

The three Committees and their respective expert
groups continued the practice of sharing relevant
information and of meeting, where appropriate, in
order to discuss common issues, coordinate actions
and exchange information on particular issues. For
instance, the 1540 Committee's Group of Experts and
the 1267 Committee's Monitoring Team held regular
informal exchanges concerning new challenges, such
as the implications of scientific and technological
developments in chemical, biological, radiological
and nuclear weapons in relation to non-State actors,
including terrorists. The 1540 Committee's Group
of Experts and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) shared experiences
on compiling effective implementation practices in
accordance with their respective mandates. In addition,
the members of the expert groups participated in
training sessions, such as on the relationship between
the Internet and communication technologies and
terrorism, organized by CTED in December 2013.

The Committees also continued to extend invitations
to each other and their expert groups when arranging
thematic briefings and presentations, including those
by visiting officials from international and regional
organizations. One such briefing, which included the
participation of the Secretary-General of the World
Customs Organization, was organized by the 1540
Committee in February. Earlier this month, the 1267
Monitoring Team and CTED made a joint presentation
to the 1373 Committee members on kidnapping for
ransom.

All three expert groups continued to coordinate
their outreach activities and country visits on a regular
basis. Where appropriate, the three groups consulted
one another when planning country visits and other
missions in order to facilitate the participation of
their respective experts and to ensure a consistent and
coherent approach. A noteworthy example of such
cooperation is this week's comprehensive assessment
visit to Mongolia, conducted by CTED on behalf of the
1373 Committee, and joined by the 1540 Committee
Group of Experts and the 1267 Monitoring Team.

As regards broader regional perspectives, members
of the 1267 Monitoring Team also participated in
CTED-facilitated workshops in South-East Asia and
South Asia in December and in West Africa in April,
and both expert groups jointly facilitated a workshop
for States members of the Eastern and Southern Africa
Anti-Money-Laundering Group in April.

Another step forward in regional engagement was
marked by the establishment, pursuant to resolution
2129 (2013), of a shared focal point for the Caribbean
region to work on issues relevant to the three
Committees and their respective groups of experts. It is
hosted by the Caribbean Community and funded by the
Government of Australia and deals with requests from
Member States of the region to facilitate the delivery
of integrated technical assistance that addresses both
counter-terrorism measures and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. The initiative may also
be considered a pilot project that may lead, where
appropriate, to the shared use of focal points in other
regions.

The expert groups continued to work closely with
one another within the framework of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF), notably
its various thematic working groups, and contributed
to the preparation of the fourth review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In addition,
members of the 1267 Monitoring Team and CTED were
actively involved in the launch of the CTITF global
experts meeting on capacity-building for terrorist
designations and asset-freezing, held this month.

The expert groups also continued to coordinate
among themselves during participation in the work
of other entities and forums dealing with counter-
terrorism, such as the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Centre, regarding design, facilitation and
pursuit oftechnical assistance programmes and projects
on a thematic and regional basis; the Financial Action
Task Force, regarding the implementation of counter-
terrorist financing measures, including Security
Council sanctions; and the Global Counterterrorism
Forum, on areas within their respective mandates.

The work of the three Committees and their
expert groups has been intensified, but continues to
present opportunities for further synergies and for
strengthening the delivery of results. The Committees
and their expert groups will continue to explore ways to
further strengthen their coordination and cooperation
while maintaining respect for the mandates of their
respective Committees and the independence of the
respective expert groups.

That concludes my joint statement to the Security
Council.

Allow me now to turn to a statement that I would like
to make on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and to give an overview of developments in the work of
the Committee and its Executive Directorate.

As members of the Council are all aware,
resolution 2129 (2013) renewed CTED's mandate until
31 December 2017 and provided policy direction for the
work of the Committee and CTED to assist Member
States to achieve full implementation of resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). In that context, I would
like to address some ofthe key aspects pertaining to the
realization of that overarching goal.

National and regional assessments and follow-
up, including efforts to ensure that Member States
are provided with timely and appropriate capacity-
building assistance, continue to be the central focus
of the work of the Committee and CTED. That work
has been strengthened over recent months by the
introduction of new assessment tools and an increased
focus on regional engagement and targeted follow-up
country visits. The new tools - namely, the overview
of implementation assessment and the detailed
implementation survey - were designed to provide
a more detailed assessment of national, regional and
global challenges, shortfalls and good practices, as well
as to help ensure more targeted and effective counter-
terrorism capacity-building. Thus far, the Committee
has assessed the implementation efforts of 27 Member
States using the new assessment tools.

In order to help the Committee provide ongoing
policy guidance on capacity-building, CTED has
continued to provide regular updates on progress on
Member States' implementation efforts in specific
regions, as well as on specific terrorism-related issues,
trends and developments. It has also continued to
submit special reports on specific themes, events or
situations that may have implications for capacity-
building initiatives around the world.

In addition, the Chair of the Committee, with
the assistance of CTED, held an open briefing in
April - with the participation of the Secretary-
General of INTERPOL, the Secretary-General of the
International Civil Aviation Organization and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) - on preventing the misuse
by terrorists of travel documents and on terrorism
prevention activities. The CTED's country assessment
visits conducted on the Committee's behalf continued to
serve as a platform for direct interaction with Member
States and as the foundation for facilitating the delivery
of capacity-building assistance. The Committee
approved a list of comprehensive, focused and follow-
up visits to 40 Member States - in addition to 15
previously approved visits - for the period running
from 2014 to 2017.

The assessment process also includes in-depth
and tailored regional dialogue with counter-terrorism
practitioners conducted in focus group environments
and aimed at achieving a more complete understanding
of their working level needs, while also encouraging
practical approaches to capacity-building and
promoting regional cooperation. In that regard, for
example, CTED launched in May the first annual
meeting of professional networks of border police,
customs and intelligence agencies to strengthen border
control cooperation in the fight against terrorism in the
Sahel and the Maghreb.

Effective delivery of technical assistance and
training often requires a sustained regional dialogue
conducted over a number of years. That model has been
successfully tested in South Asia, where it has resulted
in the development of a platform that generates specific
independent spin-off capacity-building deliverables
developed through dialogue and delivered by donors
and providers. In April, for example, CTED convened
the eighth regional workshop for judges, prosecutors
and police officers in South Asia, which examined the
work of training academies in the region.

Continuing the practice of convening regular
regional and thematic meetings and workshops helps
to create an environment that best serves the interests
of potential recipient States, as well as the community
of donors and technical assistance providers and
to strengthen the coordination of activities and the
identification of national and regional priorities.
Member States and regional and subregional
organizations may also request CTED to advise them
on formulating national and regional counter-terrorism
strategies.

In that regard, CTED, acting in cooperation
with the CTITF and relevant regional organizations,
continued to assist Member States in Central Africa
in their development of a regional integrated strategy
on counter-terrorism and the non-proliferation
of small arms and light weapons. In January and
April, two regional workshops were held to draft the
strategy's border control and law enforcement-related
elements. Another example of regional engagement is
CTED's continued participation in the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel and its implementation,
working closely with other United Nations offices at
Headquarters and on the ground, including the Office
of the Special Envoy for the Sahel.
The joint statement indicated heretofore how close
collaboration of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
with the 1267 and 1540 Committees, as well of CTED
with the respective expert groups, continued to serve
as a platform for raising awareness, encouraging
implementation of related mandates and joint technical
assistance projects, where appropriate. That process
has been reinforced in the Committee's dialogue with
Member States, many of which have emphasized
the need for the delivery of capacity-building that
addresses both counter-terrorism measures and the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

The Committee and CTED continue to promote
the effective implementation of resolution 1624 (2005),
which focuses on the threats posed by terrorist incitement
and the need to take effective countermeasures, which
may include legal sanctions, as well as increased
emphasis on dialogue and understanding.

Measures taken by Member States to counter
incitement and violent extremism have been intensively
discussed during the country visits and in other
settings. In that regard, this month CTED facilitated
the organization in Kenya of a national workshop
on the effective implementation of resolution 1624
(2005). CTED also continued to gather examples of
good practices related both to legislation and other
aspects of counter-incitement measures, such as
educational programmes promoting peace, dialogue
and understanding among civilizations.

In December 2013, senior prosecutors from around
the world gathered in Tunis to discuss the growing
phenomenon of individual radicalization, which results
in terrorists acting alone or in small cells. That event,
facilitated by CTED, was also attended by leading
academics and representatives of international and
regional organizations. The participants tested strategic
assumptions and compared legal and operational tools
to address that phenomenon, which remains little
documented and ill defined.

Even though the terrorist threat has become more
diffuse, a strong and fair criminal justice system
remains central to a comprehensive counter-terrorism
approach. CTED continues to engage with Member
States on ways to develop tailored and more effective
judicial responses to emerging trends. As part of the
Committee's efforts to support States' efforts to bring
terrorists to justice, CTED and UNODC have launched
a joint global initiative to strengthen the capacities
of national investigative, prosecutorial and judicial
authorities. This multi-year initiative will address the
challenges involved in effectively investigating and
prosecuting terrorism cases while respecting human
rights and the rule of law.

The Committee and CTED continued to pay close
attention to relevant human rights and rule-of-law issues,
consistent with the Committee's policy guidance in that
area. Human rights issues arise in virtually all areas
of counter-terrorism, and the Committee and CTED
remain committed to promoting the principle that all
counter-terrorism measures must comply with Member
States' obligations under international law, including
international human rights law, as a matter of both legal
obligation and effectiveness of the implementation of
such measures.

Over the coming months, the Committee will
continue to fulfil the mandates conferred by the
Security Council, including through the preparation
of a special meeting on the issue of kidnapping for
ransom, in accordance with resolution 2133 (2014);
continued Committee visits to Member States and
stocktaking of their implementation efforts; and further
interaction with civil society, the private sector and
academic institutions. The Committee and CTED will
also continue to arrange open briefings on regional and
thematic counter-terrorism issues for the wider United
Nations membership, with a view to further enhancing
transparency and strengthening cooperation in the fight
against terrorism.

