Mr. Patriota (Brazil): Mr. President, I thank you
for organizing this timely debate and for composing
a sensible concept note (S/2015/87, annex). We deeply
appreciate the Chinese proposal to reflect on the norms
and values enshrined by the Charter of the United
Nations. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his instructive presentation.

The seventieth anniversary of the Allied victory
in the Second World War and of the founding of the
United Nations, to be celebrated this year, will coincide
with a vital juncture for the Organization and for the
international order as a whole. As the concept note
presented by China correctly points out, the world has
undergone profound and complex changes over the past
decades. The rise of economic globalization and the
emergence of a multipolar geopolitical environment are
but two of the major trends that define the age we live
in.

New challenges have materialized that cannot
feasibly be solved by any single country, for they are
truly global in nature. At least two of those challenges
can be considered unifying elements capable of
contributing to the enhancement of a world order
centred on cooperation, with the United Nations at its
core. I am thinking of the fight against terrorism and
the challenges posed by climate change. Members of
the United Nations are aware that we can succeed in
those two daunting tasks only byjoining forces, and we
are all ready to do so through inclusive processes that
abide by or promote universally applicable laws and
understandings. If we are serious about promoting the
principles and purposes of the Charter in the twenty-
first century, upholding multilateralism is not just
desirable; it is the only responsible course of action.

As we consider the shortcomings in the present
world order, which some authors are starting to refer
to as "disorder", the lessons of history should guide
us. Two hundred years ago, the Congress of Vienna
sealed the replacement of a unipolar European
moment with an innovative system of plurilateral
consultations - a context that can structurally be
compared to our current transition towards multipolarity,
even if the circumstances are obviously very different.
Those arrangements established in Vienna preserved
a certain stability in Europe for almost a century, but
became subject to irreversible stress under the strain
of rising nationalism, regional conflicts, economic
hardship, all compounded by political shortsightedness
and complacency.

A generation later, another ambitious endeavour
in favour of collective security, the League of Nations,
rose from the ashes ofthe Great War of 1914-1918. Many
of its legal and moral tenets, such as the prohibition
of war and the obligation to abide by international
law, are still with us today. Sadly, the League was
undone by its limited membership and by the absence
of enforcement mechanisms, the result being that an
even worse catastrophe ensued in the Second World
War. As a result of their inability to adapt to shifts in
geopolitical trends and to develop more legitimate and
efficient mechanisms for dialogue and diplomacy, both
the Concert of Europe and the League of Nations failed
to prevent devastating conflicts.

We must not allow the Organization to follow a
similar path. In shaping a new cooperative multilateral
order, attuned to multipolarity, either the United
Nations will be at the centre of that order, or there will
be no order. Unfortunately, alarming signs of systemic
failure can already be noticed. The existing order is
being corroded by disrespect for the United Nations
Charter, flawed strategies that privilege the use of
force and disregard the role of diplomacy, old-fashioned
notions of spheres ofinfluence, and misplaced concepts
of morality that aggravate humanitarian crises under
the claim of protecting civilians.

A certain measure of hope can be derived from the
fact that multilateral frameworks for cooperation have
been recently improved or even created in a variety
of areas. Key examples include the replacement of
the Group of Seven by the Group of 20 as a leading
forum for cooperation on economic and financial
issues, the creation of the Human Rights Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission, the establishment of
universal membership to the Governing Council of
the United Nations Environment Programme, and the
creationoftheHigh-LevelPoliticalForumonSustainable
Development, as recommended by the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development. A certain
measure of reassurance can also be derived from the
fact that there is unity around certain key objectives,
while the body of international law, as well as the
mechanisms for cooperation established since 1945,
receive considerable attention from Governments, the
media and civil society.

When it comes to peace and security, however,
the international community has yet to update its
structures of governance. Moreover, the current system
is being tested not only by contemporary challenges
and crises, but also by unilateralism and seriously
flawed responses. An eloquent illustration of this state
of affairs is presented in the article published by Alan
Kuperman in the March/April edition of Foreign Affairs
on the current Libya debacle. This worrisome pattern
of dysfunctionality resonates outside this building, as
perceived by The Elders, chaired by former Secretary-
General Kofi Annan. As The Elders rightly emphasized
in a recent statement presenting four proposals to build
a better and fairer United Nations system,

"all institutions must adapt to cope with new
circumstances - and today's circumstances are
very different from those of 1945".

It is therefore urgent for us to ponder the high
price of inaction, reflect on history, reaffirm the strong
commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, and rise to the challenge
our Heads of State and Government entrusted to us in
the 2005 World Summit outcome document (resolution 60/1), which called for early reform of the Security
Council.

Brazil shares with a large number of delegations
the conviction that the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations provides an opportunity, which cannot
be missed, to achieve a concrete outcome to the crucial
matter of updating our collective security framework.
Let us echo the political will, the foresight and the
tenacity displayed seven decades ago by the founders
of the United Nations. If we seek to reaffirm the
principles and purposes of the Charter and to foster an
international order based on justice and cooperation,
we must revitalize the Security Council. Only then will
the Organization be truly fit for purpose and able to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.

