Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I join preceding
speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council and in thanking you
for convening this debate. I also thank Under-
Secretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra and General
Agwai for their comprehensive briefings and their
work.

Peacekeeping is one of the primary instruments
that we, the Members of the United Nations, have
created to fulfil our Charter aspiration to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
Peacekeeping is the Organization's most difficult and
highest-profile activity, and it is the one by which we
are most critically judged. That is as it should be, for
our peacekeeping successes and failures are matters of
life and death for those whom we are entrusted to
protect.

New Zealand has long supported the United
Nations peacekeeping cause. We join those who
gratefully salute our peacekeepers. Theirs is an activity
that has undergone a dramatic transition from
traditional ceasefire monitoring to today's complex,
multidimensional, robust and non-conventional
missions in a significantly expanded number of conflict
zones. All that has imposed an unsustainable burden on
United Nations resources and led to serious challenges

in respect of mandate implementation, sustained
political support, supply of personnel, management,
leadership and financing.

Against that background, if we are to achieve our
shared goals, we - the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the Secretariat, contributing countries and
host States - need an open and honest discussion and
must accept a shared responsibility for addressing
those challenges and shortcomings. We cannot allow
United Nations peacekeeping to be discredited by our
failure to respond to and address today's peacekeeping
reality.

Many of the ideas before us today are not new.
The recommendations of the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809), made nearly 10 years ago, are still valid,
but many have not been implemented and some have
not even been addressed. New Zealand believes that, in
10 years time, we should not find ourselves still
lamenting over recommendations that have not been
the subject of concerted and timely action. To ensure
that that does not happen, we must take a structured,
focused and practical approach to working through the
issues.

We take this opportunity to comment on six
issues which warrant further attention.

First, effective logistical support is critical to the
success of every mission. The deployment of larger
missions into areas with long supply chains and the
need for partnership with private-sector providers
obliges the United Nations to take a fresh look at the
whole issue of mission support, which we anticipate
will be addressed by the forthcoming field support
strategy.

Secondly, significant benefit can be gained from
a partnership of States and regional organizations to
provide sustained political and practical support for a
mission. We know this from our own practical
experience. New Zealand is fortunate to work closely
with Timor-Leste, Australia, Portugal and others in
promoting United Nations peace efforts in Timor-
Leste. But we also know that, to ensure success, such
support must continue well beyond the creation of a
mandate.

Thirdly, we reiterate the ongoing importance of
conflict prevention. Obviously, preventing conflict
eases demand for future deployments, but to avoid a
relapse into conflict, conflict prevention must also be
undertaken within and during peacekeeping missions.
The United Nations can now focus its peacebuilding
efforts through the standby team of mediation experts
and the Mediation Support Unit. The team has already
achieved encouraging results, but it is still
underutilized, and we should encourage the special
representatives of the Secretary-General and others to
access this important resource.

Fourthly, New Zealand supports the ongoing
work on robust peacekeeping and protection of
civilians, and acknowledges the inevitability that, at
times, peacekeepers will have to undertake both
activities.

Fifth, the Brahimi report called for a major shift
toward rule of law teams, with combined police,
judicial, legal and human rights experts and with a
rapid deployment capacity similar to that of military
and police missions. We support the development of
such a capacity by the Office of Rule of Law and
Security Institutions of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), but it must be
focused in scope and duration to avoid duplicating the
efforts of others.

Finally, New Zealand believes that the Office of
Human Resources Management and DPKO need more
capacity to deal with recruitment for peacekeeping
missions. "People" is one of five key elements of the
"Peace Operations 2010" reform agenda. Efficient
recruitment and retention of quality people are crucial
to the future of United Nations peacekeeping. We are
hopeful that that will be improved and streamlined by
the human resources system for United Nations
peacekeepers. This issue is not addressed in depth in
the New Horizon paper, but it is integral to the success
of peacekeeping and deserves a renewed focus.

Two weeks ago, addressing this Council on
peacebuilding, I observed that the image of the Blue
Beret interposed between previously warring parties
has become one of this Organization's successes. But
we know that that is a fragile image that is challenged
by imperfect logistics and chains of supply, by lack of
coordination, by underutilization of mediation
resources, by the ongoing vulnerability of civilians, by
limited local legal frameworks, and by inadequate
recruitment and retention. Any one of those
shortcomings or any of those identified by others in
this debate puts a peacekeeping mission at risk. Taken
collectively, they could put the whole peacekeeping
framework at risk. Therefore, all of them must be
addressed.

