Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Sir, I am very pleased to see you, Ambassador
Mohammed Buallay, the Permanent Representative of the
friendly neighbouring country of Bahrain, presiding over
the proceedings of the Security Council in December. I
would also like to express appreciation to Ambassador
Burleigh for the excellent manner in which he guided the
deliberations of the Security Council during the month of
November.

I wish also to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/ 1998/ 1109). On previous occasions I have
expressed my Government's gratitude to the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, for all his
efforts. I would like to place on record here that we are
very grateful to him and his colleagues in the Department
of Political Affairs and to the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA) for their tireless
efforts, which have removed some of the additional
problems in Afghanistan caused by the murder of Iranian
diplomats and a journalist by the Taliban in Mazar-e-
Sharif on 8 August this year. The bodies of the Iranian
diplomats and the journalist have been returned to Iran
and all Iranian civilians known to have been detained in
Afghanistan have been released. The last of the Iranian
detainees were released to a Foreign Ministry technical
team dispatched to Afghanistan last month to visit and
assess damage to the Iranian diplomatic premises in
Herat, Kandahar and Kabul.

The Islamic Republic of Iran is determined to see
that those responsible for the cold-blooded murder of its
diplomatic personnel and the correspondent of the Islamic
Republic News Agency in Mazar-e-Sharif are
apprehended and brought to justice in keeping with
international standards of a fair trial. In his horrific report
(A/53/539) on the situation of human rights in
Afghanistan, the Special Rapporteur of the Commission
on Human Rights describes the group that murdered the
Iranian diplomats and the journalist as "Taliban forces
and persons allied with them, including those described as
'Punjabi Taliban'" (A/53/539, p. 4), and says that the
group was led by a senior Taliban Commander named
Mullah Fazel Ahmed or Fazel Mohammed.

In this connection, I would like to note paragraph 26
of the Secretary-General's report, where we read that the
Taliban leader, Mullah Omar, in the meeting with
Mr. Brahimi on 14 October "confirmed his commitment

 

to the continued investigation by the Taliban of the killing
of the Iranian diplomats and the Iranian journalist in Mazar-
e-Sharif, and promised that the Taliban authorities would
support and cooperate with an international mission of
inquiry into all circumstances surrounding the fate" of the
slain Iranian diplomats and journalist. Exactly four months
since the murder, and nearly two months since the
commitment by the Taliban leader to Mr. Brahimi to an
investigation, we are still awaiting the first preliminary
report about the result of such an investigation.

In this context, we welcome the provision of the draft
resolution, in paragraph 5 which

"Condemns the capture by the Taliban of the
Consulate-General of the Islamic Republic of Iran and
the murder of the Iranian diplomats and a journalist in
Mazar-e-Sharif, stresses that these acts constitute
flagrant violations of international law, and calls upon
the Taliban to cooperate with the United Nations in
investigating these crimes with a view to prosecuting
those responsible."

This is a very important pending issue, which the
Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran intends to
pursue vigorously in Afghanistan through the Secretary-
General and his Special Envoy. As I indicated earlier, it
adds to the already chronic and complex problem in
Afghanistan, which threatens regional and international
peace and security.

The Islamic Republic of Iran remains deeply
concerned about the political and humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan. The Taliban' s persistence in seeking a military
solution, despite the wishes of the international community
and repeated pleas by the Security Council to halt the
fighting and enter into a political dialogue aimed at
establishing a broad-based, multi-ethnic and fully
representative Government, continues to pose an increasing
threat to regional peace and security and cause yet more
human suffering for a people who have suffered more than
their fair share in the last two decades.

The draft resolution is being considered because of the
lack of progress in the implementation of resolution 1193
(1998) and the "Points of Common Understanding" adopted
on 21 September by the ministerial meeting of the "six plus
two" group, which called upon the Taliban to establish a
ceasefire and initiate political negotiations under the
auspices of the United Nations in order to establish a
Government that is truly representative of all Afghan
people. In this context, my delegation supports the draft
resolution, despite the fact that we believe the gravity of
the situation on the ground, in terms of both the
magnitude of systematic human rights violations and the
threat the situation poses to regional and international
security, warranted a stronger and earlier response by the
Council.
The historical realities and the traditional structure of
Afghanistan as a multiethnic country make it abundantly
clear that no single group or ethnicity, however supported
by outside forces, can rule over that country and bring
back peace and normalcy to Afghanistan. The Taliban
now rules by brute force and is financed by drug money
and outside interests. The present situation, under which
Afghan ethnic and religious groups, including the regular
Pashtoons, are suppressed and live in horror, will not last
and the conflict will endure. The solution lies in a
resolute process of international persuasion for inter-
Afghan political negotiations under the auspices of the
United Nations, with a view to establishing a broad-based
and representative Government acceptable to all ethnic,
religious and political groups in Afghanistan.

My Government is committed to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan. While the ultimate responsibility for bringing
about peace and thus allaying the concern of the
international community and, in particular, Afghanistan's
neighbours, lies with the people of Afghanistan, my
Government supports and continues to cooperate with
United Nations efforts, particularly those of Ambassador
Brahimi, which have a central role to play in attaining the
goals of national reconciliation and a lasting political
settlement, with the participation of all parties to the
conflict and all segments of Afghan society.

