Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): My delegation
welcomes His Excellency President Aleksandar Vucie
and Mr. Hashim Thaci to the Chamber and thanks
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for providing us with
an overview of recent developments.

We would like to remind the Council that one month
ago in this very Chamber (see S/PV.8399), we expressed
our concern about the possible transformation of the
Kosovo Security Force into armed forces. Now we are
hearing about the recent decision to adopt three laws
initiating such a transition. We share the Secretary-
General's position on the matter and his call to all
the parties concerned to exercise restraint and refrain
from actions that could lead to further setbacks in
the normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina. That reflects the current state of affairs in
the region, which requires our continued attention as a
matter of relevance in the agenda. Our priorities in that
direction should be the continued promotion of dialogue
between the parties, as well as confidence-building
measures in the political-military, socioeconomic and
human dimensions, in compliance with resolution 1244
(1999) and subsequent documents.

Kazakhstan also supports the calls of the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Mogherini, addressed
to Pristina to remove taxes on products imported
from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as they go
against the spirit of regional cooperation and hinders
the dialogue process. Such a dialogue should be carried
out under the auspices of the European Union, with
the involvement of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and other relevant regional and
subregional organizations, to maintain comprehensive
and sustainable security and development in Kosovo.

In that vein, we consider it important that the parties
adhere to the agreements previously reached through
the mediation of international organizations. We believe
in the importance of ensuring peace and security in
the region. An international security presence will
contribute to the establishment of a whole-communities
safe environment, and we agree with the Secretary-
General on that. We stand for action within the existing
international negotiating mechanisms.

Once again, we express our regret that the region
decided to go ahead with the formation of an army. To
that end, it is highly important to underline that any
unilateral steps outside of the existing international
negotiating mechanisms could raise tensions, constitute
a serious threat to peace andjeopardize overall stability
in the region. Kazakhstan urges all interested parties
to continue implementing their commitments in a good
spirit of mutual respect, understanding and compromise
for the sake of long-lasting peace and stability in that
part of the world.

