Mr. Khan: It is indeed an honour to be able to
present the third report (see 8/2019/878) of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD).

Since my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.8573),
the Investigative Team has worked with some purpose
and continued to ensure that the experiences and needs
of the survivors of crimes committed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), as well as their

families and victims, are placed at the centre of our
work - and not simply by paying them lip service,
but through demonstrable action of members of the
Team. All communities, whether Shabak, Kaka'i, Shia,
Sunni, Christian, Turkmen or Yazidi, have suffered
the unbelievable brutality and cruelty of the most un-
Islamic State called Da'esh. It is, of course, essential
that their voices and experiences be heard as we conduct
our investigations to build credible cases in order to
ensure accountability.

In the past six months since my last report (see S/2019/407), I have visited and met with tribal leaders
throughout Iraq, family members and survivors - not
only in Baghdad, but in Erbil, Tall Afar, Mosul, Ninawa
Plains, Diyala and elsewhere in Iraq - to ensure that
those accounts are recorded and that the interactions of
the Investigative Team can be as informed as possible
in order to understand the experiences of the victims
and witnesses and to ensure proper investigations.

Last week, I visited two displacement camps in
Dohuk and I saw women and children who had suffered
awful slavery and sexual abuse, as well as men, trying
to live with dignity in very difficult conditions. The
effects of Da'esh still linger. Not only have the crimes
been endured, but communities are still grappling with
the aftermath. The courage of the survivors gives one
pause for thought because in their engagement with us,
they had to speak and relive hell on Earth, which is what
they experienced. They spoke with such engagement
and willingness that it put into sharp relief the heavy
responsibility that lies with all of us to ensure that
their cries, their tears and their suffering are met with
purposeful action and credible investigations.

It is, of course, the responsibility of all of us - the
Security Council, me and the Team - to ensure that not
only are words spoken, but that we have the collective
stamina and focus to make sure that proper investigations
and accountability are realized in practice.

As reflected in my report, over the past six
months, the Investigative Team has sought to draw on
this imperative for urgent action in the delivery of its
mandate. One year after our deployment to Iraq, I am
pleased to inform the Council that the Team is now fully
operational. We had about five staff members when we
first deployed in Iraq, and we now have 107 members. I
am delighted that, as we have grown, we have managed
to maintain a good gender balance - 53 per cent of
our substantive and support staff are women, and more
than 50 per cent of our senior leadership positions are
occupied by women. At the same time, I am glad to
say that we have achieved geographical diversity - all
regional groups of the United Nations continue to be
represented in our Team.

The establishment of that core infrastructure
has provided a basis for significant progress in the
collection, gathering and analysis ofdigital, testimonial
and forensic evidence with respect to the three core
areas that I adumbrated in my previous report, namely,
crimes in Mosul, in Sinjar and in Speicher - the Tikrit
Air Academy. At the same time, we have ensured that we
have a responsibility to meet quickly and meaningfully
the requests that we have received from third States and
other domestic courts.

By using the trust fund, we have also ensured that
we have expanded the scope of investigations to make
sure that all the diverse communities - regardless
of race, religion, tribe or ethnic origin - that were
targeted by Da'esh will have investigations carried
out that focus on the crimes that they endured in order
to ensure criminal responsibility based on evidence.
The breadth of the field work conducted by the Team
during the reporting period has been reflected in key
evidence-collection activities, even in recent weeks.
We have managed, for example, to complete 3D laser
scanning of crime scenes, which will help bring to
life, by way of modern technology, scenes that may be
known in Iraq or unknown in third countries. It is also
a very useful aid when one is speaking to a witness,
who can, without going into areas that may still be
dangerous and traumatic, actually position themselves
in that 3D modelling in a way that will bring clarity to
their accounts and hopefully assist domestic courts in
assessing criminal responsibility.

We have continued to collect evidence and
interview witnesses, including witnesses who endured
sexual and gender based-violence, rape or slavery, as
well as other witnesses, from Dohuk and elsewhere.
We have managed to do that with full respect for
international standards - as the Council requires of
us - by way of our witness protection unit and our
clinical psychologists, who we recruited with the kind
assistance of the Netherlands. We have also garnered
together the successful use of social media and
reviewed some of the social media to put forward the
photographs of individuals who appear in the Da'esh
propaganda videos and elsewhere. We have received
thousands of responses that have helped us identify the
names of those protagonists, which will further inform
the investigations of the Team. We have also worked
hand in glove with the Iraqi domestic authorities to
continue to gather DNA samples from the remains of
mass gravesites so that hopefully we can build cases, as
well as identify the remains and, together with the mass
graves directorate of Iraq, return them to their loved
ones for burial, in accordance with their religious and
cultural practices.

As I address the Council today, we have two
field-based missions that are actively conducting
investigations in the Ninawa governorate. In fact, at
this moment they are investigating crimes that targeted
in particular judges, religious clergy, journalists and
health-care professionals - because, as we see, among
many other aspects, Da'esh seems to have targeted some
of the leaders, some of the informers of Mosul, when
they strangled that city and then suffocated it when
they took over completely. Based upon those activities,
the Investigative Team has identified a number of
individual ISIL members as primary targets for further
investigations in relation to each of the areas that we
have previously identified - the three investigative
priorities that were detailed in my previous report. For
example, just in relation to the crimes that targeted
the Yazidi community alone, we have identified more
than 160 perpetrators of massacres against the Yazidis,
particularly in Kojo, and elsewhere, and we are focusing
our work to build solid cases, hopefully, in relation
to each of those that may be presented to domestic
courts - Iraq, of course, is the primary intended
recipient - but any courts that are willing and able to
hold members of Da'esh accountable.

The progress achieved by the Team in the past six
months has continued to build on our relationship of
mutual support and collaboration with the national
authorities of Iraq, and their support and assistance
has been exemplary. I used that word when I had the
honour of delivering my second briefing to the Council.
I am glad to say that that has continued to be the case.
Without the support and the real, meaningful assistance
of the Government of Iraq, this hope and prayer for
justice would fall on fallow ground. Only by that hand
guiding us step by step can we achieve on the promise of
justice that we all wish to see. Since my previous report,
over the past six months we have conducted 203 field-
based investigative activities with the direct support of
the Iraqi authorities. These missions are planned and
facilitated with the support of the National Operations
Centre within the Office of the Prime Minister. Once
again, without that support, which has been critical, we
simply could not move outside of Baghdad.

Our engagement with the Iraqi judiciary has been
essential. I think, personally, that it is one of the key
aspects that the Team has managed to move forward as
dynamically as it has done. While I must pay my thanks
to the Chief Justice, all the judges of Iraq who we have
dealt with have made meaningful contributions to allow
UNITAD, together with the Government ofIraq, to meet
the requirements of justice. An example of that is in
Mosul, where we have had quite extensive discussions
with the Counter-Terrorism Court in Tallkayf. We have
gathered thousands of pages of material pertaining to
37 case files, and further volumes of evidence are also
being digitized. That will be an advantage and an asset
to UNITAD, and it is also of mutual benefit to the Iraqi
investigative judges, so that they can actually access
the material that they have once it is digitized.

Similarly, in relation to Camp Speicher and the
awful massacre of mostly Shia cadets at Tikrit Air
Academy, we have had unbelievable support from the
national investigative commission that the Republic of
Iraq established to look into that. I will come back to
that a little bit later with regard to how we have managed
to work together and build cases. Following the
unanimous renewal of the mandate of the Investigative
Team in September, I have also reached out and tried to
ensure even closer communication and understanding
with the Government of Iraq. I am delighted to say that,
after the renewal, the Office of the Prime Minister set
up a new national coordinating committee within his
Office - it is a new composition - and includes a
representative of the Kurdish Regional Government. I
think that the Government of Iraq should be applauded
for that foresight as well. The mandate repeatedly talks
about the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq,
and it is important that we have representatives from
the entire territory of Iraq to make sure that we speak
and work with one voice as effectively as possible. I met
that new committee on 4 November in Baghdad and
will meet with it again on my return on 10 November.

Our recruitment is moving at a good pace. We
have completed a competitive recruitment process
in accordance with United Nations rules, identified
candidates for the posts that are to be occupied by Iraqi
candidates and now we are at a working group-level
stage of mutual consultations with the Government
of Iraq to make sure that the Iraqi experts that we
recruit have the confidence of the Government of
Iraq and, again, that we work together in concert to
the greatest possible extent. That unity of purpose in
terms of collaboration and cooperation on logistics and
support for the investigations has been mirrored by
the cooperation and assistance given by the President
and the Prime Minister of the Kurdish Regional
Government. In the same way, I can only describe their
support as exemplary, which is extremely positive. They
have also set up an intergovernmental task force, which
was created in order to hopefully ensure the effective
transmission of requests from the Investigative Team
and an effective receipt of information as we try to
ensure accountability.

A technical assistance programme has also been
pursued. The mandate, of course, repeatedly emphasizes
that we are required to share knowledge with the Iraqi
members of the Team, who work on an equal footing
with us, but also to share our technical knowledge and
enhance some capacities. We have done so through a
number of measures - not only exhumations and the
identification of victims, but also with other trainings
and assistance, whether related to drones, 3D laser
scanners or rapid DNA machines. We have conducted
trainings for all of those.

We have an important aspect coming up: we have
received funding from the European Union. Together
with the Government of Iraq, we hope to create a
digitization programme that allows Iraq to have a
digitized version of its records and information that are
relevant to Da'esh crimes. It will also allow UNITAD
to harvest those and build cases in accordance with
international standards. In my previous report, I
intimated that UNITAD would imminently be feeding
into domestic courts, which we have done.

I am glad to report that we received a request from
Finland, which had a case relating to the Camp Speicher
massacre. It was before the court of appeal. With
the full support and knowledge and real meaningful
assistance of the Iraqi authorities - particularly the
judiciary - we managed to have eight witnesses give
evidence from the UNITAD headquarters in Baghdad
straight into the court of appeal in Turku, Finland, in
complete accordance with international standards. We
saw not only prosecution witnesses, but also defence
witnesses. It is a very real credit to my brothers and
sisters in Iraq and the Government that it even extended
to transferring people from custody to the UNITAD
headquarters. The authorities in Finland have formally
expressed their thanks to the Government of Iraq for
that facilitation.

Through this engagement, UNITAD has
demonstrated its ability and willingness to respond
to a requirement in the mandate to feed into courts in
Iraq or those of third States. We are currently in receipt
of three further formal requests from States to feed
into domestic prosecutions that they are conducting
in relation to Da'esh crimes. We have also received an
assortment of additional inquiries from other States that
believe that, with the assistance of the Government of
Iraq, we may be able to move forward. Over the past six
months, we have also received commitments of support
from Australia, Denmark, Germany, Finland, France,
the United States of America, the United Kingdom,
the United Arab Emirates, the Philippines, Sweden
and Uganda. Again, without both the assistance of
Government-provided personnel and contributions to
the trust fund, the operational activities of UNITAD
would be severely circumscribed.

The past six months have been characterized, in
my View, by a real move forward from start-up to real
operations. We have assisted in building case files
and fed into third-country courts. We are refocusing
our commitment to bring our communication with the
Government of Iraq ever-closer, while maintaining
the independence of our investigations, which, of
course, is absolutely essential. I am profoundly
grateful for the support not only from the Government
of Iraq, but for the support and the trust that we are
fostering and that we have been so generously given
by survivors. I am pleased that today, at the initiative
of the United Kingdom - and I thank you, Madam
President - the Council will have an opportunity to
hear from a survivor - Mr. Kachi - who is on screen at
the moment. I would humbly suggest that this precedent
is a very good one. I hope that, in future briefings, by
the leave of the Council, other survivors from other
communities in Iraq will also have the chance and the
honour to address the Council for a few moments.

