Mr. Mrkic' (Serbia): I thank you, Madam President,
and members of the Security Council for convening
this meeting under resolution 1244 (1999).

At the outset, let me express my gratitude to the
Council for continually addressing the situation in
Kosovo and Metohija, which is demonstrated by the fact
that the Council convenes meetings to discuss this issue
regularly, every three months. I also thank Mr. Farid
Zarif, Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his commitment and dedication in guiding the
United Nations team in the field and for his daily
efforts to find a way to overcome the still-deep gap of
distrust that divides the ethnic communities in Kosovo
and Metohija.

The Republic of Serbia, too, is firmly resolved to
work to achieve that goal, as we believe that reducing
the distrust is the only right way, that is, a precondition
for creating better living conditions for all. Last April,
we signed the Brussels agreement in order to facilitate
the solution of questions of vital importance for all
people in the province, hopeful that the signers from
Pristina would share our enthusiasm in overcoming the
problems that we have been facing for far too long.

However, it is with regret that I have to state that
that has not always been the case. We do hope that
there is a political will in Pristina, although we know
that concrete results in solving people's problems,
particularly those besetting minority ethnic groups in
the province, are in very short supply. We therefore
consider that the continued presence of the United
Nations in Kosovo and Metohija is of paramount
importance for future developments, especially at
this sensitive juncture when, after a very long time,
possibilities can now be discerned for all those living
in Kosovo and Metohija to begin to live better and for
its ethnic communities to begin to overcome tensions.

The tensions between the communities have existed
for decades, and it would be illusory to expect them to
disappear within a matter of months. If indeed we long
for a future where everyone can live in peace, without
fear for their lives, we have to solidify the foundations
laid down by the Brussels agreement and work, day in
and day out, towards bridging the deep gap brought

about by decades of lack of trust and confidence. On
the long road, in addition to goodwill and hard work,
we also need an honest broker, not someone who
will do our job for us but who will ensure that all the
participants in the process are guided by the idea of the
long-term betterment of all our people, rather than by
the predominance of the ethnic majority.

It is precisely in that role of impartial overseer of
the process of historic reconciliation that the Republic
of Serbia perceives the United Nations. For several
decades now, the world Organization has worked to
improve the living conditions for all communities
in Kosovo and Metohija, and it is equipped with the
necessary knowledge and experience for the road that
lies ahead.

I have to say that we would have liked to have made
more progress on that road, alone and without outside
assistance, and thus be able to seek agreements with
representatives from Pristina on all matters without
assistance. That in itself would demonstrate the political
maturity of both sides. However, just as the signing of
the Brussels agreement would not have been possible
this year without European Union mediation, without
Baroness Ashton, I am afraid the implementation of
the agreements may not be possible without the active
participation of the United Nations.

While we are firmly resolved to prove that Serbia is
up to the challenges and tasks with which it is presented,
we also need a guarantee that the other side will not
undermine the agreements already reached. In View of
the enormous efforts invested so far by the Republic of
Serbia in finding solutions acceptable to all sides, we
would like to see - and we do not see - the other side
investing efforts to bring about very necessary changes
in the field. Apparently, the status quo suits the other
side much more, and that is why we assume that they
want international actors to leave the province.

I am sure that the Council needs no reminding that
the task of the international presence in Kosovo and
Metohija is not to promote the independence of Kosovo.
By resolution 1244 (1999), this body established the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and charged it with the mandate of
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights in the province. Accordingly, what we are dealing
with is the setting of standards, which is our primary
goal - not the establishment of a status, which appears
to be that of Pristina.

As our goals - at least in that domain - evidently
differ, we consider that the Brussels agreement is only
the beginning of the normalization of relations, not the
end. We would not be warning of attempts to undermine
agreements had we not already registered a number
of them in this short period of time. For instance,
satisfaction is expressed in the report (S/2013/444)
of the Secretary-General over the amendment of
the law on the budget in the Assembly of Kosovo.
We, too, would be satisfied if it did not break a prior
bilateral agreement. In fact, the amendments to the
law are contrary to the agreement made in the working
group on the implementation of the integrated border
management agreement last J anuary.

Under that agreement, the funds collected from
the transfer of goods for individuals and legal entities
in the municipalities in northern Kosovo and Metohija
are to be credited to the fund for the development of
the north. The amendments adopted in the Assembly,
however, provide for the establishment of a development
trust fund for the association of Serb municipalities in
Kosovo and Metohija. In that way, the funds would
be initially credited to the Kosovo fund - treasury/
budget - and only then to the fund for the development
of the north. That modification runs counter to the spirit
of the political agreement. Rather than eliminating
the obstacles to the normalization of life, it creates
additional ones.

Another example of the breach of trust is the
situation in Brdjani. The report states that Serbs
protested because ofthe attempts by internally displaced
Albanians to build houses in that part of northern
Kosovska Mitrovica. The truth of the matter, however,
is the persistence of Kosovo and Metohija Albanians
in altering the ethnic structure of Brdjani through land
grabbing and building without a permit. In fact, local
Serbs had agreed with returnee Albanians that they
could rebuild their houses without any encumbrance
whatsoever. Brdjani, it should be borne in mind, is a
small place where everybody knows everybody else
and where such agreements were possible. Yet the
Serbs from Brdjani protested only after they discovered
that Kosovo and Metohija Albanians were planning to
build 172 apartments in that locality for veterans of
the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army who had never
lived there, and only for a fraction of that number for
Albanians who had lived there before 1999.

That is yet another example in which UNMIK
mediation would be of great help. We therefore
propose that the Secretary-General request his Special
Representative to draw up an exact list of Kosovo
and Metohija Albanians who lived in Brdjani prior to
June 1999 and to present it with his next report. We
are convinced that such transparency would contribute
significantly to the resolution of disputes and that we
need a neutral international presence to achieve it.

Building confidence in Kosovo institutions among
minority communities is not aided by the signing of
the 1 July military agreement with Albania, mentioned
in the report of the Secretary-General. The Republic
of Serbia protested the signing in the belief that the
agreement on military cooperation should be placed
in the context of the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. Its implementation is sufficiently complex
even without the less than constructive surprises by
Pristina, especially those with destabilization potential.

The exchange of military personnel, provided for
by the agreement, would result in an increased presence
of ethnic Albanians in a very small geographic area,
interspersed with a number of enclaves populated by
Serbs, Gorani and other non-Albanians, thereby adding
to the anxiety of those already isolated communities.
Such an agreement has a potential, in case a political
decision is taken, to threaten the security of the people
in a real way and to repeat the ethnic pogrom of March
2004. Whether or not such a scenario comes to pass,
the signing of that agreement sends a clear message to
all members of non-Albanian communities as to who
controls force. It should be borne in mind that, at least
in theory, the agreement provides for the possibility that
full military force could be deployed, since the Republic
of Albania does possess heavy weapons; whereas, at
least formally, the so-called Kosovo Security Force
does not.

Of course, we do not expect that Pristina will
use the agreement with Albania for military actions
in the field, but we must emphasize the consequence:
intimidation of minority communities. Likewise, we
did not believe that the pogrom was possible before it
happened in 2004, or the dispatch of Pristina's special
force to northern Kosovo and Metohija in the summer
of 2011.

At that time, we also kept telling our fellow Serbs
that threats to their lives were a thing of the past, but
the reality contradicted us. If we want to solidify the
trust that we have only begun to build, we now need
much more than assumptions. We need guarantees that
force will not be used.

Tensions continue, not only in the north but in the
entire territory of Kosovo and Metohija. The Serbs
living south of the Ibar River are facing problems.
Although those problems are different than those of
the Serbs in the north, they merit attention and serious
efforts to find solutions. Particularly worrisome is the
fact that some problems are institutional in nature and,
as a result, they involve partial and sometimes full
denial of basic minority rights in terms of security and
restitution of property.

Although the report includes a separate chapter on
northern Kosovo and Metohija, it is of particular concern
that, by choosing to treat the subject this way, it actually
minimizes emphasis on developments important for
Serbs and members of other non-majority communities
in Kosovo and Metohija. We propose that, for the
next report, the Secretary-General asks his Special
Representative to prepare an exhaustive review of the
situation in which the Serbs, Gorani and the members of
other communities south of the Ibar River live. Such a
report would be very illustrative if it included examples
of institutional encumbrances related to the exercise of
rights, the registration of ethnically motivated criminal
offences and the realization of property rights.

The property rights of Serbs are violated throughout
Kosovo and Metohija, in particular by indiscriminate
sales of companies in Serbian communities to Albanian
business people through the Privatization Agency of
Kosovo. The sales affect the economic viability of the
Serbian communities, destroy conditions for return and
undermine security. In addition, it has been a common
practice to put only ethnic Albanian workers on lists
of employees entitled to monetary compensations from
the sale of a company.

In that connection, I recall the position maintained
within the United Nations that the Privatization Agency
of Kosovo is not a legal successor of the Kosovo Trust
Agency, since it has not been established under a law
in force in Kosovo and Metohija in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999).

In the light of the property issues mentioned,
I consider it necessary to re-examine the decision
on funding the Privatization Agency of Kosovo. It
would be ill-advised to leave such a sensitive issue
as privatization, which concerns all minority rights,
within the competence of the Privatization Agency of
Kosovo. The latter has already misused its powers in
the interest of the majority community on a number of
occasions.

It has been 14 years since the Council adopted a
decision on the establishment and on the competencies
of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo and Metohija,
but some key aims of the international community
remain unfulfilled. According to data from the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
there still remain 210,148 internally displaced persons
from the province living in Serbia today. More than
70 per cent of them are Serbs, 17 per cent Roma, as well
as Gorani, Bosniacs, Montenegrins and others.

Tension in Kosovo and Metohija continues to flare.
Despite our efforts, we have not succeeded in reducing
it, demonstrated by the security data presented in the
report. It has been pointed out that, taken separately
for each quarterly reporting period, it has been hard to
make precise conclusions on the basis of the number of
security incidents that took place during a particular
period. As it stands, it is possible to wrongly conclude
that the security situation is improving; whereas, in
fact, we still have a long way to go to achieve that goal.

After the completion of the report, which states that
the number ofincidents related to minority communities
has been reduced as compared to those in the preceding
period, the murder of an elderly Serbian woman was
discovered. The perpetrators were never identified. That
reveals a new problem: the report is silent on the number
of discovered and tried perpetrators and the number of
cases, solved and unsolved. Also, no mention is made
of the measures taken by the authorities - whether the
police, the prosecutors or the courts.

The practice of not punishing the perpetrators of
violence against Serbs therefore continues. We still do
not know who killed 14 reapers at Staro Gracko in 1999,
following the arrival of the international presences, or
who shot the Serbian children as they played on the river
at Gorazdevac in 2003. Every year, as we remember
those who lost their lives, we expect to hear what has
been done concerning them, but we have had no answer
for more than 10 years now. The pogrom of March
2004, which resulted in 19 dead and approximately
4,000 displaced, has not yet led to initiating a single
court proceeding.

Had at least one of those cases been solved or had
we seen any headway in investigations, we would now
have something to prove to the Serbian community in
Kosovo and Metohija that, over time, justice would
be served in each case. We would be able to tell the
community that meting out justice would not only
discourage potential perpetrators from committing
violence again, but that, over time, it would create a
different climate among Kosovo inhabitants, who, in
that way, might one day become guarantors of their
security.

Yet, none ofthose cases has been solved so far, which
leads us to believe that the culture of impunity obtains
in Kosovo and Metohija. It is therefore no surprise
that violent demonstrations broke out in Pristina after
EULEX arrested a few suspects in connection with
war crimes committed against minorities. I repeat, in
an environment like that, minorities surely do not feel
safe. If the environment were at least a bit different,
we would be witnessing more returns, and our Liaison
Officer, who assumed his duties in June, would
not be one of only 118 Serbs in Pristina, a city that
numbered 40,000 Serbs not so long ago. There were
only 302 Serb returnees to Kosovo and Metohija in
2012, fewer than in 2011, when 464 persons returned.
We are witnessing a continued decrease in the already
small numbers of returnees. The United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has pointed that fact
out. Even though she offers a positive assessment of
the legal and institutional frameworks for human rights
protection, the High Commissioner indicates that their
enforcement remains insufficient. That brings us back
to the question of Pristina's political will to address
those issues.

The lack of institutional clarity, highlighted in a
joint study by the Council of Europe and the European
Union, would not be such a big problem, if it were
not yet another issue used by Pristina to intimidate
the Serbian population by resorting to arrests under
secret indictments. We continue to witness unfounded
charges arbitrarily pressed against Serbs for war
crimes. Equally disturbing is the postponement of
the amnesty law, which, incidentally, barely made it
through the Parliament, which makes Serbs justifiably
apprehensive that, pending its implementation, many
more of them might be arrested.

The Republic of Serbia takes this opportunity
to call on EULEX, which is competent to find those
responsible for war crimes, to make a contribution
towards finding a solution to that problem by presenting
a list of Serbs indicted, without interfering in individual
court proceedings.

As on previous occasions, I would like to reiterate
the importance of a full and effective investigation into
allegations of people being killed for organ trafficking.
The Republic of Serbia is ready to continue cooperating
with the EULEX investigation team in order to establish
the truth and to achieve justice for the victims, as soon

as possible.

I must point out that the intimidation and
discouragement of returns can be much more subtle, if,
for instance, one denies the history of an entire people.
It so happens that we continue to witness attempts,
made within UNESCO, to rename the cultural and
historical heritage of the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija
as the heritage of Kosovo without mentioning Metohija,
in other words, to 'Kosovize' it. Those attempts are
tantamount to destroying evidence of the long existence
and survival of Serbs for centuries in that area, all for
the purpose of promoting the so-called independence
of Kosovo.

As far as the Republic of Serbia is concerned, it
does not, nor will it, recognize the unilateral declaration
of independence. Let me also express our gratitude to
all those Member States that share and support our
position of principle. Too many latent tensions continue
to exist everywhere in Kosovo and Metohija. Our
experience has shown that often the slightest incident
can trigger a situation that can escalate into protests
with unforeseeable consequences.

Great efforts and concrete steps are needed to
ensure physical safety and to secure the property of
minority communities. Those steps need to be taken,
as stated in the report, by Pristina, and we believe that
the process will evolve a lot more easily and faster with
UNMIK's assistance.

The first agreement to normalize relations is a
good beginning, but it only sets a framework for the
hard work that still lies ahead of us. We consider those
foundations good enough to build a better tomorrow,
and we must not miss this opportunity. We cannot
simply ignore obstructions, for that not only means a
return to the past but also signals a deepening in the
mistrust, which we want to overcome.

Aware of the opportunity before it, the Republic
of Serbia expects the continued assistance of the
international community, the United Nations in
particular, on the road to confidence-building, which we
believe is the only sound foundation for bringing about
a normal life for everyone in Kosovo and Metohija.

