Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our deep regret at the
deteriorating humanitarian situation being borne by
the Syrian people, inside and outside the country. I also
express our thanks and gratitude to all United Nations
humanitarian workers and those of other organizations
for the assistance provided to the Syrian people.

The continuation of the Syrian crisis over the past
few years and the escalation of its militarization have
led to acute deterioration in many areas. I express our
condemnation of all targeting of civilians in conflict
areas and all explotiation of civilians as a war tactic
by means of starvation, laying siege or using civilians
as humanitarian shields. Since the outbreak of this
humanitarian crisis, particularly in Madaya, Kafraya,
Fu'ah and Muadamiyet al-Sham, Egypt has established
close contacts with many United Nations officials,
Syrian businessmen, members of the opposition and
members of the Syrian Government, with a view to
finding speedy solutions that meet the humanitarian
needs ofthe Syrian people, particuarly in besieged areas,
regardless of their affiliations. We remain confident
that humanitarian work should rise above political
differences. In that regard, Egypt welcomes the arrival
of some assistance to those areas and encourages all
parties to continue their cooperation with the United
Nations and other emergency relief organizations in
order to avoid the recurrence of such tragedies.

The Security Council is tackling the many different
aspects of the crisis in Syria, in spite of the differences
of opinion over certain issues. Egypt believes that,
when it comes to humanitarian issues, the international
community and the members of the Security Council
should remain united, particularly since we see that
certain countries attempt at times to take advantage of
political situations. We appeal to all parties to refrain
from politicizing the crisis ofthe Syrian people or using
it as a means of bringing pressure to bear, since that
would lead only to further suffering for the civilians
in this conflict and would increase division among the
different parties.

We reiterate that putting an end to the suffering
of the Syrian people requires a political solution that
puts an end to armed conflict and lays the basis for
a democratic State. We appeal to all members of the
Security Council and to the International Syria Support
Group to do their utmost to preserve the political path
and the plan of action agreed within the Vienna process,
endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution 2254
(2015). We also appeal to all parties to work towards
that purpose, after so many years of stalemate. We warn
that any attempts to derail the current political efforts
would lead only to further escalation of the armed
conflict and to a vicious circle that would perpetuate
the crisis.

