Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Special
Representative Farid Zarif for his briefing. I also
acknowledge the report by the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security on
the activities of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). The United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and EULEX continue to promote peace, security,
human rights and the rule of law in Kosovo, in close
cooperation with the relevant international partners,
including the Kosovo Force and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.

I welcome Prime Minister Vucie of Serbia and
Prime Minister Thaci of Kosovo.

Robust debate in the formation of Governments
can be a sign of vibrant and mature democracies, but
the prolonged political deadlock in Pristina following
the successful elections on 8 June has risked diluting
the progress achieved so far in the dialogue with
Belgrade and damaging Kosovo's economy. We
therefore welcome the in-principle agreement reached
recently to form a coalition Government in Pristina and
the announcement that the Assembly of Kosovo will
reconvene on 8 December. We urge the new Kosovar
Government to re-engage as a matter ofpriority in a new
phase of dialogue with Serbia. We also urge it to focus
on responsible Government and fighting corruption,
and to work to stabilize the country's economic and
fiscal situation.

Australia welcomes the recent progress achieved in
technical talks between Kosovar and Serbian authorities
despite the stalled high-level political dialogue. The
agreements on crossing points, telecommunications
and energy should make a real difference to people's
lives and facilitate economic activity. The progress
and cooperation in municipal governance, including
between the four Serb-majority municipalities and
authorities in Pristina, and in police integration are
also welcome developments. The full establishment
of the Community of Serb Municipalities should now
be a priority, along with concrete improvements in the
overall situation facing Kosovo's internally displaced
persons.

The security situation in Kosovo continues
to normalize, with a steady decline in politically
motivated security incidents. But the intensification
of inter-ethnic tensions in Kosovo following the
suspension of the 14 October football match between
Serbia and Albania in Belgrade, including incidents
directed at Kosovo-Serb returnees and their property,
shows that much more needs to be done to strengthen
inter-ethnic harmony. We commend Kosovar security
authorities and EULEX for their prompt and effective
handling of incidents in the aftermath of the match.
We urge Kosovo's leaders to continue their efforts to
build understanding and reconciliation among different
ethnic communities.

Australia appreciates the efforts of the Kosovar
authorities to safeguard the country's cultural and
religious heritage, but we remain concerned that
episodes ofdesecration ofsites ofparticular significance
continue to occur. The spraying ofprovocative messages
praising the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant at
the Visoki Decani Monastery on 12 October was of
particular concern.

In that context, Australia also appreciates the steps
taken by Kosovo to address the problem of extremism
and foreign terrorist fighters. We, like the Secretary-
General and others, commend all those Kosovo
moderate religious and secular groups who work to
address the root causes of extremism and to combat
foreign fighters.

We note the steps taken by UNMIK and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
to monitor the situation and assist in the voluntary
return of displaced persons. The return of displaced
persons and refugees from the Kosovo conflict is an
essential component of long-term reconciliation, and
we once again call on all parties to increase efforts in
that regard.

As this will be Australia's final statement on
Kosovo in the Security Council during our term of
membership, it is appropriate to reflect on the past two
years - a period of substantial progress in the relations
between Serbia and Kosovo. For both, the 19 April
2013 Agreement and the concrete results delivered by
technical talks set a high benchmark for Serbian and
Kosovo leaders elected over the past year to achieve
the full normalization of relations in a new phase of
high-level European Union-facilitated dialogue. We
welcome the recent visit by Foreign Minister Hoxhaj to
Belgrade as a sign of the determination of both parties
to make that happen.

In the light of such progress, there is now scope to
reduce the frequency of Security Council debates on
Kosovo so as to redirect Council resources - already
facing unprecedented demands - to other, more acute
challenges to peace and security. A good first step
would be requesting the Secretary-General to submit
his reports on UNMIK at six-monthly intervals. The
Council could also start to consider whether the current
mandate of UNMIK is appropriate for the contemporary
political and security situation of Kosovo.

