Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President.
We also wish to express our happiness at seeing you
preside over the Council during this month, and we
wish you every success. I also wish to thank the
Permanent Representative of China for his successful
presidency in the previous month.

The Security Council is meeting today, five
months after the vote on 27 March 2001 on the draft
resolution submitted by the members of the Non-
aligned Movement in the Council on the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory. The draft resolution
was not adopted due to the exercise of the veto by a
permanent member of the Council. Since then, the
situation has deteriorated dangerously into the current
situation, of which members are all aware.

We sincerely believe that matters might have
been different if the Council had been able to take
specific measures, and that we would therefore be in a
different situation today. In any case, it is difficult to
believe, and impossible to justify, the fact that the
Security Council has not succeeded in taking any
measures since the adoption of resolution 1322 (2000)
of 7 October 2000 on the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem. This is in
spite of the several attempts that have taken place in
this regard and in spite of the support of many
members of the Council for those efforts.

This has taken place at a time when the Council is
enthusiastically engaged in considering such issues as
the prevention of armed conflict and the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Frankly, it seems to me that
there is something fundamentally wrong that is
affecting this international mechanism that was agreed
upon in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations - an impact that also touches on the
mechanism's credibility and effectiveness. We call
upon the members of the Council to consider this issue
as a matter of principle and to adhere to the Council's
role in the maintenance of international peace and
security at all times and in all places.

We come back once again to the Council today
because of our full adherence to the principle of the
Council's responsibility - including, of course, its
responsibility for the question of Palestine - and
because of our rejection of any attempt to neutralize
the Council in that regard. Irrespective of how it is
formulated, such an attempt can only mean an effort to
evade international law and legitimacy and to deal with
matters in accordance with the de facto balance of
power. The urgent reason why we have returned to the
Council is, of course, the continuing deterioration of
the situation to a very dangerous level and the fact that
there is no other mechanism or organized sustained
effort to halt that deterioration and change the
situation. We even believe that the recent period has
led to an undermining of the only available plan, which
is embodied in the recommendations of the Sharm
el-Sheikh fact-finding committee known as the
Mitchell Committee. Accordingly, we did not have
many options. We hope that the Council will this time
be able to fulfil its duties and adopt the necessary
resolution to provide the positive impetus we all need.

The unprecedented and bloody military campaign
waged by Israel against our people began after Ariel
Sharon's infamous visit to Al-Haram Al-Sharif, on 28
September 2000. That visit precipitated the collective
rejection by our people of an act of aggression against
our sacred sites. It was also a rejection by Palestinians
of Israel's continuing occupation and practices, and it
ignited the second intifada. Since then, Israeli
occupying forces have killed 563 Palestinians, a figure
that increased to 572 over the course of the weekend.
Just yesterday, by shelling a house in Rafah, the
occupation forces murdered Samir Abu Zaid, his
seven-year old son Salman and his three-year old
daughter Alaa. Also yesterday, those forces murdered
Ahmed Abu Arar, who was 14 years of age. They also
killed another man in Nablus and injured one other
while he tried to circumvent an Israeli checkpoint as he
travelled back to his village near Nablus after
purchasing school supplies for his children in that city.
Checkpoints are intended to block the passage of an
entire people. When someone tries to bypass those
checkpoints he is murdered by the Israeli occupying
forces. Is there anything more heinous than that?

During this period, therefore, the Israeli
occupying forces have killed 572 Palestinians, many of
them children. That figure is in addition to the
Palestinians who have been martyred through other
means, but nonetheless as a result of the occupation. In
addition, around 20,000 Palestinians have been
injured -many of them have been left permanently
disabled.

The Israeli occupying forces have also caused
extensive destruction to the economy and have razed
vast agricultural areas and uprooted thousands of trees.
In many instances they have also used heavy
weapons- including tanks, helicopter gunships and
even F-16 jets - to shell and destroy civilian houses
and many sites belonging to the Palestinian Authority
and other Palestinian institutions. They have also
imposed internal and external blockades, which has led
to the complete dismemberment of Palestinian territory
and to a severe limitation of the movement of persons
and goods between Palestinian territory and the outside
world.

The occupying forces have also committed
extrajudicial killings and assassinations against
targeted persons by several means, including helicopter
missiles and special covert units. On several occasions
they have also invaded areas under the control of the
Palestinian Authority, and Israeli tanks have recently
entered and temporarily occupied an entire Palestinian
city.

In addition to all that there are the atrocities
committed by gangs of illegal Israeli settlers against
our people under the cover and protection of the
occupying forces. The Israeli occupying forces have
thus committed many atrocities against our people,
some of which are without doubt war crimes under the
clear definition set out in the Fourth Geneva
Convention and its First Additional Protocol, as well as
the Statute of the International Criminal Court.

In general, the result of Israel's bloody military
campaign and other measures, such as the withholding
of Palestinian funds, has been the transformation of the
lives of an entire people into a veritable hell and
placing them, in essence, into a number of collective
prisons. This is in addition to direct oppression,
economic devastation and every sort of suffering to
which the Palestinian people have been subjected. We
have documented all of Israel's actions in 63 letters
addressed to the President of the Security Council, the
Secretary-General and the President of the General
Assembly - letters that constitute the dossier of
Israel's crimes. We have done so in order to keep the
Council and the representatives of the international
community aware of the details of what has been taken
place. All ofthis has not been enough for Israel.

Recently, Israel has taken yet another illegal step
by raiding and closing down Orient House, which is the
Palestinian political centre in occupied East Jerusalem.
That closure is in addition to the closure of nine other
buildings belonging to other Palestinian institutions.
This step constitutes a dangerous escalation and an
assault on Palestinian national dignity and rights in the
Holy City. Furthermore, it also marks a reversal by
force of an important part of the agreements reached
between the two sides and is a flagrant violation of the
explicit commitment made in a letter dated 11 October
1993 from the Foreign Minister of Israel to the Foreign
Minister of Norway regarding Palestinian institutions
in Jerusalem. In that connection, we would like to
recall that international consensus and relevant
Security Council resolutions affirm that all actions
taken by Israel, the occupying Power, aimed at
changing the legal status and demographic composition
of Jerusalem are illegal, null and void.

After all this, Israel, the occupying Power, talks
about Palestinian violence and denounces Palestinian
acts of resistance. The origin of the whole conflict is
the existence of the Israeli occupation and the practices
of this occupation for 34 years, especially settler
colonialism manifested in the confiscation of land and
the illegal transfer of Israelis to the occupied territory
and building settlements for them.

Another factor arises, which is the ongoing
existence of occupation and its practices even after the
start of the peace process and more than seven years
after the signing of the Oslo agreement. Any attempt to
ignore or circumvent this, in addition to being immoral,
will only lead to failure in finding the necessary
solutions to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and the
Middle East crisis.

As for the current dangerous deterioration, it is
basically an outcome of Israeli actions and measures,
particularly the military ones to which I have referred.
Tension and confrontation are not caused because the
Palestinian side attempts to invade Israel and not
because the Palestinian Authority tries, for example, to
expand its control and regain Palestinian territory.
Tension and confrontation are there because Israeli
occupying forces have expanded over Palestinian
populated areas, constituting a state of unbearable
pressure on our people, and have undertaken an
unprecedented bloody military occupation, to which I
have referred as well.

One issue preoccupying the Palestinian side,
which we do not approve of, is the bombings that have
taken place in Israel. We do not condone such acts. We
have clearly condemned them, as we have condemned
all acts of violence against civilians. But in order to
understand events correctly, this wave of explosions
did not begin until much time had passed after the
beginning of the bloody Israeli military campaign last
September.

How can this dangerous situation be brought to
an end, and how can we return to the path of peace? In
our opinion, dealing with the situation on the ground in
an effective and speedy manner should take place
within a political context, because we believe that you
cannot separate security or the actual situation on the
ground from the political vision and the future that
awaits the two sides.

What we certainly believe is that dealing with the
situation on the ground cannot be achieved by the
illogical attempt to put the burden on the Palestinian
side, as Israel and some parties are trying to do. For our
part, we have clearly declared our acceptance of the
report of the Mitchell Committee, and we have called
for the comprehensive implementation of the
recommendations of the report, which aim at restoring
the situation to what it was before September 2000 and
towards the resumption of the peace process.

For its part, the Israeli Government has frequently
expressed its animosity towards the Committee and its
report. Mr. Sharon said before the report was issued
that Israel's acceptance of the Committee's
establishment was a strategic mistake. After the report
was issued the Israeli Government said that it did not
accept the recommendation regarding the cessation of
settlement activity and did not accept the criticism in
the report directed at the Israeli Army. Finally, the
Israeli Government said that it accepted the report.
Great, but in return, it invented the notion of the
separate stages of the implementation of the report,
then invented this seven-day cooling-off period that
should precede implementation of the
recommendations as a condition for such
implementation.

How can the cooling-off period be achieved
without the joint implementation of the
recommendations by the two sides? If such a cooling
down can be achieved before the implementation, why
should we need these recommendations to begin with?
In short, we believe that this Israeli position is, at best,
unrealistic and impractical and impedes the
implementation of the recommendations. At worst, it is
an expression of the rejection of the report and a means
to bury it. This is the truth.

We call for the immediate, comprehensive and
scrupulous implementation of the recommendations
contained in the report, and we call upon the parties,
particularly those that have participated in its
formulation, to adhere to it and to push in this
direction.

As for the general political context, a matter that
cannot be avoided, we once more declare our
commitment to signed agreements and our commitment
to negotiate on the basis of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), taking into
consideration the developments in previous discussions
between the two sides with the aim of reaching a final
agreement on all issues, including Jerusalem, refugees
and the borders. We call upon the Israeli side to declare
the same commitment and to relinquish the attempts to
circumvent the signed agreements and seek partial
solutions instead of a final settlement. We, of course,
also call upon all other concerned parties to affirm the
same position.

It is saddening that what is currently happening,
and the prevailing situation threatening the region as a
whole, come after the parties got close to reaching a
final settlement and to achieving peace. In all cases, we
believe that there is a solution to the conflict. It is a
clear solution, and, more than that, it is achievable. But
we need the assistance of the international community
to achieve such a solution, and we hope that this will
be the case. Towards that end, we hope that this time
the Council will succeed in contributing to stopping the
bloodshed. To start the path of return to negotiations
and peace, we have proposed modest goals to be
included in the draft resolution, because we want the
Council to succeed, which is an extremely important
matter to all parties. Let us work together to achieve
this.

