Mr. Augusto (Angola) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Angola congratulates the French
presidency of the Security Council for holding this
debate on attacks and abuses against ethnic and
religious minorities in the Middle East. We welcome
and thank Mr. Laurent Fabius, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of France, for presiding over this debate.

(spoke in English)

At present, in many countries - namely, Syria,
Iraq, Libya, South Sudan and the Central African
Republic, just to mention a few - the international
community is once again faced with its inability to
quickly and effectively protect and respond to the
humanitarian needs of ethnic and religious minorities.
We, the international community, should conduct some
soul searching and ask some crucial questions. Do we
really believe in the protection of minorities, of the
disadvantaged and those marginalized by abuse and
persecution? What should we do differently in order to
prevent mass killings and the persecution of minorities?

As recent events show, the political turmoil in the
Middle East and North Africa has a devastating impact
on minority groups. Egyptian Copts, Israeli Arabs, Iraqi
and Syrian Kurds, Palestinians in Jordan, Saudi Shia
Muslims, Assyrian Christians, Turkmen and Yazidis
are some of the groups facing increasing hostility at the
hands of extremist groups, and even from Government
institutions.

Most worrisome is the fact that Violent extremism,
religious and ethnic intolerance seem to be gaining
ground in the Middle East and elsewhere, with
minorities being subjected to brutal persecution by
extremists and terrorist groups that endanger the future
of those societies by breaking down the social fabric
of the communities and countries they have lived for
centuries. Acts of persecution, including targeted
killings, forced religious conversions, abductions,
forced evictions, slavery, sexual and physical abuse,
torture and the harassment of entire communities on
the basis of ethnic or religious affiliation are having
a disastrous effect on the collective perceptions of the
people affected.

Another cause for great concern is the rapid
advance of radical militant groups such as Daesh in
Iraq, Syria and other parts of the Middle East and
North Africa. Those terrorist organizations, while
significantly threatening the territorial integrity of the
countries throughout the region, have been outspoken
in their hatred of other religious or ethnic minorities.
This dangerous spread of Jihadist and Salafist ideology
in the Middle East and North Africa is unsettling
the centuries-old coexistence of religious and ethnic
communities and creating an environment of mistrust
and intolerance, which only leads to further conflict.

The members of the Security Council have
condemned, in the strongest terms, the widespread
and grave Violations of humanitarian and human rights
law committed by Daesh against ethnic, religious and
other minority groups, while reiterating their support
to the protection of civilians, including minorities, in
accordance with international humanitarian law and the
standards set out in international legal instruments on
human rights and the rights of refugees. However, none
of the Conventions, statements or resolutions adopted
by the Security Council seem to have the desired effect
in places where war is raging and the most egregious
human rights abuses occur. These normative documents
tend to lose their weight without the strong political
will of the Security Council to enforce its decisions by
all necessary means.

The threat posed by the radical extremists has
to be matched and, in addition to the use of force, a
clear ideological response must be provided, including
through communication technologies, that counters
their propaganda at every turn and reduces their capacity
to mobilize youth to their sinister ends. Additionally,
the promotion of a culture of tolerance, inclusion and
common understanding is key to ensuring different
but equal coexistence with other human beings. In
that regard, there arises the need to assist the peoples
of the Middle East to peacefully resolve the issues of
coexistence among diverse communities in Iraq, Syria,
Yemen and Palestine, among other places, and join the
fight against radical elements whose only purpose is to
promote hatred and division.

The Republic of Angola therefore supports
the action plan announced by His Excellency the
Secretary-General this morning for a new and urgent
approach to the question of minorities. In the same
vein, we recognize the importance and the pertinence
of the proposals made by you, Mr. President, on the
implementation of concrete actions to address the
prevailing situation of minorities in the Middle East.

The United Nations is at a crossroads, and the
Security Council has enormous responsibilities ahead
on which it must deliver in order to safeguard its very
nature and relevancy in the twenty-first century. The
challenge is enormous because we must take a definite
stand against armed groups such as Boko Haram, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Daesh and others,
which threaten entire societies and communities that
have for so long coexisted in peace and harmony.
However, promoting a culture of tolerance and common
understanding will be possible only with political
stability, economic prosperity and policies for real
political, social and economic inclusion, particularly
for the youth. In that regard, we must continue to assist
the peoples of the Middle East to peacefully resolve the
conflicts in the region and bring about all the positive
changes proclaimed by the Arab Spring.

