Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Iwould
like to extend my warm congratulations to you, Madam
President, and your team on the convening of this first
public meeting in December, devoted to the situation in
Iraq, which marks the beginning of the United States
presidency of the Security Council. I would also like
to express my thanks to Ambassador Karen Pierce and
her entire team for their flawless conduct of the work of
the Council in November, as well as for the relevance of
the issues placed on the agenda during the presidency
of the United Kingdom.

Finally, I wish to congratulate Ms. Jeanine Hennis-
Plasschaert, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General; Monsignor Bashar Matti Warda, Archbishop
of Erbil; and Mr. Robert Mardini, Permanent Observer
of the International Committee of the Red Cross to
the United Nations, for their excellent briefings. I
also congratulate Mr. Mardini on his important new
assignment and wish him every success.

Cote d'Ivoire notes with grave concern that, for
several months now, Iraq has been shaken by a political
crisis marked by violent clashes between the law-
enforcement authorities and peaceful protesters. The
crisis does not show any signs of letting up, despite the
recently announced resignation of Prime Minister Adil
Abd Al-Mahdi. The clashes, which have led to a serious
deterioration in the security situation, have resulted in
the deaths of several hundred people and more than a
thousand wounded, in addition to extensive material
damage. My country regrets this spiral of violence, which
seriously undermines Iraq's democratic and political
gains and leaves the country vulnerable to a great risk
of instability. That is why we must implore the rigorous
implementation of the principle of accountability by
identifying those who have perpetrated criminal acts.
It is equally important that the unity, independence and
sovereignty of the country be fully respected, as must
the principle of non-interference in its internal affairs.

Given the gravity of the situation and echoing the
call of the Secretary-General, my country urges the
Iraqi authorities to refrain from disproportionate use
of force and calls on all parties to exercise restraint.
It is indeed vital that the Iraqi parties work together
with the support of the international community for
the immediate cessation of violence, with a view to
peacefully resolving their differences and meeting the
deepest aspirations of the population. In this regard,
my delegation supports the recommendations issued
on 11 November following consultations between the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
Iraqi authorities and the protesters, which call for short-,
medium- and long-term measures to bring about an end
to the crisis. Cote d'Ivoire would therefore call on the
Government of Iraq to undertake the necessary reforms
and urgent measures to avoid the risk of tensions
erupting across the country, which, let us recall,
continues to face challenges related to the presence of
the terrorist group Da'esh on its territory.

Recent developments in the region have seen
military operations on the Turkish-Syrian border that
have resulted in the escape of several Da'esh fighters
from their detention centres, magnifying the fear
of a resurgence of the acts of the terrorist movement
in Iraq. In this regard, our meeting on 26 November
concerning the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)
highlighted the constructive cooperation between the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
UNITAD and the Iraqi Government in the fight against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (see S/PV.8675).
My country commends the progress made in this regard
and stresses the urgent need to uphold the principle of
accountability for the crimes committed by Da'esh,
pursuant the provisions of resolution 2379 (2017) to
guarantee victims the right to justice in the framework
of a fair trial.

In view of the multifaceted challenges facing Iraq, it
is more necessary than ever before that the international
community support the country's reconstruction and
development efforts in order to help build the observably
precarious peace, as is also the case with subregional
and international peace and security. Furthermore,
with regard to the alarming humanitarian situation
that persists in certain regions of Iraq, Cote d'Ivoire
also urges the international community to continue its
efforts to mobilize the resources needed to finance the
United Nations humanitarian response plan for 2019 in
an amount of $611.7 million.

With regard to the Kurdistan region, Cote d'Ivoire
calls for continued cooperation between the Federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government.
The dialogue must be maintained in order to find
mutually satisfactory solutions to outstanding issues,
particularly with regard to the sharing of oil resources
and the Kurdistan debt.

At the regional level, my delegation welcomes the
continued cooperation between the Governments of
Iraq and Kuwait so as to provide a definitive solution
to the issue of missing Kuwaiti nationals, as well as to
matters relating to the restitution of seized assets.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its full
support for UNAMI and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in their continued commitment
to peace, stability and sustainable development in Iraq.

