Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia): Indonesia has joined
countries that have asked for the convening of the
present meeting of the Security Council to address the
current critical situation in Iraq.

Some seven days after the virtual abandonment of
the multilateral path by the United States of America
and its allies, Governments and peoples around the
world have been witness to the immense and
intolerable sufferings that have been inflicted on the
people of Iraq. Our collective conscience demands that
the aggression be immediately stopped.

For some weeks now we have been agonizing
over the very future of the United Nations system,
which has been sidelined by the wilful unilateral action
of the powerful, and whose authority has been
undermined. Our shared interest in a world order that
respects equality among nations and the primacy of
multilateralism, as reflected by the United Nations,
demands that unilateralism be immediately checked.
And during those same weeks, all of us have pondered
the multidimensional consequences of the war for the
Middle East region and beyond.

Our shared commitment to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war demands that the
United Nations should not stand idle.

It is for these reasons that Indonesia has
demanded the convening of the present meeting and
commends the President of the Council for making it
possible. The very fact that the Security Council is
meeting today is a step in restoring its authority.
Indeed, much more is at stake than the fate and the
future of the nation of Iraq.

Indonesia has strongly deplored the unilateral
action by the United States of America and its allies,
who have decided to launch a military attack against
Iraq in contravention of international law.

Like others, the Government and the people of
Indonesia have been witnessing with profound sadness
the humanitarian toll and intolerable suffering that
have been inflicted on thousands of innocent and
vulnerable civilians in Iraq. At this stage in the
conflict, we are already witnessing with profound
concern rising casualties among the combatants on the
ground, which all of us fear will continue to grow as
the military confrontation intensifies. As we meet
today, we face the ever alarming prospect that the
fighting will spiral out of control.

Even if the fighting were to end today, we would
already have a grave humanitarian crisis on our hands.
According to information in the hands of the United
Nations in that respect, there are already 300,000
internally displaced people in the north of Iraq.
Similarly, the United Nations Children's Fund reports
that in Basra there is no electricity and that the water
supply has been interrupted. This suffering is being
inflicted on a people who have for many years now
endured the hardships of sanctions.

However, in our justified concern to immediately
and collectively address the grave humanitarian
situation in Iraq, we should not lose sight of one
important fact: the countries that have chosen the path
of war in disregard of the once ongoing process within
the Security Council bear a special responsibility to
address the unfolding humanitarian suffering resulting
from their action.
Beyond the humanitarian implications on the
people of Iraq, the very territorial integrity and national
sovereignty of that country have been put at great risk.
The Government of Indonesia has consistently
emphasized that any solution to the question of Iraq
should respect the territorial integrity and national
sovereignty of that country.

The international community should not lose
focus of what has been, and continues to be, the central
problem, namely, the issue of disarming Iraq of
weapons of mass destruction. Security Council
resolution 1441 (2002) provided a clear road map to
effectively address that issue through the inspections
regime. Indonesia has been steadfast in its principled
position against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. We have therefore consistently urged Iraq
to comply with its obligations under that resolution. We
were encouraged by the report given by Mr. Hans Blix
and Mr. ElBaradei, namely, that the inspection process
was making progress and should be continued. Hence,
diplomacy, combined with judicious pressure, was
yielding results.

We should not, and cannot, underestimate what is
presently at stake. The fate of the people of Iraq is
certainly at stake. The future of neighbouring regions
and of those beyond - politically, strategically and
economically - are most definitely at stake. Nor can
we be oblivious to the potential environmental impact
of the war. Ultimately, however, it is the very
foundation of the United Nations system and its
inherent principle of multilateralism that are being
tested. Unilateralism, from whatever source, must be
held in check.

The Security Council must, and must be seen, to
be seized of an issue that is in fact preoccupying all of
us, Governments and peoples alike. Its silence with no
call for an immediate cessation of the aggression is
deafening indeed. Indonesia hopes the Council will not
fail to shoulder its Charter-mandated responsibility to
maintain international peace and security. The Council
must unite and join the clarion call emanating from
many councils of nations, and being voiced by peoples
the world over, to end the war.

