Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
New Zealand for having convened this high-level
meeting in the Security Council, and I also appreciate
the fact that you, Sir, the Prime Minister of New
Zealand, have come to preside over this meeting.

Peace is the shared aspiration of people throughout
the world. This very Chamber embodies the vision of
saving succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
The Security Council shoulders the responsibility for
international peace and security. Our world today is
peaceful in general, but we have witnessed successive
regional disturbances and local conflicts. Traditional
and non-traditional security issues are intertwined, and
international security is complex.

The turbulence in West Asia and North African
fomented by the Syrian issue has been lingering for five
years. That has brought suffering to the countries and
peoples of the region. It has also had grave effects on
international peace and security. Many innocent lives
have been lost. Numerous homes have been destroyed.
Endless conflicts have emerged and receded. All of this
has taught us the following lessons.

First, a political solution remains the only way
out. Responding to violence with violence will only
feed hatred. The use of force will not end conflicts but
fuel warfare. The stakeholders in the Middle East must
pursue dialogue and negotiations to narrow differences,
accommodate the interests of the various parties
and seek the most lasting and sustainable solutions.
The international community must pursue political
settlement with resolve and patience, and provide
sufficient time and space for such efforts.

Secondly, we must address both the symptoms and
root causes. The tensions in the Middle East are complex.
Many issues are intertwined and can be addressed only
with a multi-pronged approach. Improving people's
livelihoods, fostering a culture of tolerance and
building harmony are fundamental to addressing the
chaos in the Middle East. They are also the essential
means of avoiding new turbulence. Countries should
follow the path of development to maintain their own
conditions. In that regard, there is no standard answer
but only tailored solutions. We must respect the choices
made by States on their own.

Thirdly, we must uphold multilateralism to resolve
the issues in Syria and elsewhere in the Middle East.
The people of the countries concerned should play the
primary role, but the international community should
also provide a helping hand. The United Nations and
the Security Council must play their part as main
channels while other forces should act in a just and fair
manner, doing more to facilitate rather than undermine
their efforts.

To address the issue of Syria, the relevant Security
Council resolutions, especially resolution 2254 (2015),
must be effectively implemented. We remember that,
in this very same Chamber, all members unanimously
adopted the resolution, which has laid out the overall
direction for resolving the Syrian issue and established
the principle of a Syrian-owned and led political
process. We believe that we need to pursue progress in
parallel in terms of a ceasefire, political negotiations,
humanitarian assistance and joint efforts aimed at
fighting terrorism. We hope that this year might be a
turning point with regard to the situation in Syria.

We welcome the fact that Russia and the United
States of America have once again reached a ceasefire
agreement on Syria. We appreciate the enormous
efforts they have made to that end. Of course, we hope
that this new agreement will entail new opportunities
for the situation on the ground, but we see that its
implementation is not going smoothly. China expresses
its regret with regard to the air strike on Government
forces and the ensuing casualties. We also find the
recent attacks on the United Nations humanitarian
convoy unacceptable. All parties should strengthen
coordination and cooperation to avoid such occurrences
and ensure the full and effective implementation of the
hard-won ceasefire agreement. That will help foster the
necessary conditions for peace talks and the easing of
the humanitarian situation.

The conflicting parties in Syria should not fight
for victory on the battlefield. They should resolve
their disputes at the negotiation table. China calls for a
timely resumption of the Geneva peace talks. We call
upon all parties to follow the Syrian-owned and -led
political process to arrive at arrangements that meet the
interests of all parties. External forces should not use
the conflict to pursue their selfish goals. They should
contribute to peace. Faced by the grave humanitarian
situation, various parties and factions in Syrian must
open access to humanitarian aid to ensure its timely
delivery. The international community should continue
reach out and help the Syrian people in these difficult
times and assist neighbouring countries in properly
settling refugees.

China will also continue to carry out its own
efforts in this respect. Yesterday and today, Premier Li
Keqiang of China has laid out our positions on various
occasions. He also announced our new humanitarian
assistance programme for refugees and migrants.

Chaos in Syria has fuelled terrorism. We believe that
we should firmly combat all terrorist forces, including
the Islamic State. We should strengthen international
cooperation in the fight against terrorism in the three
areas of intelligence-sharing, stopping the use of social
media for spreading extremist ideology, and cutting off
the flow and financing channels of terrorists.

China is a sincere friend of all parties in the Middle
East. We have no selfish interests in the region. The
interests of the people of the Middle East are our
interests. Their concerns are China's concerns. As a
permanent member of the Security Council, China will
continue to fulfil its responsibilities and play its due
role in ensuring peace and security in the Middle East.
I believe that through joint efforts we will turn sword
into ploughshare and realize peace.

