Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, let me thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for the
work he has carried out during the nearly five years of
his mandate with the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as well as the commitment
with which he has carried out the difficult task that was
entrusted to him.

Uruguay underscores the press statement adopted
today by the Security Council condemning in the
strongest terms the terrorist attacks in that took place
yesterday in Afghanistan. We reiterate our solidarity
with the families of the victims.

Uruguay remains concerned at the situation in
Afghanistan. The country continues to face increasing
difficulties in a context characterized by a deteriorating
security situation, a renewed offensive by the Taliban,
an upswing in internal political tensions and sluggish
rates of economic growth. All of this comes despite the
efforts made by the National Unity Government, the
countries of the region and the international community.

Against that backdrop, we would like to reiterate
once again our support for the work being carried
out by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), and we call on the Mission and
the National Unity Government to work more closely
together, guided by the spirit of national leadership and
ownership, bearing in mind the fact that there remain
major challenges to the reconstruction and stabilization
of the country.

On a similar note, we support the work being
done by the Quadrilateral Coordination Group and the
commitment of its member States to the peace process.
It is our hope that this mechanism will continue to
maintain its relevance through the inclusion, as soon as
possible, of all actors involved in the peace talks. It is
vital that efforts continue to be made to promote direct
talks between the Government and the Taliban at the
earliest possible time.

Likewise, Uruguay would like to express its support
for the swift ratification of the peace agreement signed
a month ago between the Government of Afghanistan
and the Hezb-i-Islami group, which would represent a
significant step towards decreasing the level of violence
and instability in the country.

By the same token, we deem crucial the
strengthening of Afghanistan's institutional apparatus.
Similarly, it is necessary for the National Unity
Government to continue to strengthen its commitment
to introducing electoral reforms, which would make it
possible to ensure that the elections scheduled for this
year take place in a democratic and transparent manner
and that the necessary guarantees are in place.

Uruguay urges the Afghan authorities to continue
to adopt anti-corruption measures at the public
administration level and to fill vacant Cabinet seats.
Such steps would allow us to provide greater stability
to a political scene that is characterized by a ramping
up of the insurgency and the proliferation of the
political opposition.

Uruguay is particularly concerned at the
consequences of the existing instability for the civilian

population, which has also had very damaging effects
by preventing thousands of children from accessing
health-care services and from going to school. We
are concerned also at what was stated in the UNAMA
communique of 2 June about the wave of abductions,
hostage-taking incidents and summary executions of
civilians that have taken place over the past few weeks.

I cannot but stress that the humanitarian situation
has deteriorated as a direct result of the increase in the
number of displaced persons, whose very survival is at
risk as a consequence of the insecurity resulting from
the conflict, against the backdrop of an operational
environment that has made it increasingly difficult for
the humanitarian actors that are working on the ground.

In that context, and bearing in mind that, according
to the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/532),
civilians have been the victims of both opposition
elements and attacks carried out by Government forces,
Uruguay believes that there is an imperative need for all
parties to abide by their obligations under international
law, international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.

On a similar note, we appeal for full compliance
with the provisions of resolution 2286 (2016), on the
protection of hospitals and humanitarian staff engaged
in medical duties in situations of armed conflict,
taking into account their inviolable status as well as the
importance of the provision of health-care services for
the civilian population.

Overcoming, over the long term, the prevailing
situation of instability and insecurity in Afghanistan
will depend to a large extent on the success achieved
in taking firm strides towards a lasting peace. To do
so, is essential that sustained support continue to be
provided to the efforts undertaken by Afghanistan to
alleviate the humanitarian situation, consolidate the
political transition and promote economic activity and
the holistic development of Afghanistan.

In conclusion, Uruguay condemns all use of
violence against the civilian population and is alarmed
at the activities carried out by the Taliban and groups
associated with the Islamic State, which have taken the
lives of innocent and defenceless civilians. Against
that backdrop, we deem it crucial to step up the fight
against terrorism in the region, particularly through
the adoption of more robust measures targeting their
sources of funding, which are often closely linked to
the high levels of illicit drug trafficking in the country.

