Mr. Akram (Pakistan): You have honoured the
Security Council, Mr. Minister, by your decision to be
with us today to preside over this meeting on West
Africa. That is but one indication of the contribution
which France continues to make in seeking the
restoration of peace, stability and economic progress in
that important subregion of Africa.

My delegation would also like to welcome the
participation of and opening statement made by the
Secretary-General in this debate. Let me also welcome
the Foreign Minister of Ghana, Nana Akufo-Addo, in
his capacity as the representative of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), as well
as Mr. Chambas, Executive Secretary of ECOWAS, and
thank them for the thoughtful statements which they
have made and which have so enriched our
proceedings.

Our discussion today is an important follow-up to
the Security Council mission to West Africa last year.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report on ways
and means to combat subregional and cross-border
problems in West Africa. Our appreciation is also due
to the efforts of Mr. Ould-Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa.

The Secretary-General's report focuses primarily
on three issues: small arms, mercenaries and child
soldiers. These are important issues indeed. However,
as the introductory part of the report notes, these are
but a few factors for instability in West Africa. We
agree with the Secretary-General's observation that the
relationship of these three factors with the cycle of
violence and instability is primarily symptomatic, not
causal. If there were no armed conflicts, the demand
for and use of small arms, mercenaries and child
soldiers would also cease to exist.

The specific recommendations made by the
Secretary-General provide a useful framework for the
Council's efforts to redress the situation through a
regional approach. Many of the recommendations -
related to enhanced cooperation and coordination
within the United Nations system; the strengthening of
existing structures and institutions at the national and
subregional levels; better implementation of existing
conventions and legal instruments; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security sector
reforms; and the building of confidence and trust
between the countries of the region - merit close
attention by the United Nations, ECOWAS, the
regional Governments and international partners in
their respective spheres. A number of those
recommendations have been reflected in the draft
presidential statement which the Council is likely to
adopt today.

As has been said here, we need to effectively
utilize the peacekeeping operations which have been
deployed in the region. They are an important tool in
the hands of the Council to help address the underlying
problems, including cross-border issues. Their
deployment, the renewal of their mandates and
drawdown should be carefully planned by the Council,
keeping in mind the regional context.

Pakistan is participating in the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone and in the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). We will also be
contributing troops for Cote d'Ivoire. The Pakistani
contingent in Sierra Leone, comprising a brigade, is
deployed in the sensitive diamond-mining areas in the
eastern part of the country. Just across the border, two
Pakistani battalions are deployed with UNMIL in a
difficult area that has been the scene of militant activity
in Liberia in the recent past. In the context of checking
the cross-border movement of militants, Pakistani
troops deployed in Sierra Leone have participated in
operations specifically conceived for the purpose, such
as Operation Blue Horizon.

As we set out to support a regional approach for
West Africa, we must be cognizant of two overarching
requirements: first, a participatory process and,
secondly, the capacity to implement it. In our view,
better and effective implementation can be achieved,
especially by individual States, if they are fully
engaged in the process, including through transparent
and open decision-making. The same applies to
subregional organizations. It would be logical to
harmonize policies at all levels in order to derive
optimum benefit from cooperation with subregional
organizations. The Council should also be mindful of
capacities at the national level to carry out actions
being proposed to the States of the subregion in the
context of a regional approach. The possibilities of
assistance for such capacity-building must be carefully
examined.

In our view, it is equally important to identify and
address the root causes of conflict. Those causes
involve, among other things, the exclusion of regional,
ethnic or religious groups from participation in
political and economic power-sharing. Human rights
violations are a result of this situation.
Underdevelopment, poverty, widespread
unemployment, hunger and disease, poor governance
and lack of accountability, weak State institutions and
lack of State authority further compound the problems.
Many of the conflicts are rooted in the struggle for
power and the scramble for resources. As we seek to
eliminate or contain these conflicts, we have to cut off
the sources of financing that enable the warring parties
to sustain the conflict through the acquisition of arms,
the hiring of mercenaries and the use of child soldiers.

My delegation has stated on earlier occasions that
durable solutions to the complex crises in Africa can be
achieved only through a comprehensive and composite
approach. No approach can be comprehensive without
an adequate focus on development. Economic progress
and development, and not punitive measures, should be
the preferred course of action. Even in applying
sanctions, the approach must be comprehensive and
balanced. First, the impact of sanctions - especially
economic sanctions - against developing countries
has to be compensated through other means in order to
avoid undue suffering caused to innocent people.
Secondly, the scope of sanctions, when applied, should
address all the causes of the conflict. For example, the
linkage between the illegal exploitation of natural
resources and the fuelling of conflicts in West Africa is
well established. The emphasis so far has been on the
supply or production side of the illegally exploited
natural resources.

In our view, it is equally important to focus on the
demand or consumption side of this illicit activity.
Naming and shaming and sanctions should be applied
to all those who are involved. Those who finance these
wars by buying and trading in the illegally exploited
resources of Africa are indeed merchants of death.
Their crime is no less than that of those who finance
terrorism. We need to trace the money trail back to the
sources of financing of these callous and bloody wars
in Africa.

We hope that the future report of the Secretary-
General on West Africa will devote attention to these
and other important cross-cutting issues in order to
complement the recommendations made in the present
report with a view to evolving a truly comprehensive
strategy for conflict prevention, crisis management and
post-conflict stabilization in that important subregion
of Africa.

