Mr. Sotirov (Bulgaria): I am pleased to express
my Government's appreciation for the Council's
decision to hold an open meeting on the situation in
Angola in the context of the recently issued report
(S/2000/1225) of the Monitoring Mechanism on
Angola Sanctions. We welcome the participation of Mr.
Joao Bernardo de Miranda, the Minister for External
Relations of Angola, in the discussion, and we are
confident that such debates can only contribute to the
common efforts of the international community to
increase the effectiveness of sanctions and bring
reconciliation to the war-torn Angolan society.

Allow me, Mr. President, to extend, through you,
my warmest congratulations to Ambassador Richard
Ryan, Permanent Representative of Ireland, as the
newly elected Chairman of the sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993), and to
express my full confidence in his abilities to
successfully guide the work and promote the further
improvement of the monitoring capacities of that
important body. I would also like to pay tribute to his
predecessor, Ambassador Paul Heinbecker, for his
valuable activities.

As pointed out earlier today by the Permanent
Representative of Sweden, my delegation aligned itself
with the statement made by him on behalf of the
European Union and other associated countries. We
fully share the positions expressed in that statement on
the situation in Angola. That is why it is my intention
to elaborate on some specific issues of particular
interest to my country.

On behalf of the Bulgarian Government, I would
like to welcome the final report of the Monitoring
Mechanism as a further step towards ensuring
effectiveness of the implementation of the Security
Council sanctions against UNITA. We share the view
that the Mechanism deployed all necessary efforts to
produce an objective, comprehensive and well-
substantiated report. We commend the all-inclusive
approach taken by the authors, ranging from carefully
studying the import and exportation procedures and
practices in certain countries, including Bulgaria, to
holding extensive discussions with Governments,
international organizations and non-governmental
organizations. It is worth mentioning that the spirit of
cooperation and interaction established by the
Chairman, Ambassador Juan Larrain, and the other
members of the Mechanism with all the parties
concerned contributed immensely to the positive and
concrete results ofthe Mechanism's work.

Against this background, we appreciate the
overall positive assessment, contained in the
Mechanism's report, of the implementation by the
Bulgarian authorities of various sanctions regimes
imposed by the Security Council, and in particular
sanctions established against UNITA. We value the
acknowledgement contained in the report that the
Bulgarian export control system fully reflects and
complies with the guidelines and international
standards established by the Wassenaar Arrangement
and the Code of Conduct ofthe European Union.

In the spirit of transparency and openness, the
Bulgarian Government rendered full assistance and
cooperation to the Chairman and the members of the
Monitoring Mechanism during their two visits to
Bulgaria in September and December last year. In the
course of the productive dialogue continuing
throughout the Mechanism's mandate, the Bulgarian
Government provided comprehensive answers to all the
enquiries raised, as well as technical and other support
to the Mechanism's members. As a result, relevant
conclusions have been drawn and appropriate measures
taken by the Bulgarian authorities for the further
improvement of the implementation of the Security
Council sanctions against UNITA. I would like to
assure Council members that, in the case of any
Bulgarian national being found guilty of violating
those sanctions as a result of the investigations
currently undertaken by the competent authorities, he
or she will be prosecuted in accordance with the
established administrative or criminal law in Bulgaria.

Let me briefly dwell upon the measures recently
undertaken or currently being designed by my
Government to address some of the recommendations
made by the Panel of Experts and those contained in
the final report of the Monitoring Mechanism. First, a
decree providing for strict implementation of all
Angola-related resolutions by the respective Bulgarian
authorities, Bulgarian nationals and corporate entities
was adopted by the Bulgarian Government on 11 July
2000. Similar governmental decrees were adopted in
the year 2000 to ensure compliance with Security
Council sanctions against Ethiopia, Eritrea, Sierra
Leone and Afghanistan. Moreover, as a rule, all
Security Council resolutions involving sanctions are
now enacted in Bulgaria through specific Government
regulations.

Secondly, a comprehensive regulatory mechanism
is now being considered by the appropriate authorities
to impose strict control on arms export operations in
potentially risky markets. These strengthened
regulations are aimed at ensuring the systematic
implementation and update of all commitments flowing
from existing international sanctions and restrictions.

Thirdly, the submission of a delivery verification
certificate by the importing party is now a mandatory
requirement for each arms transaction to
non-embargoed countries in Africa and Asia which are
situated in close proximity to risky or embargo-
subjected zones.

Fourthly, with regard to permission to import
arms and dual-use goods, a stringent verification
regime is applied to ensure the proper end use of the
imported equipment in the territory of the Republic of
Bulgaria and to prevent any possibility of re-export
without authorization from the exporting country. The
procedure for permission to export arms requires a
check-up on the origin of the equipment.

Fifthly, a register of companies acting as
intermediaries and brokers is being put in place to
improve control on transnational channels of arms
supplies with the aim of preventing any possibility of
illegal diversions of arms from their originally
established destinations. Those measures have been
deemed to reinforce and complement the existing two-
tier system of control over foreign arms transactions in
Bulgaria, including by providing more safeguards to
avert the diversion of weapons to embargoed countries.
The model thus established by my country was
positively assessed by the Monitoring Mechanism. We
believe that there is a further need for all States to
consider ways to avoid inconsistencies and gaps in
national approaches and that identifying good practices
could serve as an additional incentive to that end.

My delegation strongly believes in the need for
the establishment of internationally recognized norms
and standards in the field of arms transfers. However,
this appears to be a challenging goal for the
international community. There is a lot to be done to
overcome the concerns and reservations of some
countries, despite the considerable progress made in
recent years in increasing the awareness of
Governments and the public about the vital importance
of this issue to the prevention of illegal arms flows to
conflict areas. We are convinced that full
implementation of Security Council sanctions,
including those against UNITA, can be achieved only
through a synergy of actions at the national, regional
and global levels. Improved international cooperation
and the coordination of national policies are
indispensable for the attainment of this goal.

In concluding, Sir, let me assure you of my
Government's willingness to continue its cooperation
with the Security Council and its subsidiary bodies on
the monitoring of sanctions against UNITA. We are
determined to render all necessary assistance for
the implementation of resolution 1336 (2001) of
23 January and to contribute further to the complete
fulfilment ofthe Mechanism's mandate.

