Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): First of all, let me thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's briefing, for
your leadership as President of the Security Council,
and for co-leading the Addis Ababa leg of the mission
to Africa together with Rwanda.

As detailed in the terms of reference for the
mission, the purpose of the visit to Addis Ababa
was mainly to strengthen partnership and enhance
cooperation between the African Union (AU) and the
United Nations in accordance with resolution 2033
(2012) and to exchange views on situations of interest
to the AU Peace and Security Council and the Security
Council. In that respect, on Wednesday, 8 October the
two Councils held their seventh join annual consultative
meeting. The meeting was co-chaired by yourself,
Mr. President, and by the Permanent Representative of
Equatorial Guinea to the AU, in his capacity as Acting
President of the Peace and Security Council.

Six topics were the agenda ofthat meeting: the Great
Lakes region, the Sudan and South Sudan, Somalia,
the Central African Republic, the Sahel region and the
enhancement of the partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations. Each organization had a
lead member to introduce each topic or to respond to the
introduction made by a designated member of the other
organization. Generally, as attested by the outcome of
the meeting, the two Councils agreed in principle on
the diagnosis of the crisis, on the partnerships required
and on the solution to bring sustainable peace in those
conflict-affected countries. A joint communique was
indeed adopted and was issued as a document of the
Security Council.

The AU Peace and Security Counci and the
Security Council assessed, inter alia, the cooperation
between the AU and the United Nations with regard to
the promotion and maintenance of peace and security
in Africa. They welcomed the progress made so far and
stressed the need for continued efforts to enhance the
existing partnership at both the strategic and operational
levels, in order to ensure greater synergy and coherence
and more effective responses to the evolving peace and
security challenges that the African continent is facing.

In that respect, we undertook to conduct necessary
consultations to ensure the effective implementation of
the steps agreed upon at their meetings and reiterated
the need for the agenda of their annualjoint consultative
meetings to be agreed in advance and to include in
such agenda an item on issues that require follow-up,
along the lines of the communique of fifth annual joint
consultative meeting held in New York on 13 June 2010.

The two Councils agreed to convene their eighth

annual joint consultative meeting in New York in
June 2014. The date of the meeting will be determined
through consultations between the Chairperson of the
AU Peace and Security Council and the President of the
Security Council.

Following the joint consultative meeting, the
Security Council also met, upon her request, with
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, Chairperson of the
AU Commission, to exchange views on the relationship
between the International Criminal Court and the
African continent.

The Council ended its mission to Africa with
a meeting with His Excellency Mr. Hailemariam
Dessalegn, Prime Minister of Ethiopia and Chairperson
of the African Union, in which both parties reviewed
together the outcome of the mission to Africa and
discussed peace and security on the continent.

Let me conclude by thanking you, Sir, for your
leadership and for scheduling this productive mission to
Africa. I extend my appreciation also to my colleagues,
the members of the Security Council, for the high-
level representation from their delegations and for their
active participation throughout the mission.

