Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset, Sir, to commend you and your fraternal
country, the United Republic of Tanzania, on the
excellent manner in which you are conducting the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I wish
also to thank you for the initiative to convene this open
debate, which enables States Members of the
Organization to participate in the Security Council's
deliberations on how to improve the effectiveness of its
approach to this issue of its action to bring stability to the
Great Lakes region.

Tunisia is pleased to note the Council's renewed
interest in this subject, which can help in formulating a
comprehensive approach to the resolution of the
security and development issues that are of such
urgency in the region. In that context, we welcome the
November 2005 Council mission to countries of the
region and express our support for the conclusions it
reached.

We hail the wisdom of the approach advocated by
the Tanzanian presidency of the Security Council with
respect to addressing these issues in a regional context.
We fully endorse that approach, particularly since,
during our term on the Council in 2000-2001 we
sponsored such an approach. Indeed, mindful of the
close links among the various conflicts in the Great
Lakes region, Tunisia called in the Council for the
adoption of a comprehensive and regional approach to
this matter. Moreover, the President of the Republic of
Tunisia, His Excellency Mr. Zine El Abidine Ben Ali,
proposed the idea of an international conference on the
Great Lakes region, to be held under the auspices of
the United Nations and the African Union, as the
appropriate forum for the comprehensive consideration
of regional issues.

Tunisia attaches the highest importance to the
prevention of conflict in Africa through improved
cooperation and coordination among United Nations
bodies, programmes and specialized agencies, the
international financial institutions and the international
community at large aimed at addressing the political,
social and economic root causes of conflict in Africa.
Let me note also that the end of a peacekeeping
mission does not necessarily mark the establishment of
sustainable peace. Such a peace can be ensured only by
laying the political, economic and social foundations
needed for long-term peacebuilding. The international
community bears the political and moral duty to work
together to that end. The Peacebuilding Commission,
whose establishment was decided upon at the
September 2005 world summit, should provide a key
framework for such action.

Both in conflict prevention and in peacebuilding,
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, under Chapter VIII of the Charter, is of
the greatest importance. Tunisia wishes therefore to
reaffirm its interest in cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, particularly aimed at
improving the Union's institutional capacities.

In the Great Lakes region today there are more
than 20,000 Blue Helmets from a number of African
troop-contributing countries, including my country.
Africa's efforts to exercise ownership merit increased
support from the United Nations and the international
community. The establishment of the African Union
Peace and Security Council with a View to setting
regional conflict-prevention policies will certainly
assist the African States concerned. But efforts to
strengthen the peacekeeping capacity of African
countries must be accompanied by efforts by the
international community in the context of the collective
obligations mandated by the Charter, which gives the
Security Council primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Tunisia once again calls on the international
community, and especially on donor countries, to
provide generous humanitarian and economic
assistance to countries in the Great Lakes region. This
would make it possible for the peoples concerned to
enjoy the peace dividend. It is in the interest of those
peoples to view the current page in the history of the
Great Lakes region as belonging to the past: a page that
is now being irreversibly turned to reveal a
commitment to finding peaceful solutions to remaining
problems, and to doing so in a constructive and
cooperative spirit and in the framework of a
comprehensive, multidimensional regional approach.

Tunisia is proud of belonging to Africa, and it has
steadily taken action on its vigorous commitment to
African causes and to peace and stability in the Great
Lakes region. My country has participated, and is
participating, in many peacekeeping missions in the
region, and we are prepared to continue to do so,
within our means. My country is also prepared to share
with countries of the region our experience in the
spheres of economic and social development in the
stages of emergence from conflict and of rebuilding.
