Mr. Medrek (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I should also like to congratulate your
predecessor, the representative of Norway, for his
efforts during the month of March.

The Security Council is holding this meeting four
days after its adoption of resolution 1402 (2002).
During those four days, the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories has worsened and has become
more tragic. Israel has carried out the collective murder
of Palestinians, encircling them and their families. The
Palestinians have been forced to bury their dead in
hospital courtyards. The situation has become such that
no human being, regardless of affiliation, can accept it.
It has now reached a level of danger that is threatening
international peace and security.

The Security Council must finally shoulder its
responsibilities in this regard. The Council must
demand of Sharon that he stop the killings, his
Government's use of force and its policy of vengeance,
which can only lead to further suffering for all the
region's peoples, beginning with the Israeli people
itself.

The current situation is testing the credibility of
the United Nations, and in particular that of the
Security Council. Is it reasonable for a resolution
adopted with the approval of all permanent members of
the Security Council to remain a dead letter? Israel is
refusing to implement that resolution or to abide by it.
Is it reasonable that international humanitarian law, in
particular the Fourth Geneva Convention, is being
flouted by the Israeli occupying forces? How can we
ignore - or accept - the policy of collective
punishment that Israel is carrying out to the extreme
against the defenceless Palestinian people? Such a
practice is unacceptable, and the tens of thousands who
are protesting daily throughout the world are voicing
that sentiment.

Yesterday, His Majesty King Mohammed VI, as
Chairman of the Jerusalem Committee of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, appealed to
the international community to intervene quickly to put
an end to the deteriorating situation. The best way to
achieve that result is to send a force to separate an
army that has sophisticated military equipment from
the Palestinian inhabitants, who have as their weapons
only the determination to continue their struggle
against occupation. Such an international presence has
become an urgent necessity to put an end to the
ongoing policy of assassination and the vicious circle
of violence and counter-violence.

Many voices have been raised throughout the
world requesting the intervention of a third party to
ensure the separation of the Israeli forces from the
Palestinian people in order to find a way out of the
current deadlock. I recently took the floor before the
Council on behalf of the Group of Arab States to
condemn terrorism, regardless of its origin. Today I
again reaffirm that position, because it is not dictated
by the current situation. It flows from Arab civilization
and the precepts of tolerant Islam, a religion that
rejects violence and gives precedence to the logic of
dialogue, negotiation and coexistence among human
beings.

To deprive a people of its basic daily needs and to
deprive its children of the right to attend school and to
receive basic medical care and to trample its dignity
can only lead young people to sacrifice everything,
including their lives.

We should not be surprised that Yasser Arafat -
President of the Palestinian Authority, the symbol of
the Palestinian national identity, whom Israel is using
every means to isolate from his people and from the
outside world, including cutting off his electricity, food
supplies and access to medical care - should be ready
to sacrifice himself to preserve his dignity and that of
the Palestinian people. The present situation, which is
extremely dangerous for all of us, is humiliating for all
nations and peoples that have committed themselves
under the United Nations Charter to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war.

The world cannot stand idly by in the face of a
policy aimed at silencing the entire Palestinian people
and depriving it of its legitimate rights. The entire
world cannot stand by in the face of Israeli practices -
namely, killing innocent people and the mass arrest of
hundreds.

Today's Council meeting is of great importance.
Indeed, it is of historic importance. In the light of the
aspirations of all peoples of the region - in particular
the Palestinian people, which is daily suffering from
the occupation and the agony it has imposed - the
Kingdom of Morocco calls upon the Security Council,
the principal organ of the United Nations entrusted
with the maintenance of international peace and
security, and urges it to take concrete measures
necessary to put an end to the arbitrary and
irresponsible policy of the Israeli Government in the
Palestinian territories. Israel must withdraw its forces
immediately, must lift its siege of President Arafat and
begin a dialogue between him and the Israeli Prime
Minister, Ariel Sharon, to put an end to violence and to
resume negotiations with the aim of achieving a just,
lasting and comprehensive solution to the situation in
the Middle East, in accordance with international law.

Morocco remains ready to participate in any and
all efforts or initiatives aimed at extricating the region
from the present deadlock. The objective would be to
give the peoples of the region hope that their legitimate
rights, security, peace and understanding can be
guaranteed.

