Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to welcome the presence of Sergey
Vershinin, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation, and to echo other delegations in
congratulating the presidency on the successful manner
in which it has helmed the important work and agenda
of the Security Council. We are also grateful for the
convening of this briefing and thank Mr. Pedersen for
his comprehensive presentation. We acknowledge his
intensive and always careful work and reaffirm our
commitment to continuing to contribute in a positive
fashion to the discharge of his mandate.

We wish to commend the developments described
by the Special Envoy on the upcoming implementation
of a Constitutional Committee that the Syrian people
and the international community will be able to
acknowledge as legitimate, balanced and inclusive, as
set out in the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

We echo those who underscored the role played
in this regard by the Astana guarantors as well as the
constructive participation of the Syrian Government
and opposition groups. We would highlight the fact that
the elaboration ofa new Constitution will be necessary
if we are to lay fresh political and institutional
foundations in Syria. However, we must also be careful,
as the reality today points to the fact much remains
to be done to put an end to the suffering of millions
of Syrians.

We therefore wish to emphasize the importance that
the Committee be effective and diligent in fulfilling
its mandate and that it produce tangible results under
deadlines that are in keeping with the sense of urgency
inherent in the seriousness of the humanitarian situation
and the latent threat of terrorism in Syria. That implies
that the parties show genuine signs of disinterestedness,
be flexible in their respective positions and come to
the table with a renewed willingness to engage in a
different yet constructive dialogue. Furthermore, we
note the central role of the Special Envoy as facilitator
of the process and promoter of consensus to that end.
In that connection, we underscore that the international
community should provide him with broad support.

We commend the efforts to make the Committee
representative and inclusive of all segments of Syrian
society. We especially emphasize that the final
percentage of women members of the Committee
is close to the 30 per cent quota initially envisaged.
We encourage the meetings of the Committee and
the various discussions held there to take place in a
context of transparency so as to enable the international
community, and the Council in particular, to monitor
and support the implementation of any agreements and
to inspire greater confidence among all the parties to
the peace process.

As we look towards the Committee's first meeting,
we urge the parties to continue to work on measures to
promote a better climate of understanding, including
the release of detainees, the identification of missing
persons and the transfer of mortal remains. We welcome
the work being done in that respect under the Astana
framework, but note the need for more substantial
progress. In addition, we underline the importance of
facilitating the voluntary, safe and dignified return of
millions of internally displaced persons and refugees,
under internationally recognized parameters, as an
essential element of achieving reconciliation in Syria
and building sustainable peace in that country.

I conclude by reaffirming Peru's full commitment to
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Syria.
Any detente or other arrangements or the presence of
foreign forces should always be temporary and not lead
to a de facto partition of the country.

