Mr. Jurica (Croatia): First of all, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this exchange
of views on peace and security in Africa. We sincerely
believe that today's deliberations will help us to take
stock of the lessons learned and to better understand
future challenges. Let me also join previous speakers in
thanking the Secretary-General for his pertinent and
valuable remarks, as well as for his active engagement
in promoting effective cooperation and collaboration
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in general and the African Union in particular.

Croatia recognizes the primary responsibility and
leading role of the Security Council in the maintenance
of international peace and security, as the only global
body mandated with that task. Nevertheless, that global
task can be accomplished more effectively with active
engagement at the regional, subregional and national
levels. Optimally, those three levels of responsibility -
global, regional and national - should, owing to their
intertwining nature, act in harmony, respecting the
principles of subsidiarity, division of labour and
effectiveness, in order to achieve peace and security. In
that respect, regional organizations should assume their
share of the responsibility, as appropriate, in this
global-regional partnership mechanism.

The unique knowledge and local expertise of
regional organizations often place them in a better
position to assess regional and local situations.

The question remains of how to make the best use
of these assessments. Having said that, Croatia believes
that the Security Council should evaluate regional
initiatives on their own merits and contributions,
especially as they are complementary to the continued
and active engagement of the overall United Nations
system, for example in supporting peace processes and
peacekeeping operations in Africa.

Here, we come to the first point that my
delegation would like to raise: capacity-building as a
way of enhancing regional organizations' effectiveness
and efficiency in conflict prevention, management and
resolution. My delegation attaches particular
importance to security sector reform, as discussed in
numerous reports of the Secretary-General, in
particular taking into consideration the input and
expertise of his Special Representatives in the field. In
that respect, we acknowledge some encouraging
developments in West and Central Africa.

Secondly, we would like to single out one
particular concept, conflict prevention, which could
and should be strengthened and given more
prominence in the work of this global-regional
partnership. We can all agree that experience teaches
us that any crisis can be better handled in its early
stages. Therefore, an approach encompassing a better
early warning system as a means to identify potential
crises before they emerge is of utmost importance. On
that point, we welcome the meeting regarding
Zimbabwe convened by the Southern African
Development Community last week in Lusaka.

My delegation is very concerned about the recent
situation in Zimbabwe, especially as we firmly believe
that every nation has the right to enjoy the benefits of
democracy, and not to have them denied, as seems to
be the case in Zimbabwe. On the other hand, Kenya
provided a good example of timely intervention by a
regional mediation mission, led by former Secretary-
General Kofi Annan.

The third point we would like to make relates to
the need for new thinking and innovative functional
approaches. There is one lesson that we always like to
repeat: there can be no one-size-fits-all approach, and
any attempt to build upon such an approach necessarily
leads to failure. The Sudan is an excellent example,
where the Security Council is working together with
the African Union to create a special relationship in
addressing the ongoing crisis in that country. Thought
should be given to using a similar model in other
conflict areas.

Fourthly, in response to the growing need to
develop a comprehensive approach encompassing
political, military, humanitarian and development
components in the post-conflict period, we recognize
the valuable goals and role of the Peacebuilding
Commission. The Commission has been successful in
its tailored approach, and within that framework we see
an excellent opportunity for meaningful cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations.

Allow me to reflect here upon a matter that my
Government deems to be of utmost significance. There
has been a great deal of talk about the danger of the
culture of impunity taking root in some of the conflict-
ridden areas of Africa. We would like to reiterate that
there can be no lasting peace without justice - and
development, of course - and that justice is vital to
any reconciliation process and to the building of a
healthy society.

Finally, Croatia acknowledged that the formation
of the African Union back in 2002 was a major step
forward in strengthening Africa's regional political-
security structures and conflict prevention
mechanisms. Also, I would like to note that Croatia
established formal relations with the African Union in
May 2007, and subsequently participated in an African
Union summit for the first time, in Accra in June and
July 2007.

Croatia also aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Slovenia
on behalf of the European Union.

My delegation would like to express its
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your personal
dedication to peace and stability in Africa and
elsewhere, and for your presence here at this fruitful
debate.

