Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): The conflict in
Somalia has certainly gone on for far too long. But it is

 

not fair to say, in our view, that the international
community has forgotten Somalia. Numerous efforts have
been made to bring the warring factions together. We
welcome the part played by the Organization of African
Unity, by the Arab League, by the European Union, by
Egypt and by Italy. We attach particular importance to the
regional efforts led by Kenya and Ethiopia. The Ethiopian-
sponsored Sodere declaration and the Kenyan-sponsored
Nairobi agreement can play a vital role in laying the
foundations on which a political settlement can eventually
be built. But it is important that the Nairobi and Sodere
agreements are seen as complementary to each other.
Participation of all the Somali parties, including those in the
north-west, is necessary for the process of reconciliation to
stand any chance of success.

The Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Security Council have also shown their concern about the
continuing conflict in Somalia and their support for regional
and other efforts to initiate a political dialogue. In February
the Secretary-General issued a report calling for more
resources for humanitarian relief and rehabilitation in
Somalia, expressing support for regional efforts to achieve
a political settlement and calling on all States to comply
with the arms embargo. In response, the Security Council
issued a presidential statement firmly backing the approach
set out by the Secretary-General. At its fifty-third session,
the United Nations Commission on Human Rights also
issued a statement welcoming regional efforts to promote a
political dialogue.

In the light of the efforts being made by Kenya,
Ethiopia and others, we ourselves see no need for a new
initiative on Somalia at this point. But it is vital to ensure
that these various efforts are properly coordinated and fully
complementary with each other.

This is also the moment to recall that none of these
efforts can succeed unless the leaders of the various parties
in Somalia show the necessary political will. The main
responsibility for achieving national reconciliation and for
restoring peace rests with them. Here I agree with what my
Chinese colleague has just said.

Finally, I would like to say a word about the
humanitarian situation. The recent drought highlights the
continuing need for humanitarian assistance. The United
Kingdom has contributed £54 million to humanitarian relief
in Somalia since 1991. We shall continue to do what we
can to alleviate the situation there. But successful relief
operations require the cooperation of the parties on the
ground, including security, freedom of movement and the
opening of seaports and airports. We have been concerned
to hear of the problems which humanitarian agencies have
encountered in Mogadishu and elsewhere. All the parties
in that country have an obligation not only to step up
their efforts to achieve peace, but also to ensure that the
valuable work of the humanitarian agencies is not
impeded. The leaders of those parties must stop jockeying
for power and concentrate on the needs of the people they
are supposed to represent.

