Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, allow me
to join others in warmly welcoming your presence,
Mr. President, among us today. We thank the
United Kingdom for convening this open debate on
reconciliation. We also thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Alpaslan Ozerdem and Ms. Ilwad Elman for their
very insightful briefings.

Indonesia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Philippines later
today on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN).

With the rise in conflicts and their complexities,
solutions are not always easy. Reconciliation rebuilds
trust, confidence and relations in societies afflicted
by conflict. It heals the wounds of conflict and helps
societies move towards a peaceful future. Coupled with
peacebuilding and development, reconciliation prevents
the recurrence of conflict and ensures durable peace.
Indonesia has first-hand experience in promoting
successful reconciliation to resolve communal conflicts
in Ambon, Poso and Aceh in the early 2000s. It is
on the basis of our own experience that we share the
following points.

First, national ownership and inclusiveness are key
to achieving lasting reconciliation. For reconciliation
to work, it must be nationally driven - it cannot be
imposed from the outside. Lasting reconciliation also
requires all segments of society to be onboard. In that
regard, I would like to echo What was mentioned earlier
by the Secretary-General on the fact that reconciliation
must come from within, with the full participation
of all segments of society. Therefore, it must involve
the parties to the conflict as well as civil society
organizations, community and religious leaders, women
and youth. Women in particular have proven to be
important actors in reconciliation. Our own experience
shows that women have played an extensive role in
advancing reconciliation at the grass-roots level in a
variety of ways. Indonesia strongly supports the greater
participation of women in reconciliation, as well as
throughout the entire continuum of the peace process.

Secondly, for reconciliation to take root, an
enabling environment is required. First of all, the
underlying causes of the conflict must be addressed;
immediate humanitarian needs must be met; the rule of
law and the judicial system must be restored to ensure
justice for all; and democracy needs to be established
to provide a platform for open and genuine dialogue.
At the same time, economic development must be
accelerated so that the peace dividends can be directly
felt by the people. Only through this effort can we
materialize the strong nexus between sustaining peace
and sustainable development.

Thirdly, the international community must provide
the necessary support for reconciliation. While
reconciliation is a nationally driven process, the role of
the international communityis indispensable. The United
Nations, through its peacekeeping operations, special
political missions and the Peacebuilding Commission,
must continue working to facilitate dialogue and create
conditions conducive to reconciliation. To assist post-
conflict countries in rebuilding their economies, the
United Nations and the international community need
to mobilize financial and technical support. In that
regard, continued support for the Peacebuilding Fund
is of crucial importance.

For its part, Indonesia has been active in
supporting peacebuilding and reconciliation efforts,
including through capacity-building programmes
within the framework of South-South and triangular
cooperation. At the regional level, Indonesia initiated
the establishment of the ASEAN Institute for Peace
and Reconciliation, which is based in Jakarta. The
Institute promotes capacity-building and the sharing
of experiences and best practices on peace and
reconciliation in the region and beyond.
In conclusion, Indonesia stands ready to further
share its experience in reconciliation. We are also
committed to continue assisting post-conflict countries
in promoting reconciliation, peacebuilding and
sustainable peace.

