Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): In the first place, we would
like to express our gratitude to the delegations of Japan,
Sweden, Slovenia and Costa Rica which, through their
tireless efforts and persistence, have brought us to the
point we are at today. Ambassador Owada in particular
deserves our admiration and appreciation for the manner
in which he has conducted our negotiations.

Kenya has continuously and vigorously pursued an
active policy of nuclear non-proliferation and, with others,
has promoted the goal of complete nuclear disarmament
and the elimination of such weapons. Consequently, we
are a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and to the Pelindaba Treaty
establishing the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone; a
signatory of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty;
and, indeed, one of the first 21 members of the
Conference on Disarmament.

It is through that prism that we learned with regret
and concern of the underground nuclear tests carried out
by India and Pakistan. The tests will no doubt be
remembered as having dealt a serious blow to our
aspirations to a world free of nuclear weapons.

We encourage India and Pakistan to exercise
restraint and to refrain from carrying out any further tests.
We note the assurances contained in their Government
press statements and expect them to exercise maximum
control over the deadly technology they have acquired, to
remain committed to the Non-Aligned Movement's goal

 

of nuclear disarmament, and to participate with others in
negotiating a fissile-material cut-off treaty in the
Conference on Disarmament.

It is regrettable that the insecurity created as a result
of the lack of serious commitment by the nuclear-weapon
States to move towards disarmament has provided others
who may have felt the need to ensure their own security
with an excuse to test. Deplorable though these countries'
actions may be, a wake-up call has most definitely been
sounded.

To this end, the need for security assurances for non-
nuclear-weapon States and the even more urgent need for
renewed efforts to rid the world of nuclear weapons cannot
be over-emphasized. We look to the nuclear-weapon States
to start the ball rolling. The rest of us expect them to take
seriously their responsibility to finally remove the threat of
nuclear weapons, which since the end of the Second World
War has continued to hang over our heads.

Security Council presidential statements on the tests
carried out by India and Pakistan expressed the view that
such tests run counter to current global efforts towards
nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament. It is
Kenya's conviction that testing of any kind, underground or
otherwise, should not be carried out, and that all tests pose
a threat to all of us by increasing the chances of
proliferation and, indeed, of an arms race. In this regard,
we welcome the renewed commitment contained in the
Geneva communique of the five States permanent members
of the Council, which inter alia expresses their
determination to fulfil their commitments relating to nuclear
disarmament under article VI of the NPT.

Kenya will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us because we feel that, although it does not cover
all the areas it should have covered, it nonetheless
addresses our main concerns with respect to nuclear non-
proliferation; contains a commitment on nuclear
disarmament by nuclear-weapon States; and, finally, calls
on India and Pakistan to choose the path of reason and,
indeed, dialogue.

