Mr. Begec (Turkey): Working methods is an issue
with direct impact on the critical undertakings of our
Organization. We are aware that the Security Council
is the primary body to determine its working methods,
yet the Council does not operate in a vacuum. The way
it functions has a clear impact on the substance of its
work, and therefore on its relations with the other main
organs of the United Nations.

We welcome the latest presidential note (S/2016/619)
on the preparation of newly elected members and on
the Chairs of the subsidiary organs. Nevertheless, I
wish to highlight three points on other aspects of the
working methods.

First, the most obvious and urgent issue in the
working methods is the question of the veto. Needless
to say, the Security Council has, on many occasions,
failed to act in a timely manner to find lasting solutions
to problems. There is no accountability mechanism
for inaction by the Council, which mostly results from
the threat or the use of the veto. That inaction is the
main factor that encourages those who do not refrain
from breaching the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations in a consistent fashion. To preserve
the credibility of the Organization and to enable it to
fulfil the responsibility given by the Charter, we should
deploy more resolute efforts.

In that respect, we welcome the initiative by France
and Mexico, as well as that by Liechtenstein on behalf
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
Group, aimed at eliminating a negative vote in case of
mass atrocities. However, the code of conduct regarding
the non-permanent members will not be meaningful
unless the permanent members embrace it too. In that
context, let me also invite the Council to carefully
reflect upon its recent inaction during the critical hours
when its support and solidarity were important for my
country, its people and democratic institutions.

Secondly, there is the relationship between the
Council and the General Assembly. Bearing in mind
the certain limits in that regard, we think that there
is still room for improvement in terms of increasing
the transparency and inclusiveness of the work of the
Council. To that effect, more informative briefings
and Arria Formula meetings; the timely availability
of draft resolutions, presidential statements and
information on the work of the subsidiary bodies;
decreasing the frequency of closed meetings; and
increased consultation with the members, including
the troop- and police-contributing States, are needed
for meaningful interaction. The process of the selection
of the next Secretary-General is undergoing a positive
change in terms of transparency, and there can be
further improvements in that regard.

Finally, we would be pleased to see a more equitable
division of labour among Council members.

