Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Your delegation,
Mr. President, is one of the champions of the
promotion of the rule of law in the United Nations. We
warmly welcome your initiative to hold an open debate
on this topic as a good opportunity to take stock of past
achievements and to look at the challenges ahead. We
will do so on the basis of the comments we made at the
debate in 2006 and in the light of the important
developments that have taken place since.

Our principled approach to the issue at hand has
not changed. We remain convinced that the best way
for the Security Council to promote international law
and the rule of law is to lead by example. We challenge
the view - and, to some extent, the conventional
wisdom - that regards the Council as a purely
political body. Its authority is based on the world's
supreme international treaty, the United Nations
Charter. The Council is legally bound by the applicable
rules of the Charter and of international law. Those
rules leave it much room to take decisions based on
political, legal and other considerations - but that
room is not without limits. It is therefore both a legal
necessity and a wise policy choice for the Council to
respect and promote international law and the rule of
law.

The Council must respect human rights, in
particular when taking action with direct impact on the
rights of individuals. In 2006, our statement focused
strongly on the need to improve sanctions procedures.

10-4285]

We commend the Council for the tremendous progress
that it has made in that regard by reforming the
sanctions regime against the Taliban and Al-Qaida
through the adoption of resolution 1904 (2009), and we
welcome the appointment of Judge Kimberly Prost as
the first Ombudsperson. The approach taken in that
resolution may not be perfect and may not take
relevant standards of due process to their ultimate
consequence, but it is an expression of the political
will within the Council to address the legitimate
criticisms that had long been expressed against the old
system. We hope that, on the basis of that experience,
discussions on the scope of the Council's human rights
obligations will reach new levels.

Furthermore, the Security Council must remain
vigilant in ensuring that its work remains within the
legal bounds and the spirit of its constitution, that is,
the Charter. Council decisions that are to be
implemented by Member States, in accordance with
Article 25 of the Charter, must have a clear legal
foundation. In particular, they must take into account
the balance of power among the main organs. The
Security Council should be particularly sensitive to the
General Assembly's prerogatives as the prime
legislative organ and to the need to enhance the
perceived legitimacy of its decisions through greater
inclusion and transparency. In that connection, we
recall the many contributions made by the group of
five small States in that respect.

Cooperation with courts and tribunals, in
particular the International Criminal Court (ICC),
remains an essential tool for the Security Council in
the promotion of the rule of law. Since 2006, the
Council has further acknowledged that fact by
establishing the Special Tribunal for Lebanon and,
more recently, by moving to address the problem of
impunity for the universal crime of piracy. The past
years have also seen a further consolidation and
strengthening of the work of the International Criminal
Court. In 2006, we stated that Council referrals to the
ICC must be accompanied by sustained political
support throughout all phases of the judicial
proceedings. Today, the need for such follow-up is
more obvious than ever, as evidenced by the Court's
recent decision on the lack of cooperation in the
situation in Darfur. The decision comes after five years
of resource-intensive judicial work on that situation
and requires a response from this Council.
10-42851

A further relevant development was the historic
decision taken by the States Parties to the ICC at the
Review Conference in Kampala. By consensus, the
Conference adopted a definition of the crime of
aggression for the purpose of the Rome Statute, as well
as the conditions under which, no earlier than 2017, the
Court may exercise jurisdiction over that crime. Once
formally activated, the Court's jurisdiction over the
crime of aggression will give the Council a new policy
option to address the most serious forms of the illegal
use of force in contravention of the United Nations
Charter. We are encouraged to see that the draft
presidential statement that will be the outcome of this
debate contains a reference to the International
Criminal Court.

During the past four years, the Council's
commitment to promoting both peace and justice in
conflict and post-conflict situations has received
significant new institutional support within the United
Nations. The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Rule of Law Coordination and
Resource Group and the strengthening of the
Secretariat's mediation capacities have greatly
contributed to a more holistic approach in that regard.
The Security Council should continue to support
efforts to strengthen domestic judicial capacities, in
particular by devising appropriate mandates and
structures for missions on the ground. The ICC Review
Conference in Kampala strongly underlined the need to
enhance the capacity of national jurisdictions to
prosecute perpetrators of the most serious international
crimes, pursuant to the principle of complementarity.

Nevertheless, the Council's commitment to
pursuing both peace and justice has also been tested in
recent years. Such developments show that the
paradigm shift towards a positive relationship between
peace and justice has yet to take full effect and requires
sustained political support. Legally, permanent
amnesties for genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes are no longer viable. Effectively, no such
promise of amnesty can be made. Both the Security
Council and the Secretary-General, in their activities
aimed at preventing and ending conflicts, should
continue to strengthen the implementation of that
important principle. In particular, that will require a
stronger engagement of mediators and other conflict
intermediaries with issues of justice.

The topic of today's debate is extremely rich and
complex and can hardly be appropriately addressed in a

short statement. We hope that the Council's work on
this agenda item will continue and that it will be taken
up in a regular manner, preferably at least once a year,
on the basis of a new report of the Secretary-General
that could be submitted to both the Council and the
General Assembly at its next session.

