President Guelleh (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, and other Council
members for having made this exchange today
possible. I have twice come to brief the Council on the
situation prevailing in our region, in particular in my
country, since Eritrea's aggression against my country
in June 2008. As is already known, that country has
long denied the existence of any border conflict
between our two countries, and has continued to give
misleading and arrogant responses to our efforts to
resolve our disputes diplomatically and peacefully.

Despite the irresponsible attitude of the Eritrean
regime, the Djibouti Government and people, who are
peace-loving and eager to have the best possible
relations with all neighbouring countries, positively
welcomed the mediation agreement proposed by our
Qatari friend and signed it on 6 June 2010 under the
auspices of the Emir of Qatar, His Highness the dear
Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani.
Unfortunately, the signing of that agreement and
the efforts of our Qatari friend did not deflect the
Eritrea regime from its hostilities towards my country.
Worse, it flagrantly and systematically continued its
destabilization activities by kidnapping and the forced
military training of young Djiboutians, who then
infiltrated northern Djibouti in order to carry out
terrorist attacks on our land.

My country is convinced of the virtues of
dialogue and mediation. However, we will not allow
the Eritrean regime to violate our territorial integrity or
to launch terrorist attacks on our territory with
impunity. We have concrete information on Eritrean
terrorist activities. In particular, we have arrested
rebels trained and sent by the Eritrean regime to
destabilize our country. Moreover, we also found
weapons that that same regime tried to send into the
northern part of the territory, again as part of its
destabilization attempt. My Government immediately
conveyed that information to the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the African Union
and United Nations.

The deafening, three-year silence on the fate of
our prisoners is completely intolerable and
unacceptable. Article 3 of the mediation agreement
stipulates that the two parties make available to
mediators all information on the disappeared soldiers,
on the one hand, and the various appeals of the
international community, on the other. My Government
was prompt to do that by inviting, in particular, the
International Committee of the Red Cross to come and
meet the Eritrean prisoners and deserters.

However, the dishonest and untrue remarks of the
Eritrean regime, which had long stated, even sworn,
not to have detained any of the 19 Djiboutian
prisoners, were contradicted by the escape on
4 September of two Djiboutian soldiers, reported
disappeared the night of 10 June 2008. They escaped
from detention camps in Eritrea and reached the Sudan
on foot. They were then transferred to Djibouti by the
friendly Sudanese Government, which we would like to
thank here. To date, Djibouti remains without news of
the other 17 Djiboutian prisoners of war.

Such behaviour is unacceptable and reflects the
complete refusal of Eritrea to abide by international
norms and obligations. My Government therefore
demands the immediate and unconditional freedom of
the Djiboutian prisoners of war held by Eritrea.
11-62085
Furthermore, my Government demands that that
regime immediately refrain from involving itself in the
unrest in the north of our territory.

The report of the Monitoring Group on the
implementation of resolutions 1844 (2008) and 1907
(2009) is conclusive (see S/2011/433). Must I recall
that the report was submitted to the Council in June?
Eritrea not only threatens the peace and stability of the
countries of the Horn of Africa, but also continues to
flout the international community by directly
supporting the acts of terrorism of Al-Shabaab. After
three years of silence, denials and lies, the authorities
of Eritrea seem to be moving heaven and Earth in the
face of economic sanctions by wanting to explain itself
before the Council. The sole purpose of that is to avoid
sanctions by, as always, trying to be seen as a victim.

The conclusions on Eritrea's actions are clear and
indisputable. We have given the Eritrean authorities
more than ample opportunity to agree to dialogue and
negotiation, but in vain. Their decision has been taken.
As for their choice, it is very clear, as they continue to
ignore the persistent calls of the Security Council and
the regional organizations.

In conclusion, I call on all members of the
Council to support the new draft resolution presented
on behalf of the countries of IGAD (S/2011/744). The
draft resolution seeks to remind Eritrea that the
international community will never accept that the
regime continues to destabilize and terrorize the
countries of the subregion. Given that the weapons
embargo and targeted sanctions of previous resolutions
seem unable to contain the ongoing and acute
aggression and hostility of the Eritrean regime, we
hope that this latest draft resolution will help to better
monitor it. Therefore, it is essential that members of
the Security Council be vigilant and, in particular,
aware of the threat that that regime poses to the
stability of our subregion. It needs to live in peace with
its neighbours, rejoin IGAD and stop the
destabilization and interference in the internal affairs
of neighbouring countries. That is all that we, the
Djiboutian Government and friendly country of the
region, demand of Eritrea.

