The Secretary-General: I thank you,
Mr. President, and the members of the Council, for the
kind words addressed to me and for this opportunity to
meet with all of you today. I assure you of my
wholehearted support and dedication in ensuring the
efficient and successful work of the Council.

Before I begin, I would like to pay tribute to the
former Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his
significant contributions to the work of the
Organization over the past 10 years.

I listened carefully to members of the Council in
their interventions on this important subject, which is,
after all, their primary responsibility under the Charter.
I also observed that the members of the Council are
united and speak with one voice on the need to View
conflict management in a holistic manner: prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. There is also unity
among Council members with regard to the need to
address conflict in a comprehensive manner, with
development and human rights issues being accorded
their proper priority.

As your important statement just now made clear,
Mr. President, the United Nations has an exceptionally
challenging agenda ahead of it in 2007. We face an
unprecedented demand for peacekeeping, as well as a
range of growing demands for preventive diplomacy,
good offices, peacebuilding and efforts in conflict
management. The Council, and the Organization as a
whole, are going through one of the busiest periods in
our history, with a record number of peace operations,
resolutions and reports over the past few years.

The Department of Peacekeeping Operations has
expanded to cover 18 missions, with a historic high of
100,000 personnel in the field, and climbing. The total
number of peace operations in which the United
Nations is engaged in some form has risen to around
30. This globalized presence requires ever closer
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Secretariat - including, of course, the Secretary-
General.
Some of our most acute and persistent challenges
are in Africa. One of my top priorities will be to step
up efforts to address the crisis in Darfur, where the
humanitarian situation is growing worse, despite all the
declarations and proclamations of the international
community over the past three years. In the coming
days, weeks and months, I will coordinate closely with
leaders in Africa and beyond, and I will work through
my Special Envoy for Darfur to secure the constructive
engagement of the Sudan, African Governments and
the international community as a whole.

At the same time, we must stay the course in
other parts of the continent. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we must ensure that recent
positive developments enabled by our largest
peacekeeping operation are consolidated so that lasting
peace and stability take hold in the heart of Africa. I
look forward to discussing these and other issues with
leaders at the African Union summit to be held in
Addis Ababa at the end of this month.

Equally, I will strive to inject new momentum
into our search for peace and stability in the Middle
East. This means rededicating ourselves to the work of
the Quartet in resolving differences between Israel and
Palestine - differences which carry such a unique
symbolic and emotional charge for people far beyond
the physical boundaries of the conflict. It means
supporting Lebanon in everything from its physical
reconstruction to its quest - as yet incomplete - for a
peaceful, democratic and fully independent future.
And, in the wider reaches of the region, it means
continuing our efforts to address the political and
security challenges of Afghanistan and Iraq.

By the same token, we must keep working for a
conclusion to the uncertainty that still hangs over the
status of Kosovo, which if unresolved threatens to cast
a shadow over regional stability in South-Eastern
Europe.

So I am glad to join you today for this discussion
on a range of issues that no country can resolve on its
own - issues which present threats to the security of
people around the world and to the entire international
community. Responding to such threats is, after all, one
of the primary purposes of the United Nations and a
particular responsibility of the Security Council.

As the President of the Council pointed out,
recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome, the threats
that we face in this century are multifaceted and
interconnected. This is true whether we are considering
the threat of terrorism, a faceless enemy that knows no
boundaries, or weapons of mass destruction, which
present a unique existential threat to all of humanity.
Both demand urgent, sustained and comprehensive
attention from the international community.

The same is true of HIV/AIDS and the other
pandemics, which not only take a huge human, social
and economic toll on countries that can least afford it,
but also pose threats to peace and stability in the
devastation that they wreak on capacity and
governance.

The same is true of extreme poverty, which
breeds a hopelessness that allows for neither mercy nor
dignity and which is preyed upon by zealots and
extremists to further their agendas and ambitions.
Achieving our goals for development around the world
is essential to build lasting peace and security.

The same is true of egregious human rights
violations, weakened governance and failure to uphold
the rule of law in various parts of the world. Over the
past years, the United Nations has sought to strengthen
the three pillars of this institution - those of security,
development and human rights, all underpinned by the
rule of law - in order to build a more peaceful, more
prosperous and more just world for succeeding
generations.

We have important achievements to build upon,
from the Peacebuilding Commission to the Human
Rights Council and the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, as well as the responsibility to protect. But
we must also do more to invigorate disarmament and
non-proliferation efforts. This will require
strengthening the disarmament and non-proliferation
regimes themselves, as well as addressing the special
challenges posed by the cases of Iran and the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

The Security Council has acted by adopting
important resolutions on these issues, but a great deal
remains to be done. It is essential that the international
community work as one to address these challenges. I
am committed to strengthening and consolidating the
work of the United Nations in this direction. In such an
endeavour, I shall try to play the role of harmonizer
and bridge-builder and work to restore trust between
Member States and the Secretariat.
The Council has acted on the reform agenda in
areas ranging from the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission to strengthening working
methods, while also acting on counter-terrorism and
sanctions. I will make it my priority to strengthen the
ability of the United Nations to play its role to the
fullest extent in conflict prevention, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. I see all of those as a
continuum and the role of the United Nations as one
that must be coordinated, comprehensive and
consistent.

To that end, we need to look at the organizational
structures of all departments and offices related to
peace and security and find ways to strengthen our
capacities. To meet the growing demands of globalized
operations, we must identify ways and means to build a
staff which is truly mobile, multifunctional and
accountable and which lives up to the highest ethical
and professional standards.

The draft presidential statement before the
Council calls for a strategic approach to the assessment
of conflict situations and the planning and management
of peacekeeping operations. It will provide an
important guideline for me in building such improved
capacities and enhancing the delivery of our common
objectives. That will be a top priority for me in the
coming weeks.

Again, let me say how very much I look forward
to working with the Council in the years ahead.

