Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for bringing this important issue, which is always
near and dear to our Indonesian heart, to the attention
of the Security Council. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, Force Commander
Gyllensporre and Ms. Novosseloff for their
comprehensive briefings. I would especially like to
thank Lieutenant General Gyllensporre for taking care
of our peacekeepers in Mali, including Indonesian
peacekeepers, and for having us there. I think we
learned a lot from our discussion with him at the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali.

The importance of triangular cooperation has long
been underlined in many major guiding documents
related to peacekeeping. The Brahimi report of
the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations (see S/2000/809), the report (A/72/19) of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34),
the New Horizon Initiative report, the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446) and the Action for Peacekeeping
Declaration all speak volumes about the need to
strengthen triangular cooperation. What has been
lacking, however, are efforts to institutionalize
triangular cooperation. We have heard many important
recommendations today. But the question is: how can
we make sure that triangular cooperation works? Let
me highlight several points that we consider important.

First, implementing existing intergovernmental
commitments on triangular cooperation is crucial.
The report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations, for instance, identified, among other
things, the necessity of strengthening peacekeeping
mandate configuration processes and United Nations
capabilities through effective triangular cooperation.
The C-34 report also reiterated that triangular
consultations based on informal and inclusive thematic
debates among the Security Council, the Secretariat and
troop- and police-contributing countries were essential.
All the recommendations from those meetings and
reports must be considered and follow-up actions must
be determined.

For our part, last March we held a triangular
formula meeting on training, capacity-building, safety
and security, and the performance of United Nations
peacekeeping. I stress the word performance. The
meeting was useful in bringing together all stakeholders
to discuss ways and means to improve and strengthen
training, capacity-building, safety and security, and the
performance of United Nations peacekeeping, which
in turn contributed to the issuance of presidential
statement S/PRST/2019/4 under Indonesia's presidency
in May.

The second point concerns considering options for
further direct engagement between host Governments
and the Security Council. That would include
cooperation in the pursuit of Security Council mandates,
including facilitating access and the implementation of
peacekeeping mandates. The quadrilateral formula,
which includes host States in the discussion, can be one
of the options. Based on the quadrilateral consultations
with the host nations, the Security Council, troop-
contributing countries (TCCs), police-contributing
countries (PCCs) and the Secretariat could discuss
the larger picture of political strategy and priorities.
Such consultations would be useful in revalidating
and rearticulating the long-term vision of the mission's
political objectives and solution.

We concur with what Mr. Lacroix mentioned in his
statement, namely, that "mandates can also strongly
benefit from the perspectives and experiences of troop
and police contributors present on the ground". Our
troops on the ground need to be clear on the mandate,
and the experts on the Council should make sure that the
mandate is simple, clear and executable on the ground.
I think that is the message that the Force Commander
was trying to deliver, and I think that is also the message
that many Force Commanders who have come into the
Security Council Chamber have delivered. I will not
name those Force Commanders, but that is the message.

The questions then centre on how we will do it
and when we will do it. I deliberately used the word
"experts" for those who are discussing the draft
resolution. I think that is extremely important. They
should strive for clarity instead of drafting lots of pages
of text. I had that experience when we were in Mali. I
spoke with many of our peacekeepers there, and I asked
them a simple question: Did they understand what they
were supposed to be doing based on resolution 2100
(2013)? Council members know what the answer was.

I would like to stress once again that better
coordination, coherence and cooperation between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
during discussions of peacekeeping mandate and
transition are also crucial to improving engagement
between host Governments and the Security Council.

My third and last point relates to pursuing
innovative approaches, including through triangular
partnership projects. Cooperation does not have to
stop at that political level; it should be expanded to
the technical level. That is why innovative projects,
such as triangular partnerships, should identify the
partnerships necessary to address the capacity gap in
implementing peacekeeping mandates. That is also
important during the configuration ofa mission's force,
structures, size and posture so that it is matched with
appropriate human, material and financial resources.
In that respect, Indonesia will host the Triangular
Partnership Project in 2020, focusing on addressing the
gap between the mandates and the capacities of TCCs
and PCCs.

I note the remarks made by my colleague from
Germany on the various recommendations, as well as
the remarks made by Ms. Novosseloff and Mr. Lacroix.
I support not only the holding of meetings, whether
formal or informal, but also the substance, dynamics,
outcome and concrete action of those meetings. I would
love to have more meetings with the TCCs, PCCs and
the other stakeholders, but what is important is to
stop the debate and to continue with something that
is concrete.

In conclusion, we hope that this debate also offers
an opportunity to revive and operationalize triangular
cooperation in the context of implementing the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. As a footnote, I would like
to underline the following. I note the message from the
Force Commander on the need for the Force Commander
and the troops on the ground to be agile and to have
the ability to respond appropriately, particularly in
missions that have a serious security threat.

I wish to underline once again that our objective for
the future is to make peacekeeping operations efficient,
effective, agile, responsive and, lastly, safe. Ithink that
is the important part that we tend to forget. The key
words here are coordination and good management. At
the end of the day, we should never forget that our Blue
Helmets are on the front lines, risking their lives for the
cause of peace.

