Mr. Kemayah (Liberia): We thank the Security
Council, under the presidency of Poland, for having
organized this open debate on children and armed
conflict. We express our thanks to UNICEF and to the
other briefers for their inspiring reports earlier today.

We take note of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2019/509) and its findings. The uncomfortable truth
remains that the scale and severity of the violations
being committed against children continue unabated in
several regions of the world, with wanton disregard for
international law as well as international norms. It is
also regrettable that incidents involving the abduction,
killing and maiming of children have reached a record
level globally, as have attacks on schools and hospitals
and the denial of humanitarian access to children, while
the future of millions of children living in countries
affected by armed conflict remains at risk. The situation
deserves the utmost attention.

As we observe the tenth anniversary of resolution
1882 (2009), we call on the Council to reinforce its
provision that all parties to armed conflicts adhere to the
obligations applicable to them under international law.

There is a dire need to address the gap in funding
for the rehabilitation and reintegration of children
affected by armed conflict, especially child soldiers.
Adequate funding will support Governments and
regional and subregional organizations in building
child and social protection capacity and in formulating
prevention strategies. We therefore urge that priority be
placed on addressing the root causes of conflict so as to
ensure prevention.

The traumatic and excruciating impact of
armed conflict, particularly on children, cannot
be overemphasized.

Within the ambit of our national flagship
development plan, the Pro-Poor Agenda for Prosperity
and Development, the Government of Liberia, under
the astute leadership of His Excellency Mr. George
Manneh Weah, espouses the promotion of democracy,
good governance, respect for human rights, justice and
the rule of law.

Hence, having transitioned from conflict to peace
and given that young people, who constitute 63 per
cent of our population, are the building blocks for
the sustainability of peace, security, democracy and
development in our country, the Government of Liberia
has at the core of its Pro-Poor Agenda for Prosperity
and Development programmes to strengthen child and
social protection.

We commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
for advancing the mandate of this very important
Office. We particularly laud the initiative launched in
April of this year under the ACT to Protect Children
Affected by Armed Conflict campaign. The initiative
seeks to generate greater awareness and action in
order to improve the protection of children affected by
armed conflict.

Finally, on behalf of Mr. George Manneh Weah,
President of the Republic of Liberia, the Government
and the people of Liberia, I wish to express our
unwavering support for the commendable campaign
ACT to Protect Children Affected by Armed Conflict.

