Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I am very pleased
to welcome to the Security Council Ms. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy of the European Union (EU) and
to thank her for the briefing. Ukraine commends the
significant contribution that the European Union makes
in support of the maintenance of international peace
and security.

We must admit today that living in turbulent times
demands quick decisions and even closer cooperation.
As the Secretary-General pointed out recently,

"The challenges are too complex for one
organization or one nation to meet alone. Hence
there is the need for partnerships and innovation."

If history is any guide, we should once and for all learn
the lesson that a weak, slow or hesitant reaction by
the international community to challenging and tragic
events, in particular in Ukraine and Syria, dictates the
scale and pace of the consequences. Thus the lesson
here is to treat the disease, not the symptoms. In the
case of Ukraine, a strategic answer should be given
on the EU side to security challenges originating from
Russia to the eastern partnership. We hope that the new
EU global security strategy will properly reflect that.

The European Union has been the United Nations
most reliable partner in promoting the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and in
strengthening respect for the rule of law. The level of
cooperation between the United Nations and the EU
was strengthened recently, and we are seeing tangible
results in the fulfilment of the provisions ofpresidential
statement S/PRST/20l4/4, on the institutional and
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the EU, which was adopted two years ago.

The High Representative addressed in detail many
crises that affect our world today and on which United
Nations-EU cooperation is much needed. I would like
to comment on some of them.

We fully acknowledge that fight against terrorism
requires close cooperation between the United Nations
and its international partners, including the EU. We
commend the broad engagement of the EU and its
member States in combating terrorism, including
their active participation in the International Coalition
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and in
the work of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum. The
recent EU joint framework on hybrid threats was an
important step to that end, and it envisaged intensified
cooperation with partners aimed at combating organized
crime, terrorism and trafficking. We are ready for such
cooperation and await concrete proposals, in particular
in the area of the fight against terrorism, which is of
particular importance for us.

Ukraine fully supports the work of the International
Syria Support Group (ISSG) and its efforts aimed at
finding a long-lasting political solution to the crisis.
We believe that the implementation of the Vienna
statement conclusions issued by the ISSG on 17 May
can improve the humanitarian situation in Syria and
enhance efforts to achieve a political solution. We
welcome the United Nations and the EU's readiness to
provide comprehensive humanitarian aid to the Syrian
people, which would contribute to improving their
living conditions.

Ukraine supports the key points on Syria stipulated
in the conclusions of the European Union Council on
the regional strategy for Syria, Iraq and the Da'esh
threat, which was published on 23 May. We believe
that, without strengthening the implementation and
monitoring of the cessation of hostilities, ensuring
country-wide humanitarian access and making progress
on the issue of detainees, we will have no grounds for a
credible resumption of the intra-Syrian talks.

Ukraine supports the efforts of the Government
of National Accord and the Presidency Council in
Libya aimed at organizing the national dialogue and
strengthening the security situation. We hope that
arrival of the Presidency Council in Tripoli and the
start of the hand-over ofpower will result in the gradual
stabilization of the country.

With regard to the conflicts on the African
continent, we welcome the reaffirmed commitment
between the EU and the African Union to peace
and security in conformity with the purposes and
principles of the Charter. Cooperation between the EU
and the African Union based on the 2014-2017 road
map can contribute to achieving results in improving
the security situation, strengthening democracy,
good governance and human rights and countering
global and emerging issues. As current Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the Central African
Republic, Ukraine highly values the strong engagement
of the European Union in that country, notably its
humanitarian assistance, financial contribution and the
establishment of a military training mission.

Ukraine reiterates its support for the historic
nuclear deal between Iran and E3/EU+3 - the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action - which was a milestone
in strengthening the non-proliferation regime as a
whole. Ukraine welcomes the choice of Iran in terms
of its commitment to ensure a peaceful nuclear policy.
We call upon all the sides to the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action to ensure its diligent implementation, as
well as that of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015),
including nuclear-related restrictions.

Migration is another area for practical United
Nations-EU cooperation. To resolve this problem of a
global dimension, we should take a global approach
and work more closely to tackle the causes of illegal
migration, improve our efforts to fight the trafficking
of human beings, and provide people in real need of
international protection with all of the necessary help
and assistance.

We commend the EU's efforts and dedication in
contributing to the peaceful resolution of conflicts and
protecting the universal principles of international law,
including those enshrined in the United Nations Charter.

For my country, this aspect is particularly pertinent,
given the attempted illegal annexation of Crimea and
the ongoing military Russian aggression in the east of
Ukraine. What has happened in Ukraine over the past
two years is the most serious crisis in Europe since the
Second World War. It is hybrid warfare that is already
being waged against all of us, and we can counter it
only with a bold and coherent strategy based on our
joint efforts, a clear understanding of the source of the
threat and a vision of how to tackle it.

We appreciate the EU's uncompromising position
on the matter and its consistent policy of applying
the whole range of political-diplomatic tools, along
with the appropriate economic and trade measures, to
restore measures and right the wrongs committed by
the Russian Federation.

I urge the Russian Federation to comply with the
United Nations Charter; the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 68/262, entitled "Territorial
integrity of Ukraine"; as well as international treaties,
and to de-occupy Crimea. I also urge this State to fulfil
its obligations under the Minsk agreements, including
the withdrawal from Ukraine of Russian weapons and
its military forces and mercenaries.

I am glad that the Russian delegation has finally
started to pay attention to the reporting of the human
rights monitoring mission in Ukraine, which was
mentioned in my Russian colleague's statement. It even
mentioned some elements of the latest report, but time
and again it has failed to notice the "elephant in the
room" in the last and in all 13 previous reports. Russia
itself is the root cause of the situation in and around
Ukraine. Let me quote from the report:

"The conflict broke out in spring 2014 with the
influx of foreign fighters, including citizens of
the Russian Federation, ammunition and heavy
weaponry into east Ukraine from across the border
with the Russian Federation".

To conclude, I would like to emphasize that it is
only through enhanced and coordinated cooperation
between the United Nations and the EU that we will
be able effectively to counter the growing number
of common global challenges. Ukraine is ready to
contribute to this end and at the same time looks forward
to strengthened international support in countering
the external aggression against its own sovereignty
and independence.

