Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: I thank the Security
Council for this opportunity to present the twelfth
briefing on the work of the International Criminal
Court on the situation in Darfur.

I would like to update the Council on the Pre-Trial
Chamber I decision to issue a second arrest warrant for
President Al-Bashir for three charges of genocide,
including genocide by killing, in accordance with
article 6 (a) of the Rome Statute; genocide by causing
serious bodily or mental harm, through rapes and the
sowing of fear among people in villages and people in
camps for displaced persons, in accordance with article
6 (b); and genocide by deliberately inflicting, on the
Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa groups, conditions of life
calculated to bring about the groups" physical
destruction, in accordance with article 6 (c).

I would also like to brief the Council on the
hearing concluded yesterday at the seat of the Court in
The Hague to confirm the charges against the rebel
commanders who led the attacks against African Union
peacekeepers at their base in Haskanita. That was the
most serious attack against peacekeepers in Darfur. For
the Office of the Prosecutor, crimes against
peacekeepers are some of the most serious crimes
under its jurisdiction. They affect the lives of millions
of civilians under peacekeeper protection.

I would also like to confirm that the Government
of the Sudan is not cooperating with the Court, as the
Pre-Trial Chamber informed the Council, and is
conducting no national proceedings against those
responsible for the crimes committed. Since 2005,
Sudanese authorities have consistently promised to do
justice, creating mechanisms such as special courts and
prosecutors, while consistently and deliberately
2
protecting those who commit the crimes. President
Al-Bashir, in accordance with the Pre-Trial Chamber's
finding, issued the criminal orders to attack civilians
and destroy their communities. President Al-Bashir
does not want to investigate those who are following
his orders.

In terms of cooperation on arrests, the Rome
Statute States parties are firmly insisting on the need to
respect the Court's decisions. The presence of many
representatives of States parties in the Chamber today
underscores their consistent support for an end to
impunity for these crimes.

The situation in Darfur is not just a humanitarian
crisis; it is a systematic attack against the civilian
population. The situation in Darfur is a genocide - an
ongoing genocide. As mentioned in my written report,
hundreds of civilians have been killed just in the past
six months. Thousands have been forcibly displaced,
and more than 2.5 million are suffering a subtle form
of genocide - genocide by rape and fear. Rape and
fear are silent weapons, below the radar of the
peacekeepers and unstoppable by the humanitarian
organizations. And this continues. The Secretary-
General's report of 14 July (S/2010/382) notes that
sexual and gender-based violence continues and is
generally perpetrated by men in military uniform.

I appreciate the commitment to stopping crimes
against women and children, as expressed by the
Security Council in its meeting on 26 October (see S/PV.64ll) commemorating the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). In its presidential statement contained in
document S/PRST/2010/22, the Security Council noted
with grave concern that women and girls are
disproportionately affected by conflict, and that
women's participation in peace processes remains too
low. Resolution 1325 (2000) should be implemented in
Darfur.

In relation to the Haskanita attack, yesterday's
confirmation hearing at the seat of the Court in The
Hague was unique. The rebel commanders have
accepted that there is sufficient evidence to confirm the
charges and go to trial. In any case, the Chamber has to
make a decision by 17 February 2011. The Haskanita
case before the judges is about how those two
commanders led more than 1,000 troops in carrying out
a violent attack on the African Union Mission in Sudan
(AMIS) base in Haskanita, killing 12 peacekeepers and
injuring eight others. They also destroyed the camp and
looted vehicles, fuel and money. The attack has
10-68333
resulted in war crimes charges against them for
violence, murder and attempted murder of AMIS
personnel and article 8, intentionally directing attacks
against personnel in a peacekeeping mission, and
pillaging. My Office expects the charges against the
rebel commanders to be confirmed and that the trial
will begin in 2011.

In my personal view, during the trial the
commanders will challenge the neutrality of the
African Union peacekeepers and will therefore argue
that the Haskanita base constituted a legitimate
military target. The Office of the Prosecutor will
maintain that the African Union peacekeepers were
neutral and that the attack was illegal, constituting war
crimes. It is important to highlight that the
commanders are appearing voluntarily before the Court
and are willing to face the risk of going to prison in
order to claim that President Al-Bashir also has to
appear before the judges and respect the decisions of
the International Criminal Court.

In relation to national proceedings, I would like
to highlight the report of the African Union High-level
Panel on Darfur, which cites the

"current major obstacles to justice and
reconciliation in Darfur [as] the absence of
political will; denial of what happened and is
happening in Darfur, as well as obscuring of the
truth; war, fear and insecurity; poor policing
and enforcement of law and order; impunity for
the crimes committed in Darfur".

These are the words of the African Union High-level
Panel on Darfur.

Confirming that, the most recent cover-up
statement promising justice for Darfuris came on
27 September, when a Special Prosecutor for Darfur,
Mr. Nimr Mohamed, visited Darfur and announced his
intention to begin investigating the 2 September attack
on Tabra, which had resulted in dozens of people
reportedly being killed. However, two weeks later, in
mid-October, Prosecutor Mohamed was released from
his position and replaced by Abdel Dayim Zomrawi,
Under-Secretary in the Ministry of Justice. Since then,
no progress has been reported on the Tabra
investigation or any other. Until the orders to the
Sudanese Armed Forces to commit crimes in Darfur
cease, there is no possibility ofjustice in Darfur.

Let me conclude. The Security Council referred
the Darfur situation to the International Criminal Court
in 2005. It issued a presidential statement in 2008
(S/PRST/2008/21) urging the Government of the Sudan
to cooperate with the Court. It recently issued a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/24) in which it
recalled the "importance it attaches to an end to
impunity, and to justice for crimes committed in
Darfur".

My duty was to investigate impartially the worst
crimes committed in Darfur and to present cases
against those most responsible. We presented our
evidence to the judges; the Court issued arrest warrants
against a militia Janjaweed leader who reported to the
then Minister of State for the Interior, who reported in
turn to President Al-Bashir. The charges against
President Al-Bashir include crimes against humanity,
war crimes and genocide. The arrest warrant will not
go away. The legal work is done, but the crimes are
ongoing. President Al-Bashir and his supporters are
making enormous efforts to cover up the crimes and
divert the attention of the international community by
announcing new strategies and new efforts for justice.

The Court also investigated the worst crimes
committed by the rebel forces against peacekeepers. As
I have said, the trial is coming. The Court will fulfil its
judicial mandate. The whereabouts of the three
fugitives are known. Ahmed Haroun can be found in
his governor's residence in Southern Kordofan.

States parties are fulfilling their duties and legal
obligations, but additionally they are adopting policies
to sever any contact with individuals sought by the
Court. President Al-Bashir was excluded from the
recent European Union/African Union summit. States
parties are ensuring respect for the legal limits.
Regional organizations, such as the League of Arab
States and African Union, are crucial to ensuring
justice, stopping the crimes, alleviating the
humanitarian situation and providing stability to the
Sudan. A proper dialogue with them is crucial to
achieving these goals.

The implementation of the Court's decisions and
the execution of the arrest warrants are in the hands of
the Security Council.

