Ms. Lisson (Australia): Australia welcomes the
opportunity to participate in today's debate and thanks
the Chairmen of the three Committees for their
briefings.

The comprehensive legal framework of the
United Nations in the field of counter-terrorism is of
fundamental importance in developing a global
response to the evolving threat of terrorism. Australia
strongly supports the work of the United Nations
counter-terrorism Committees. We encourage close
engagement by the Committees with the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force to ensure
appropriate coordination, avoid duplication and
encourage the effective implementation of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

Australia is focused on enhancing security and
capacity-building efforts with partner countries to
combat terrorism and prevent terrorist attacks.
Regional counter-terrorism successes are continuing to
have an impact on the primary terrorism threat to our
region, namely, Jemaah Islamiyah. Australia remains
committed to working at all levels with Member States
to overcome the grave threat to our security posed by
terrorism.

Australia strongly supports the work of the
Security Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee and
its Executive Directorate. We also support the
Committee in its efforts to monitor the implementation
of counter-terrorism measures. We welcome the
Directorate's engagement with donors active in the
counter-terrorism field and its focus on matching donor
capabilities with recipients' needs. Effective
relationship-building between donor and recipient
countries and a practical focus on capabilities and
needs are critical for success.

Australia welcomes the steps being taken by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) to engage more closely with Member States and
regional bodies in order to better coordinate its work.
That will be important if global counter-terrorism
efforts are to be effective, as a strong legislative and
regulatory framework is essential in disrupting terrorist
networks and dealing with specific threats. Indeed, in
March of this year, Australia significantly increased the
maximum penalties under our legislation for terrorist
offences.

Australia welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1810 (2008) and encourages the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to
continue to build on its efforts of the past four years in
support of the universal and effective implementation
of the resolution. Australia in particular commends the
Committee for seeking to promote and develop greater
Asia-Pacific coordination and cooperation, including
facilitating assistance to countries of the region.

As Chair of the Australia Group, we work with 40
other member Governments and the European
Commission to strengthen the Group's control lists.
Through outreach efforts, we complement the goals of
resolution 1540 (2004) and that Committee's own
outreach efforts. Australia will also chair the planning
meeting of the 34-member Missile Technology Control
Regime to be held in Canberra later this year. That will
provide us with a further opportunity to contribute to
strengthening international non-proliferation
frameworks and norms.

Finally, Australia welcomes the emphasis -
particularly in resolution 1810 (2008) - on enhancing
ongoing cooperation between the 1540, 1267 and 1373

Committees. That will be particularly well received in
the Asia-Pacific region, where countries are focused on
cooperating in developing their counter-terrorism
capabilities.

