The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

Today the United States of America voted against
draft resolution S/2019/962, authored by the Russian
Federation, because it mocks our values and principles.
It defies the recommendations of the Secretary-General,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) and international non-governmental
organizations, and, most importantly, from the start it
has been a disingenuous attempt to prevent a life-saving
cross-border mechanism from functioning for Syrian
civilians. Russia's goal today was simple. It wanted to
score political points. It was interested only in creating
a public spectacle and tarnishing the credibility of the
Security Council. For Russia, this was not about saving
Syrian lives. In truth, its text was never meant to be
a good-faith compromise. From the start, Russia took
a cynical, take-it-or-leave-it approach with regard to
its draft resolution. It failed today because failure is
the outcome Russia wanted on the issue of life-saving
humanitarian aid to Syria. Let the record clearly reflect
that fact. Russia proposed a draft resolution destined to
fail because it would rather see Syrian civilians starve
than disappoint Bashar Al-Assad.

The United States asked for five crossing points
to be authorized for 12 months. That position was
informed by our values, whereby we have an obligation
to the least fortunate of our brothers and sisters. We
wanted more United Nations aid going to more Syrians
through the most direct access routes available. OCHA
also supported the addition of a fifth crossing point
at Tel Abyad on the same humanitarian basis and
assessment of need. We fought hard to keep four of the
crossing points open with a View to ensuring greater
United Nations access for delivering much-needed aid.
Reluctantly, for the sake of maintaining a reasonable
amount of aid flows, we were willing to compromise to
authorize three crossing points for 12 months, but that
compromise was not enough for the Russian Federation
or for China.

The Russian Federation and China's vetoes of the
co-penholders' draft resolution (S/2019/961) show that
their engagement on that matter was never serious.
For them, it was never about saving lives or the United
Nations mechanism. To the members of the Council
who argue that the humanitarian situation in Syria
has changed and that the cross-border mandate should
reflect that change, I ask them today - will millions
of Syrians be fed by shutting off access to their only
source of food? Will sick women, men and children be
healed by shutting off access to their only source of
medicine? Those questions answer themselves.

What is not clear is how the Council's mandate
to maintain peace and security will be advanced by
today's vetoes. The Russians owe the Council, the
people of Syria and the international community that
explanation. We know that no credible answer will come
from those who have chosen to deny aid to millions of
Syrians in need. The outcome of today's vote is bitterly
disappointing, but I now want to speak directly to the
Syrian people. The United States remains committed
to them. We are committed to defending the voiceless,
feeding the hungry and ensuring that the displaced and
the orphaned receive the humanitarian aid that they
must have to survive. We are the largest humanitarian
donor in the world, providing $10.5 billion to the
Syrian people, and we will continue to support them.
We are proud of our principled stance on assisting
every Syrian in need. We will continue to shine a light
on those who choose not to help. Going forward, we
will do everything in our power to support principled
humanitarian assistance.

In conclusion, I want to be absolutely clear. Yes,
today is a very sad day. However, today's vote is not the
end of this conversation. We will continue to press for
a solution for the Syrian people. We will never cease
to defend those who find themselves without food or
medicine. And today we hold on to an unwavering hope
that a solution will be found for the Syrian people, who
need us today more than ever.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

