Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): We too wish at the outset
to thank Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region, for
his statement. We join previous speakers in
congratulating him on the commendable work he
carried out during the preparations for the Second
Summit of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region. We also thank Ambassador Liberata
Mulamula, the first Executive Secretary of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
Secretariat, and wish her every success as she assumes
her important position. We would like also to add our
voice to those congratulating the countries of the Great
Lakes region on convening the Summit and signing the
Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the
Great Lakes Region.

Slovakia fully associates itself with the statement
to be made later by the representative of Finland on
behalf of the European Union. In our national capacity,
we would like to add a few comments.

The signing of the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes Region was a major
step towards reconciliation and development in that
region, which has been troubled for so long. To some
extent, the signing of the Pact was a logical
consequence of the progress achieved in the field of
peacebuilding and democratization in the region.

In previous years, we mostly received messages
of desperation and tragedy from the Great Lakes area.
Now, finally, messages of hope have begun to come
from the region. Democratic elections in Burundi and
just recently in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
concluded the transition and will hopefully pave the
way for a more secure, stable and prosperous Great
Lakes region. Also, the negotiations between the
Government of Uganda and the Lord's Resistance
Army taking place in Juba finally provide, after 20
years of conflict, a viable chance for sustainable peace
in northern Uganda and the surrounding region.

However, the positive messages coming from the
Great Lakes region should not lead us to complacency.
At least two parties to the Pact on Security, Stability
and Development - the Sudan and the Central African
Republic - are currently affected by the crisis in
Darfur. Despite positive political developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, its eastern parts
continue to suffer from the presence of rebel groups.
We could go on by mentioning widespread poverty,
problems in the management of natural resources,
thousands of refugees and internally displaced persons,
further thousands of former combatants waiting for
reintegration, weak and unreformed security sectors,
massive violations of human rights and many other
threats that could possibly fuel new conflict.

The countries of the region now have a major tool
for consolidating the results achieved so far. It provides
the countries of the region with an important
instrument that can help them overcome mutual
problems and prejudices resulting from turbulent past
relations. The Pact is a cornerstone to be built upon.
We highly commend the comprehensive approach
taken in drafting the Pact. Its main parts cover peace
and security, democracy and good governance,
economic development and regional cooperation, along
with humanitarian and social issues - that is, all the
major issues that the Security Council has been
considering when addressing Great Lakes conflicts.

Yet, the signing of the Pact is just the beginning,
though an important one. Peace consolidation in the
Great Lakes region will require a great deal of
additional effort. The implementation of such an
ambitious and comprehensive Pact will require a
massive concentration of human, material and financial
resources by the countries of the region, as well as by
the international community. Local ownership,
partnership and complementarity, as highlighted by
both Special Representative Fall and Ambassador
Mulamula, lie at the core of the consolidation and
peacebuilding efforts and endeavours.

Finally, we wish to thank the Tanzanian
delegation for preparing the draft presidential
statement, which has our full support.

