Mr. Svilanovic (Serbia and Montenegro): I wish
to express my appreciation to you, Mr. President -
and, through you, to all other members of the Security
Council - for responding so quickly to my
Government's request urgently to convene this
meeting. Indeed, yesterday's extremely grave
developments in Kosovo and Metohija warrant
immediate and resolute action by the Security Council.

The violence committed against the Serbian
population in Kosovo and Metohija on 17 March is
jeopardizing the United Nations Mission there. All
efforts by the international community aimed at a
peaceful resolution of the problems of this southern
Serbia province are endangered. The Serbian
population has suffered a purge whose objective was its
ethnic cleansing from Kosovo and Metohija. KFOR
and the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) have failed so far to stop that
action.

It is particularly distressing that such an outbreak
of violent attacks on such a wide scale by Kosovo
Albanian extremists against the Serbian community in
the province has happened almost five years after the
establishment of an international presence there. Many
people have been killed; many more have been
wounded and injured. In the process, a number of Serb
patrimonial sites have been set ablaze. On behalf of the
Government of Serbia and Montenegro, I would like to
express our deepest condolences and sympathy to the
families of all the victims.

The attacks on the Serbian community in Kosovo
and Metohija are sending more than one signal. To the
Serbs, the signal is that there is no life for them in the
province and that they should leave. To KFOR and
UNMIK, the signal is that they have no real authority
and power in their area of operation. To the Security
Council, the signal - or rather the challenge - is that
its resolution 1244 (1999) will not be implemented,
especially with regard to the return of all refugees and
internally displaced persons and the creation of a
secure and safe environment for all communities in
Kosovo and Metohija.

Another signal from the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government and Kosovo Albanian political
leaders to the international community is that they
cannot or do not want to go out in the streets to prevent
that kind of mass violence from happening. They want
authority, and a lot of authority was transferred to
them. However, they ignore the responsibilities that
come with authority.

The timing of the attacks is also indicative. In the
near future the Security Council was supposed to
finally receive the standards implementation plan.
Instead, we all received the signal that I have just
mentioned: Serbs should leave; after that it will be
much easier to fulfil standards. Secondly, just after the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
announced the date for the upcoming province-wide
elections, the Serbian community was given notice that
they should not think about participating in the
elections, but instead should pack and go. Thirdly, is
the situation now really conducive to continuing the
long-awaited dialogue that just recently started?

The current crisis is extremely serious and may
have far-reaching negative consequences. Nobody
should take it as yet another incident in a long
sequence of incidents over the past five years. On the
contrary, everybody involved should approach the
problem responsibly.

First and foremost, a resolution should be adopted
condemning Kosovo Albanian extremism and
terrorism. A political and security framework for
further action by the civilian and military missions in
these new and grave circumstances should be defined.
International forces should be strengthened and should
adopt a much more resolute stand. Extraordinary
measures are needed to physically protect the Serbian
population, which is already preparing to flee to central
Serbia.

Authorities and security forces of Serbia and
Montenegro are ready to provide any assistance and
cooperation to the United Nations Mission in applying
those measures. The situation in Kosovo and Metohija
calls for urgent and complete security stabilization. The
international presence must regain full control on the
ground.
In that regard, it is of utmost importance that
urgent measures be taken to secure the international
border between Serbia and Montenegro and Albania
and Macedonia in the area of Kosovo and Metohija.
According to our information, that border is completely
unguarded now and groups of armed terrorists are
coming into Kosovo and Metohija with large quantities
of arms and other military equipment. That could lead
to further deterioration of the security situation in the
province.

Most recent events clearly highlighted the fact
that political extremism - in terms of both demands
and methods - cannot lead to resolution of the
problem. Additional efforts are required, as well as
additional institutional guarantees. In that regard,
decentralization is essential and could be a potential
step towards stabilizing the situation of the Serbian
community in Kosovo and Metohija. Serbia and
Montenegro is ready to participate in the preparation
and implementation of a dialogue on the most
important matter of institutional guarantees and
decentralization.

Albanian extremism and terrorism in Kosovo and
Metohija has to be condemned. However, that is not
enough. The Security Council should define the
appropriate political and security instructions and
guidelines for the civilian and military missions in the
province in these new and difficult circumstances,
since organized violence such as occurred yesterday is
undoubtedly the single most serious threat to peace and
security in the entire region.

As a matter of urgency and as a minimum, all
planned reductions in the composition and resources of
KFOR and UNMIK should be cancelled. Also, KFOR
should re-establish protection for communities that
were gradually deprived of that. Religious and cultural
sites must be also protected full time.

It is obvious that statements and declarations of
good intentions are not sufficient if the issue of Kosovo
and Metohija is to be dealt with seriously. Such
statements are understood and taken by the extremists,
who actually control Kosovo and Metohija, as
expressions of weakness, not as a sign of resolve on the
part of international community, specifically UNMIK
and KFOR. Therefore, concrete and urgent action is
required to immediately put an end to the present wave
of violence. Otherwise, the objective of creating a
multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo and Metohija will
very soon be irreversibly damaged.

