Mr. Chergui (spoke in Arabic): On this holy day
on which we commemorate the birth of the Prophet, I
would like to express our warmest congratulations to
all present.

(spoke in English)

On behalf of the African Union and on my own
behalf, let me start by thanking you, Mr. President,
and the People's Republic of China for demonstrating
your unwavering support and commitment to peace and
security in Africa.

At the outset, I wish to join His Excellency the
Secretary-General in extending, on behalf of the
African Union, condolences to the Governments and
the people of Malawi and Tanzania and to the United
Nations family on last week's tragic loss of United
Nations peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Our thoughts and prayers are with the
families of the fallen soldiers.

Allow me also, Mr. President, to express
appreciation for this invitation to brief the Council on
the very important subject of enhancing capacities for
peace and security in Africa. As a Union, we always
appreciate the focus that you place on peace and security
in Africa during your presidency. In that regard, we
always endeavour to use this platform to reiterate our
position on the level of commitment and cooperation
we require of the United Nations to guarantee the
effectiveness of our strategic partnership.

I am also grateful to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive presentation. We recognize ourselves
in every word he said today. I want to pay tribute to
his tireless efforts to consolidate and further promote
the strategic partnership between the African Union
and the United Nations, including in the area of peace
and security. I would like to assure him of the African
Union and Africa's full respect for and support to
all their joint endeavours, which the African Union
continues to enhance.

The issue of peacekeeping reform is of shared and
critical interest to the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union.
Last year's Security Council high-level debate on
peacekeeping reform (see S/PV.8051) and the ensuing
resolution 2378 (2017), which was preceded by
resolution 2320 (2016), presented an important locus
on which to continue monitoring our efforts towards
effective partnership, enhanced cooperation and
peacekeeping reform.

Since my briefing to the Council on this topic last
year (see S/PV.7971), the African Union has spared
no effort in expediting key priorities that contribute
towards strengthening our partnership. Today's
meeting thus offers the opportunity for me to highlight
three major areas that we have achieved considerable
progress in, which are also areas of mutual concern and
interest to our two institutions.

First, the Council will note that we continue to
facilitate key processes of the revitalized Peace Fund,
which we launched on 17 November on the sidelines of
the 11th extraordinary meeting of the Assembly of the
African Union on reform. The launch of the Peace Fund
was preceded by the inaugural meeting of the Board of
Trustees, ofwhich the United Nations is a member, whose
members were also appointed last week. The Board will
ensure the effective management and accountability
of the Peace Fund. As I speak, we have recorded, as
the Secretary-General just indicated, $60.5 million in
contributions from African Union member States to the
Fund. This represents the highest contribution since its
establishment, and based on additional commitments
expressed at last week's Assembly meeting, we are
projecting to reach $100 million in contributions
by early 2019. This accelerated momentum is a key
component of our collective efforts to guarantee the
African Union's access to United Nations-assessed
contributions, on which we seek to have agreement in
the draft resolution to be adopted by the Council in the
coming weeks.

Secondly, the African Union Commission has
recorded significant progress in enhancing its existing
human rights compliance framework for African
Union peace support operations. Allow me to reiterate
that ensuring compliance with and accountability to
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law, and conduct and discipline is not new to the
African Union. These international norms and standards
have always been part of our mission planning and
management processes, long before the discussions on
predictable and sustainable financing of African Union
peace support operations began. For instance, since the
African Union's first deployment in Burundi in 2003,
the African Union and its member States have been
ensuring preventive, response and remedial measures to
avoid and respond to any violations of these norms and
standards by personnel. That includes predeployment
training for all peace support operation personnel,
the signing of memorandums of understanding with
troop- and police-contributing countries to confirm
the responsibilities of the African Union, as well as
the conduct of court martials and public prosecutions
in mission areas and in the countries of alleged
perpetrators. Thus, our current efforts are focused
on enhancing these existing frameworks, which we
are facilitating jointly with the United Nations, with
support from the International Committee of the Red
Cross, to ensure common standards and processes.

Thirdly, our concrete partnership in particular
theatres of operations, such as Somalia, continue to
offer us opportunities to enhance greater cooperation
and consultation between our two institutions. Since
2013, the African Union and the United Nations have
jointly undertaken four African Union-United Nations
joint reviews of the African Union Mission in Somalia.
These processes have allowed for greaterjoint analysis,
planning and cooperation between the two Secretariats.
The recent joint engagements of the African Union and
United Nations Special Representatives in Somalia to
urge the Federal Government and states of Somalia
to resolve their current political differences through
constructive dialogue points to the inevitability of our
joint work to maximize our prospects for greater success
and achievements. However, more needs to be done to
facilitate joint visits to these theatres, as well as regular
consultations between our two Councils, in order to
guarantee greater coherence and the convergence of
strategic directions and tasks in African Union Peace
and Security Council communiques and United Nations
Security Council resolutions on the same issues.

We are firmly convinced that the aforementioned
elements serve as a guarantee of the mutually
reinforcing commitment of our two secretariats to
further aligning our processes in order to enhance our
joint efforts. Thus, we urge the Council to also further
enhance its strategic engagement and framework with
the African Union Peace and Security Council. In this
regard, we urge members of the Council to seize the
opportunity to adopt the draft resolution that will be
submitted in the coming weeks on the need for the
African Union's access to United Nations-assessed
contributions for operations authorized by the United
Nations on a case-by-case basis. This, we believe, will
bring the international community one step closer
to establishing a more effective, predictable and
sustainable framework that will enable us to achieve
peace and security on the continent.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that the African
Union understands the objective and aim of the draft
resolution that is currently being negotiated by Council
Members. As the African Union, we believe that
the draft resolution, when adopted, should indicate
that the Council, in principle, agrees to the use of
United Nations-assessed contributions for African
Union-mandated peace support operations authorized
by the Security Council on a case-by-case basis. In
this regard, the draft resolution is not intended to tie
the hands of the Council to any unending support, as
it offers a platform for proper consultations on each
conflict situation that will require such support before
any decision is made. In that respect, we urge that the
draft resolution, when adopted, not be overloaded with
conditionalities that would further delay us in making
progress to more effectively prevent and manage peace
and security in Africa.

We believe that further conditionalities will not
represent the spirit of the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security, signed on 19 April 2017. This is
Why our two secretariats are currently finalizing a
joint communique that the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
and the Secretary-General will be signing before the
adoption of the draft resolution in December. Thus,
the reaffirmation of the commitment to the African
Union-United Nations Partnership, and in particular
to operationalizing the African Union Peace Fund,
as well as to enhancing common and harmonized
standards of our existing human rights compliance
and accountability frameworks and mechanisms, will
address all the additional steps that need to be addressed.

On this note, we believe that without the political
cooperation and support of the Council, the attainment
of collective security within Africa and beyond will
be difficult to achieve. In this regard, we continue to
count on the leadership and guidance of African Union
member States, especially those in the Security Council,
in the realization of our institutional mandates.

