Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I, too, would
like to join others Security Council colleagues in
welcoming the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier; the Foreign Minister
of Kosovo, Mr. Skender Hyseni; and the Foreign
Minister of Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremic', to the Council
Chamber today. I should like also to welcome the Vice
Federal Minister for European and International Affairs
of Austria.

I would also like to express our thanks to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2009/497) on developments in Kosovo over the
reporting period and to commend the continuing efforts
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) to help improve stability in
Kosovo. We would also like to thank Mr. Zannier for
his leadership and hard work.

The Secretary-General's report illustrates that
Kosovo is continuing to make good progress in a
number of areas: the rule of law, security and
community reconciliation. We acknowledge the
contribution of the United Nations in achieving this
progress. It is also positive that 317 Kosovo Serb
police officers have been reintegrated into the Kosovo
Police Service and that the Kosovo security force has
now reached initial operating capability. We commend
the role that the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force have
played in achieving this.

The United Kingdom welcomes the start of
criminal proceedings against those involved in
deliberate attempts to damage vehicles belonging to the
international missions in Kosovo. As the President of
Kosovo has said, such attacks are unacceptable.

It is important to note that a growing number of
United Nations Member States - now 62 - have
recognized Kosovo. Kosovo has also become a
member of the five World Bank Group institutions with
the active support of over 50 further countries that,
while not yet formally recognizing Kosovo, have
shown by their votes that they accept that the Republic
of Kosovo is now a permanent fact on the international
scene and should be allowed to play its part
independently in relevant international institutions.
Altogether, almost 60 per cent of the membership of
the United Nations has now accepted the fact of
Kosovo's existence. We hope that those that have not
yet done so will soon follow their example.
With UNMIK now having concluded its
reconfiguration, more autonomy being given to Kosovo
institutions and EULEX establishing a presence in all
regions of Kosovo, UNMIK needs to ensure that it
focuses on those areas where it can play a useful and
relevant role. Equally, it is correct that UNMIK's
resources should be commensurate with the size of its
responsibilities. We welcome UNMIK's willingness to
engage in a number of areas, such as assisting the
Kosovo Property Agency, supporting Kosovo's
engagement with external organizations where
necessary, and promoting returns and reconciliation.
We also underline our full support for the valuable
work that EULEX is carrying out throughout Kosovo.

We call on the Government of Kosovo to
continue to engage constructively and pragmatically
with UNMIK for the benefit of all people of Kosovo.
Nothing in that cooperation diminishes Kosovo's
status.

One of the key challenges facing Kosovo in
coming months is to ensure the success of the local
elections. That will be achieved only by encouraging
the participation of all of Kosovo's communities.
Kosovo Serbs and their friends in the international
community should recognize the practical benefits of
decentralization and local elections. Whatever
differences we have on status, we can surely agree that
Kosovo Serbs need effective and legitimate locally
elected leadership. Only through wide participation can
there be viable local government that can secure
funding for the benefit of its communities. The
Government of Kosovo must reach out to all
communities and do all it can to ensure Kosovo Serbs
recognize the benefits that local representation will
bring them.

We also call on the Government of Serbia to
continue to engage with the European Union to
improve conditions for Kosovo Serbs. We welcome
recent progress on the ground and look forward to
further, early steps on customs, justice and other issues.

We disagree with the view of the Serbian
Government that conditions for successful local
elections do not exist and regret that the Serbian
Government will not support them. But we welcome
the repeated assurances given by representatives of the
Government of Serbia that Belgrade will not seek to
punish those Kosovo Serbs who do take part. We
believe that Kosovo's Serb community would benefit
from the rule of law and the opportunity to play a part
in running their own communities.

The proposed EU house in the north should
enable the citizens of north Kosovo to more easily
recognize the benefits that a European perspective can
bring them - for example, European project funding,
scholarship or business start-up opportunities and
information about the European Union.

The United Kingdom remains committed to
supporting the international community's efforts to
promote stability, reconciliation and economic progress
in Kosovo so that it can advance towards an EU
perspective in parallel with its neighbours.

