Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh): You, Madam, have the
appreciation of my delegation for holding this open
meeting of the Council on the situation in Kosovo.

May I also begin by thanking Mr. Hedi Annabi
for updating us on the issue. While many positive
developments have been taking place in Kosovo under
the United Nations administration, we feel that there
should be a speedier return to normalcy of the situation
in Kosovo. In this connection, we would like to make
the following points.
First, as to staffing requirements, we are
concerned that the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) has not been able
to attain the desired level of staffing for civil
administration and civilian police, as requested by the
Secretary-General. There is no doubt that the situation
needs further improvement. However, in addition to the
ongoing efforts, the prerequisites include a full
complement of police personnel, judges and civilian
administration personnel, among others. Unless we can
ensure the smooth operation of the civil administration
with the requisite strength, the restoration of the
desired level of security will doubtless be delayed.

My second point refers to missing persons and
detainees. We have referred to this persistent problem
quite a number of times in the Council. The persons
who remain missing and captive are obviously the
source of constant agonies and anxiety to their
families. The continuation of such an unfortunate
situation breeds mistrust and is therefore
counterproductive to attempts at building interethnic
harmony. The sooner the problem of missing persons is
resolved, the better it will be for the outlook for peace.
In this context, we support the appointment of a special
envoy of the Secretary-General for missing persons and
detainees in Kosovo.

My third point refers to elections. We are
encouraged by the steady progress towards the holding
of municipal elections. The recent draft regulation on
the structure and function of municipal administrations
throughout Kosovo, which was endorsed by Kosovo's
Interim Administrative Council, is indeed a welcome
development. We should believe that defining the
powers and responsibilities of the municipalities is a
prelude to establishing institutions for democratic and
autonomous self-government at the municipal level and
is an appropriate step towards the gradual transfer of
administrative responsibilities from UNMIK to local
authorities.

My fourth point refers to economic activity. The
pace of economic activity in Kosovo has been slowly
picking up. It is, however, still insufficient for the
creation of requisite job opportunities for the people.
The economy needs a significant boost, to which the
international community and organizations can and
should play an important role by providing an infusion
of appropriate help and assistance. This will give the
people of Kosovo the optimism to look forward to the
future, rather than being haunted by their past miseries
and plunging into desperate action and adventures.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the
restoration of peace in the region, which has been a
hotspot of conflict and inter-ethnic violence for a long
time, is a task of immense complexity. Nonetheless, the
notable progress already made shows that this is not
impossible. What we need to do in the Council is to
reiterate our strong support for the process of
reconstruction and reconciliation already under way in
Kosovo.

