Mr. Ahmadein Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me to begin by expressing my delegation's
condemnation of and sadness about the attack against
the United Nations office in Somalia. We offer the
condolences of the people and the Government of Egypt
to the United Nations and to the people and Government
of Somalia.

(spoke in English)

I would like to express our appreciation to the
United Kingdom presidency of the Security Council
for organizing today's debate on conflict prevention
and natural resources, a subject of great interest to all
Members of the United Nations, particularly countries
in conflict and post-conflict situations, including in
Africa.
I would like also to thank, through you, Sir, Mr. Jan
Eliasson, Deputy Secretary-General, the representative
of the World Bank, Mr. Kofi Annan and Ms. Grynspan
for their valuable participation and introductory
statements.

Our debate today raises a very serious question on
how to ensure that non-renewable natural resources
are a means for growth and development rather than
a source of instability and conflict. Conflicts are the
product of multiple and complex factors. However,
many conflict situations are linked to competition over
natural resources. Countries in post-conflict situations
are doing their best to develop efficient and accountable
national structures and to build national capacity to
manage their natural resources. Those efforts should
be fully supported by the international community,
including through technical and financial assistance
when needed.

The international community's response to the
question of cutting the link between natural resources
and armed conflict, particularly through initiatives such
as the Kimberley Process and the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative, reflects the importance of
curbing the illegal exploitation of natural resources
in order to support efforts to achieve peace, stability
and sustainable development. As a member of the
Group of Friends of Natural Resources, Egypt lends its
unequivocal support to those initiatives and their goals.

The United Nations is contributing to those
efforts through its conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts. Supporting national
capacity-building in the management of natural
resources is becoming an integral part of the mandate
of peacekeeping operations. The efforts of the
Peacebuilding Commission to ensure that extractive
industries located in countries in post-conflict
situations contribute to stability and socioeconomic
development cannot be over emphasized.

Our efforts to ensure that extractive industries
in countries in post-conflict situations contribute to
stability and socioeconomic development cannot enjoy
full success without the collaboration of all stakeholders,
including the international financial institutions and
the private sector. The World Development Report
2011 - "Conflict, security and development", prepared
by the World Bank Group, emphasized that building
capable and legitimate institutions is the key to breaking
the cycle ofviolence and avoiding a relapse into conflict
in fragile and conflict-affected countries. Egypt also
commends, in that regard, the African Mining Vision
2050, adopted by the African Union in 2008, as well as
the Protocol against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources in the Great Lakes Region.

Finally, Egypt underlines the importance of regional
approaches to address the exploitation of shared natural
resources in order to transform these resources into a
force for regional peace and mutual cooperation.

