Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to thank
you very much, Sir, and the delegation of Morocco
for organizing this timely and necessary debate. I
would also like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Abou Moussa for his very
comprehensive briefing.

As was reaffirmed during the briefing of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) continues to pose a
serious threat to civilians in four affected countries,
in particular in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Central African Republic, countries where the
LRA continues to perpetrate brutal attacks against
the civil population, causing death and abductions
and spreading fear, which has led, so far, to more than
443,000 displaced people in LRA-affected areas.

Portugal reiterates its strong condemnation of the
continued violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law by the LRA, in particular those
against women and children, including the recruitment
and use of children, killing and maiming, rape, sexual
violence and abductions. We firmly demand that the
LRA cease those practices, release all abductees,
disarm, demobilize and surrender. We also encourage
all States to cooperate in implementing the arrest
warrants of the International Criminal Court against
Joseph Kony, Okot Odhiambo and Dominic Ongwen in
order to bring them to justice.

Portugal commends the efforts that international
and local organizations have been undertaking to
provide humanitarian assistance to the civilian
population in LRA-affected areas. However, we are
deeply concerned by the fact that LRA attacks continue
to impede humanitarian access to displaced persons
and host communities, and we therefore reaffirm the
need for all parties to promote safe and unhindered
access for humanitarian organizations to the civilian
population.

The international community is at a critical
juncture with regard to the LRA problem. It is critical
that, under the guidance of the United Nations and in
coordination with the African Union (AU) and the LRA-
affected countries, efforts be intensified to remove the
threat posed by that armed group and build upon the
institutional progress achieved over the past two years.

Portugal affirms its support for the United Nations
Regional Strategy on the LRA and welcomes the current
and future efforts in the five identified areas. In that
regard and with a view to fulfilling the strategic goals
set forth in that document, we encourage the Secretariat
to pursue its ongoing efforts to draw up a prioritized and
sequenced implementation plan to support the Strategy.

With respect to the first objective of the Strategy,
we welcome the steps already taken by the four
affected countries to operationalize the AU Regional
Cooperation Initiative, especially the Regional Task
Force, which remains instrumental for ending the LRA
threat. In that context, we encourage the Governments
of the affected countries to fulfil their commitments
under the AU Regional Cooperation Initiative and
strengthen their political and technical coordination
under the auspices of the African Union and its Special
Envoy, Francisco Madeira, so as to swiftly agree on a
concept of operations for the Regional Task Force.

While noting that the affected States have
the primary responsibility to protect civilians, we
encourage the various United Nations bodies, especially
the peacekeeping missions concerned, to continue to
enhance coordination in that regard among themselves,
as well as with the other relevant international and
regional actors, in the fields of technical coordination,
information-sharing and joint planning. In parallel,
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and
reintegration initiatives, including those developed by
the local civil society, must be robustly pursued and
supported by the international community.

Let me now turn to the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), whose work is
of great importance for enhancing United Nations
engagement in efforts to achieve peace and security
in Central Africa, in close coordination with the
relevant regional and subregional organizations and
United Nations bodies, not only regarding the LRA
threat, but also with regard to other crucial challenges,
including security and terrorism, the fight against drug
trafficking, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and the illicit
flows of arms and fighters. We deplore the growing
threats to the personal security of some United Nations
personnel in Central Africa, and strongly condemn the
fact that some of them were recently attacked and killed
while carrying out their duties.
Let me conclude by referring to UNOCA. We
reiterate our strong support for its innovative efforts,
specifically those addressedto preventing the emergence
of new conflicts, resolving existing ones by peaceful
means and promoting democratic and accountable
governance in the Central Africa subregion.

Let me briefly refer to the LRA, which is a topic
to which my country attached the utmost importance
during our current mandate on the Security Council.
I would like to underline once again the need for the
Council to remain closely engaged on this issue. In that
regard, we firmly support the adoption of a Security
Council presidential statement on the LRA as soon as
possible. Portugal will continue to spare no effort to
continue to mobilize the international community and
to improve the United Nations response to that scourge.

