Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Alexander Zouev and
Ambassador Irina Schoulgin Nyoni for their very
informative briefings. I also thank Mr. Chid Liberty
for his valuable remarks on the essential role of civil
society in Liberia.

We meet today at a significant moment for the
Government and the people of Liberia. The United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) completed its
mandate on 30 March after almost 15 years of service.
Fifteen years ago, Liberia was a completely failed
State. Half of the population was forcibly displaced.
Many citizens were victims of human rights violations.
Despite that very low starting point, Liberia has gone
through a remarkable journey of transformation, with
the assistance of UNMIL. It is currently on the edge
of a new era of greater inclusiveness and the equal
participation of all Liberian citizens in the political and
economic life of the country.

The inauguration of President George Weah was a
milestone on the path ofthe post-conflict transformation
of the oldest republic in Africa. Poland congratulates
the people of Liberia and their political leaders on the
progress they have made in restoring peace and on
their persistent resolve to remain peaceful throughout
the electoral process. We also commend the National
Elections Commission and the Supreme Court, which
ensured the credibility of that process.

We welcome the essential role played by civil
society in restoring peace in Liberia. Religious and
traditional leaders, representatives of women's and
young people's groups, as well as election observer
groups and the media, have made significant
contributions to maintaining a transparent and peaceful
electoral process.

Liberia is still facing many challenges, including a
dire economic situation, limited progress in addressing
the root causes of conflict, and structural inequalities.
It will be important to enhance accountable governance
and build the democratic foundations of the nation.
We therefore welcome the leadership shown by
President Weah and his commitment to fighting
corruption, promoting good governance and taking
national reconciliation forward, as well as advancing
constitutional reform and decentralization. We also
appreciate the Liberian authorities' efforts to give
priority to the Sustainable Development Goals in the
country's national development plan, which will help to
sustain peace and lay a foundation for sustainable and
inclusive development.

Despite the closure of the peacekeeping operation,
the United Nations should remain closely engaged in
supporting Liberia in its efforts to meet its challenges
to sustaining peace and achieving sustainable
development. It is our obligation to preserve UNMIL's
gains and achievements and support dialogue on the
challenges the country still faces.

Finally, we would like to express our appreciation to
UNMIL for restoring and sustaining peace in Liberia.
We thank Special Representative Farid Zarif for his
excellent leadership. We also thank his predecessors
who contributed to the achievement of UNMIL's
mandate. And we pay tribute to the 202 United Nations
peacekeepers who paid the ultimate price in the pursuit
of peace in Liberia. As we can see today, their sacrifice
was not in vain but has brought back hope and peace to
the people of Liberia.

