Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
detailed briefing. We also welcome the participation of
the Permanent Representatives of Israel and of Lebanon
in today's meeting.

At the outset, we would like to point out that the
Russian Federation has historically maintained friendly,
constructive and mutually respectful relations with both
Lebanon and Israel. We therefore support both States'
right to peaceful development without challenges to
their national security or violations of their sovereignty.
That is why we firmly believe that maintaining a calm
environment on the line of separation between Lebanon
and Israel is essential not only to preventing any
escalation in the area, but for ensuring stability more
broadly. One of our most exemplary missions is deployed
along the Blue Line, the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL), whose peacekeepers are serving
in difficult circumstances, considering the general
security crisis in the Middle East. Russia has remained
in close contact with both the Lebanese and the Israelis,
as well as the United Nations personnel, including with
regard to the events currently taking place. With regard
to the situation that has developed around the discovery
of these tunnels, whose existence UNIFIL confirmed
in the past few days, we would chiefly like to focus on
the following points.

While we understand everyone's alarm, for the sake
of stability we believe that all the parties should refrain
from emotional polemics. Right now, it is critical that the
parties immediately engage in constructive, professional
dialogue aimed at eliminating controversial points. In
the Israeli-Lebanon context there are opportunities for
that. The existing tripartite mechanism in Naqoura for
preventing and resolving incidents works well.

We have also taken into consideration UNIFIL's
preliminary conclusions about the violation of
resolution 1701 (2006). Our view is that all violations
of the resolution's provisions must cease, on both sides.
That means all of them. We cannot have a selective
approach to the resolution's implementation. With
regard to the Israeli military's launch of its Operation
Northern Shield, we naturally recognize Israel's right to
defend its national security, including by preventing any
illegal penetration of its territory by anyone. However,
we hope that the action undertaken in that regard will
not run counter to the provisions of resolution 1701
(2006) defining the rules of conduct ofthe parties in the
area of the Blue Line, which is not an internationally
recognized boundary. The commitments relating to it
are mutually binding only between the two parties.

We welcome the clear messages from the leadership
of both the States involved signalling that they do not
intend to engage in direct confrontation. We heard a
similar message in the conversation between President
Vladimir Putin and Prime MinisterNetanyahu. President
Aoun, speaking for the Lebanese side, reaffirmed his
commitment to resolution 1701 (2006) and expressed
his willingness to take all necessary measures to
resolve the problem based on the clarification of all the
circumstances. We want to emphasize the importance
of seeing both parties display a sense of responsibility
and restraint and avoid provocative steps and abrasive
statements that might further exacerbate an already
tense situation in the Middle East.

Separately, we would like to focus on the fact that
the tunnel problem should not become a reason for
hasty conclusions about the functioning of UNIFIL.
The mission should not be subjected to politicized
aspirations that have little to do with improving its
effectiveness. Any efforts to undermine UNIFIL's
capacity would be unacceptable, considering that its
peacekeepers' work has a stabilizing effect not only
along the Blue Line separating Lebanon and Israel but
inside Lebanon itself and in the Middle East generally.
We want to emphasize that all disagreements that arise
either in the area of the Blue Line or with regard to the
agenda item for Lebanon should be addressed through
political dialogue and consultations, as every relevant
Security Council resolution makes clear. The fact is
that what is going on in this part of the Middle East is
the result of many years of conflicts, crises and wars.
Stabilizing the situation requires the cooperation of
the States concerned with a view to increasing trust
and relaunching international efforts to achieve a
comprehensive settlement in the Middle East.

