Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his comprehensive briefing and the efforts of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to reform
and improve United Nations peacekeeping operations.
I also thank the Ambassador of Bangladesh and the
Ambassador of Canada for their insightful briefings, as
well as the French presidency and the delegation of the
United Kingdom for holding this meeting, which is an
opportunity to harmonize United Nations peacekeeping
reform efforts.

Over the past two years, reform and review efforts
have focused on operational and technical aspects,
especially with regard to broadening the base of
troop- and police-contributing countries and force
generation. Those efforts have included developing
the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System and
holding the 2015 and 2016 Ministerial Meetings in New
York, London and Paris. It is now time for the Council
to ensure that those efforts take shape and are in line
with mandates. In that regard, I would like to make the
following three points.

First, Egypt believes that force-generation and
capacity is contingent upon effective trilateral
consultations among the Security Council, troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) and the Secretariat. Such
consultations contribute to a clear and comprehensive
vision for mandate design and review that takes
into account United Nations capabilities, political
developments and the situation on the ground at every
stage of conflicts, on a case-by-case basis. Such
consultations are particularly important when it comes
to adopting sequenced mandates - a welcome measure
that would ensure the effectiveness of missions, rather
than prolonging them for decades. That would allow
the Council to make realistic and actionable decisions
when renewing, reviewing and amending mandates.
In that regard, Egypt fully supports the efforts of the
United Kingdom and Pakistan.

Secondly, as part of peacekeeping reform,
significant efforts have been made to enhance training,
strengthen compliance with the command and control
chain and delegate authority to the field to make urgent
decisions, which, in many cases, directly impact the
effectiveness of missions and the reputation of the
United Nations. Force-generation and TCC expansion
must not come at the expense of performance
standards, equipment availability, training and strict
conduct and discipline standards, including combating
sexual exploitation and abuse. Performance assessment
must be based on clear parameters and peacekeeping
policies, in close consultation with TCCs.

The availability of training, capacity and equipment
and the protection and safety of civilians must go hand
in hand. Recent months have seen an increase in attacks

against contingents - for instance, in the Central
African Republic and Mali. Such incidents have served
to expose gaps in protection capabilities, including in
training, equipment, availability of information and risk
assessment. Those gaps must be urgently addressed to
enhance the credibility of peacekeeping operations and
protect personnel, who are the most important assets of
those operations.

Thirdly, with regard to capability gaps, I would like
to note that Egypt has provided specialized units to the
most difficult United Nations operations, as we pledged.
As part of our support to peacekeeping operations, we
have provided much-needed equipment to a number of
underequipped missions, including the provision of 100
armoured vehicles. In addition, we pledged an advanced
engineering unit as part of the rapid deployment force.
In addition, Egypt upholds the highest standards in the
training our military and police forces. We organize
specialized predeployment training, in particular on
sexual exploitation and abuse.

In line with United Nations training standards.
Egypt contributes to the training and capacity-building
ofnew TCCs. The Cairo Centre for Training in Conflict
Resolution and Peacekeeping in Africa hosts training
courses for candidates from African and other countries.
As part of our focus on training and readiness, Egypt
hosted the meeting of the International Association
of Peacekeeping Training Centres in September. The
meeting addressed future training needs holistically, in
the light of the latest developments in the peacekeeping
security field and the role of missions as part of an
approach that is based on a continuum of response.

In conclusion, in line with our continued support to
peacekeeping operations, we announced at the Security
Council, the General Assembly and in a formal letter
to the Secretariat, our willingness to host the 2018
Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial Meeting. We hope
the Meeting will pave the way for a qualitative shift
in our joint efforts to promote the credibility of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

