Sir Jeremy Greenstock: The Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) has been in operation for nine
months now. Over that period, it has focused on
reviewing the reports submitted by States on their
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). So far, the
CTC has received 160 reports from United Nations
Members and from four others. It has completed its
review of 127 of these and is working hard to finish
reviewing the remainder of the reports received.

The Committee is also following up with the 29
States that have not yet submitted a report. My letter to
the Council on this, which was circulated as document
S/2002/673, explained the way in which the CTC
planned to do this. Let me reiterate: the CTC and its
experts are ready to discuss the submission of a report
at any time with States that are having difficulty. I
encourage them to make contact with the CTC.

This achievement has been made by a team which
has become increasingly experienced by the day. I
should like to thank warmly the Vice-Chairmen -
Ambassadors Koonjul, Lavrov and Valdivieso - for
their professional leadership of the subcommittees; and
the whole membership of the CTC for their consistent
hard work and cooperation. I should like to thank our
team of experts, including those who have already
completed their tours, for getting to grips with the
substance so effectively. I should also like to thank the
CTC's secretariat for the support they have given the
CTC and its subcommittees.

The CTC's work programme for the fourth 90-
day period was issued as a recent document of the
Security Council. The CTC will focus in the coming
period on reviewing for a second time the
implementation of 1373 (2001) in the States that have
submitted a further report to the Committee. The States
concerned can expect a slightly different letter from the
CTC the second time around. We intend to set out more
clearly the gaps identified by our experts together with
recommendations about the action needed to improve
implementation of 1373 (2001). We will be looking to
many States to submit a third report to the Committee
setting out their response to these recommendations
and including a timetable for action.

We expect our experts to indicate, where
appropriate, how a State might benefit from technical
or other assistance. If so, the letter from the CTC will
indicate what assistance is a priority - and what might
be required in slower time - taking account of any
request for assistance presented by the State concerned.
The letters may make recommendations on which
providers could be contacted by the State concerned for
help.

The CTC also intends to be in close contact with
potential providers of assistance. Our team of experts
will act as a source of encouragement for the provision
of assistance in the areas covered by 1373 (2001). We
have asked them to inform providers about any trends
in the implementation gaps as this information emerges
through the review process, with a view to encouraging
providers to develop new programmes to meet these
needs. They will approach potential providers, with the
agreement of the State concerned, to encourage them to
react to the particular needs identified by the CTC.

Let me reiterate the Committee's agreed
approach: the CTC does not intend to declare any
Member State 100 per cent compliant with 1373
(2001). We believe that there may always be further
work to do to meet the objectives of the resolution
against a constantly evolving background. We intend to
move ahead more intensively with some than with
others, but we will want all States to remain in close
contact with the Committee and to inform it of any new
developments that are relevant to the implementation
ofresolution 1373 (2001).

In all of that, the CTC will proceed with the
transparency and openness that are by now, I hope, a
hallmark of our work. I will continue to brief the wider
membership of the United Nations on a regular basis
on the activities of the Committee. I, the Vice-
Chairmen and the experts are available to address the
concerns and questions of individual Member States or
of regional groups.

The CTC's outreach to international and regional
organizations has intensified since my last briefing to
the Council. I myself have visited the United Nations
Office in Vienna, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the European Union and the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization to discuss matters
covered by resolution 1373 (2001). The Bureau met
representatives of the Group of Eight in New York
earlier this month. The Committee's experts have
begun an intensive travel programme - visiting, for
instance, Abu Dhabi, for a conference on hawala;
Prague, for an OSCE seminar on terrorist financing;
Washington, for contacts with the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank; Paris, for a
meeting with the Financial Action Task Force on
Money Laundering; and other venues. Today one of our
experts is in Sofia for a regional meeting of the
countries of South-Eastern Europe.

Our message to those regional players is four-
fold. They must be determined in dealing with
terrorism, and must develop permanent mechanisms for
doing so in accordance with their respective mandates.
They should use those forums to get together to talk
about counter-terrorism on a regional level, because no
State is secure from this threat if its neighbour is a
backmarker. Many regional organizations are well
placed to facilitate the sharing of expertise and best
practices within a region, where a common culture and
history often makes the transfer of expertise easiest. I
would also hope that these organizations will develop
their own assistance programmes.

Let me try to set out what the CTC has achieved
in its first nine months. Our most important success to
date is to have directed very widespread attention to
the fact that resolution 1373 (2001) both exists and is a
powerful resolution. A broad range of international
institutions and regional and subregional organizations
are now aware that there is a global structure for
countering terrorism, into which they would be well
advised to fit their activities. We have also contributed
by bringing out the connections between terrorism and
other forms of international organized crime. The CTC
is not a law-enforcement agency, nor is it working on
cases. So, in that sense, we do not have any operational
achievements in that sense to report. But we have a
strong interest in capacity-building. The fact that the
vast majority of Member States are now engaged with
us in that exercise and that all States recognize their
responsibility to follow up resolution 1373 (2001) is a
massive change from the situation that existed when
the Committee was formed.

There is a further indicator that demonstrates the
activity of the international community in this area, and
that is the ratifications of the 12 international
conventions and protocols relating to terrorism.
Ratifications have gone up by more than 15 per cent
since last July. There are now 14 countries which have
ratified all 12 conventions, when on 11 September
there were only two, Botswana and my own. The CTC
urges all States to continue to bring forward ratification
of these instruments. It is a requirement of resolution
1373 (2001), but it also is an indication that States are
beginning to build up the network of legislation they
need to be able to take effective action.

Let me end with an update of where we are with
practical support from the Secretariat. I am most
grateful to the Fifth Committee for allowing the
Secretariat flexibility in meeting the demands placed
by the Committee. I hope this will soon translate into
an immediate improvement in the speed of the
translation of documents and the servicing of meetings.
The United Nations membership as a whole has
confirmed time and again the priority it places on
action against terrorism and the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). I urge the Secretariat to reflect
that priority in the allocation of resources.

My next report to the Council will mark the year-
point since the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) and
the establishment of the CTC. The Vice-Chairmen,
other Committee members and I are determined to
ensure that the Committee's story at its first birthday is
one of the United Nations translating international
determination to deal with a global threat into effective
action encompassing all our Governments. The
Security Council should at that point have a well-
prepared debate about our objectives in this field in the
Committee's second year.

