Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Despite
the tragic circumstances in which this first meeting of
the Security Council under your presidency, Sir, is
being held, I should like to express my joy and pride at
seeing you, a worthy son of Africa, following another
worthy son of Africa at the helm of the Council.
I am convinced that the great professional and
human qualities that all of your colleagues recognize in
you will enable you to conduct the work of the Council
as brilliantly as did your predecessor, my brother
Ambassador Moctar Ouane of Mali - who has earned
our gratitude and admiration - during a particularly
busy month, when heads of State and Government
honoured us with their presence, including in this very
Chamber.

I thank you for the opportunity to participate in
these deliberations. I should like to make a few
comments concerning the way the Security Council
functions and its attitude towards deciding the
timeliness of convening or not convening a formal
meeting.

Increasingly, the consultations of the Council
have indeed been delayed and dragged out beyond
measure over the question of whether or not to meet in
public, even when a request for such a meeting has
been submitted by one or several regional groups; over
the principle of whether or not to involve non-members
of the Council; over the issue of whether or not to
limit, out of considerations that are not always well
founded, the right of certain countries to speak; and
even over the merit of calling on speakers to adopt a
particular tone in debates.

As if it were not enough that the Council's way of
doing business already causes sufficient problems and
that its methods already need revision and
improvement, attempts are now being made to restrict
access to it.

I wish to remind the Council that it is my
understanding and that of the States Members of this
Organization that it is the absolute right of any Member
State to call for a public meeting and that it is also the
absolute right of any State to speak in a debate and to
adopt the tone it deems appropriate.

For a number of States Members of this
Organization, and certainly for its weakest and
smallest, the United Nations remains the ultimate
forum in which they can, in all freedom and without
fear, express their opinions, their expectations and even
their frustrations and anger when the international
community is incapable of protecting women and
children from the deadly madness of men in the Middle
East, in Africa, Europe or elsewhere.

To restrict the right to speak and to prefer the
secrecy of consultations - which may occasionally
prove to be useful and necessary - to frank,
transparent and open debate is undemocratic and
contrary to the very principles of our Organization. If
this regrettable trend continues, we may one day find
ourselves reduced to contemplating the famous
statement of a French revolutionary: "All we have left
is the right to keep quiet and there has been talk of
stripping us of that". This situation only makes the
reform of the Security Council even more urgent.
Perhaps it is time for us seriously to tackle this
question.

For several days now the populations of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif and the occupied Palestinian territories have
been the objects of a repression the likes of which has
rarely been seen since the intifada. Children and
adolescents, armed only with their faith in the justice
of their cause, and having nothing to protect
themselves besides the pathetic means of defence that
nature offers them, are, in effect, facing an incredible
deployment of force involving tanks, missiles and
helicopter gunships.

The result of this obviously unfair
confrontation - can we really talk about a
confrontation? - is that scores of innocent people,
including very young children, including even today a
10-year-old child in the Gaza Strip - have been killed
in cold blood by bullets. Meanwhile, to fight their
murderers these young people have had only their fists
and their stones, and even the ambulances bearing the
flag of the Red Cross have been fired at.

Over these past days we have all witnessed this
barbaric behaviour of another age. We all saw live on
our television screens the unbearable sight of that 12-
year-old child who was cruelly killed despite the
supplications of his father and his father's vain
attempts to protect his son from the bullets of the
Israeli soldiers. What is still worse is that even the
ambulance worker who tried to help found himself
caught in the crossfire of the Israeli army and was
killed.

If these painful images that the cameras have
brought into each of our living rooms and that still
haunt us and will haunt us for ever, even in this
Chamber of the Security Council - if these images
can serve some purpose, it is to convince us that, on the
one hand, it is not acceptable that children are targeted,
and, on the other hand, that as a matter of urgency we
must do all we can to see to it that this shameful
butchery stops as soon as possible and that the civilian
population that has been the victim of the brutality of
the Israeli occupying forces is protected.

The acts that triggered the tragic developments
that have been occurring in Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the
occupied territories since last Friday are well known,
as are those who are responsible for it. We all know
that the originator of this terrible tragedy was the
commander who ordered the massacre of Sabra and
Shatila and the invasion and occupation of Lebanon.
We all also know that what he wished to achieve from
these acts of provocation - which led to the tragedy
that the people in the occupied Palestinian territories
are now undergoing - was to scuttle the peace process
and wreck for ever the chance of achieving a just and
final settlement of the Palestinian question. And we all
know that a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
cannot be achieved without the total, definitive
withdrawal of the Israeli forces from the territories that
have been occupied since 1967 and without the
restoration of the Palestinian people's national,
legitimate rights, including its right to create its own
independent State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital.

In this difficult time when Palestinian civilians
are victims of the brutality of the occupying forces, it
is important that the Security Council rise to its
responsibilities and fulfil its role and its mandate with
regard to the Palestinian people and international law.
In this connection, the Council must see to it that, as
soon as possible, a stop is put to the illegal actions that
the Israeli occupying Power is engaging in. In
particular, an end must be put to the use of real bullets
against a defenceless civilian population.

The Israeli security forces must also immediately
withdraw from the plaza of Al-Haram Al-Sharif and
allow the third holy place of Islam to regain its serenity
and tranquillity, and they must also must withdraw
from the Palestinian towns where they are deployed.
Finally, Israel, as the administering Power, must be put
on notice to respect the Fourth Geneva Convention and
to guarantee the security and protection of Palestinian
civilians.

These are our expectations - the expectations of
my country, Algeria, which has stood, continues to
stand and in the future will stand united with the
fraternal Palestinian people, and which believes firmly
that peace is the right strategy for the settlement of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. These are also, I am sure,
the expectations of the international community as a
whole, and the Security Council has no right to
disappoint it.

