Mr. Zhvania (Georgia): Allow me to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, and the other members of
the Security Council for the opportunity to address the
Council to share with members the latest developments
in Georgia and to discuss some of the most difficult
issues facing my nation, particularly in Abkhazia,
Georgia.

First of all, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his latest report on the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia (S/2004/315). Special thanks go
also to Mrs. Heidi Tagliavini, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, and to the entire staff of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG) for their tireless efforts to move the peace
process forward. I would also like to express our
gratitude to the Group of Friends of the Secretary-
General for all its efforts to bring us closer to a
resolution of the conflict in Abkhazia, Georgia.

Only a few short months ago, unprecedented and
remarkable events took place in Georgia. The free will
of the people brought back to the nation hope for a
better future. A new President and a new Parliament
were elected in elections that were considered to be the
fairest and the freest held since our independence. The
new Government is committed to the most serious of
reforms. The entire country is moving towards a
modern and democratic way of life.

I would like to highlight some of the changes and
achievements that have taken place in Georgia under
the new leadership, particularly as they relate to the
peace process in Abkhazia. Above all, I would like to
restate that Georgia is committed to the peaceful
resolution of the conflict in Abkhazia. Let me
underline that there is not a single member of the new
Government that advocates violence. The President and
my fellow members of the Government have been
making a concerted effort to rid the ranks of those
people. Let me reiterate: the path of violence is
unacceptable to the current leadership of Georgia. Only
through peaceful, negotiated means can we envision
resolution of the conflict.

We have begun to achieve considerable success in
realistically fighting corruption and organized crime in
our country, a task that some time ago seemed
unachievable. We have taken the fight to the criminals
all across Georgia, but I would like particularly to
highlight the actions taken in closer proximity to
Abkhazia.

We have disarmed and neutralized illegal armed
formations, which had no connection to either the
Government or internally displaced persons. We have
detained several criminal groupings that operated in
western Georgia, particularly in the regions of
Samegrelo and Svaneti - areas adjacent to Abkhazia:
groups that were involved in the kidnapping and
abduction of human beings and connected with the
kidnapping of UNOMIG personnel. We have
demonstrated that the Government of Georgia is
fighting criminals and illegal armed groups not just
with words, but with actions. We are committed to
bringing this fight to a successful end, and we are sure
that we will do so in the near future.

We regret that the investigation into the shooting
down of the UNOMIG helicopter is being carried out
only partially. Despite our and UNOMIG's countless
requests and despite the fact that the Russian
Federation is providing us with video material, the
Abkhaz leadership refuses to allow the investigation to
be carried out in the territory controlled by them; it
seems they have something to conceal.

Let me restate that we have begun a relentless
fight against anyone who chooses a criminal path. In
that context, I cannot but commend and support the
decision to introduce the civilian police component to
the Gali region. We consider that a wise decision and a
very positive trend. However, I also must note that the
Abkhaz authorities continue to obstruct the full
formation and deployment of the units, which
continues to create very significant problems for the
population in the Gali district. The Security Council
must strengthen its call on the separatists to comply
with this decision.

I believe it is also time to consider strengthening
UNOMIG's self-protective capacity. That initiative was
introduced in the past but, unfortunately, it has never
materialized.

All of the aforementioned is a testament to our
commitment to the peaceful resolution of the conflict.
Taking the path of peace is our most serious
commitment. We accept our responsibilities with a
renewed sense of commitment and purpose. We seek
better understanding with the Abkhaz people. We
encourage people-to-people contacts between the two
sides on all levels: between civil groups, non-
governmental organizations, young people, elderly
people, and so forth. We want to restore the bridge with
the Abkhaz people, which means restoring many small
human bridges between the two sides in the conflict.

To illustrate that point, I want to recall how
emotional I was to see a delegation of school children
from Abkhazia just three weeks ago in Tbilisi - and
images of them - on Georgian television, planting
trees with the President of Georgia in one of the central
parks in Tbilisi. It was indeed a touching moment for
the entire population of Georgia. We believe that those
trees will weave new branches of friendship and
greater confidence between the conflicting sides.

We are carefully watching and actively
participating in the Geneva process, and we place
much hope in its successful development. We value
that format and believe it can be of great benefit. At
the same time, improved bilateral relations with the
Russian Federation, with the participation of the
Abkhaz side, can bring us real progress. In that regard,
the third meeting, held in Geneva in February, was an
important step forward. Unfortunately, the Abkhaz side
refused to participate in the meeting. We believe that
decision was most alarming and unacceptable to all the
parties involved in resolving the conflict. We believe it
is high time for the Security Council and the entire
international community to pay more attention to the
unconstructive position of the separatists and to draw
the appropriate conclusions.

Here, I have to turn to the problem of the return
of refugees and internally displaced persons, which
was the subject of thorough discussion at the third
Geneva meeting. We welcome the advancement of this
problem to the front line of the peace process. This
most painful problem is not just about isolated
principles or concepts, but rather about the fate of the
hundreds of thousands of men, women and children
who fell victim to the ethnic cleansing perpetrated by
the separatist regime years ago, people who, for more
than a decade, have been deprived of their most basic
human rights: to live in their own homes, to speak and
to raise their children in their native language, and to
pursue happiness in secure and dignified conditions.
As we continue to deliberate on the fate of those
people, they continue to vanish and to fall victim to the
injustice of the few. That cannot go on forever.

Two days ago another meeting on this issue was
held in Moscow and, unfortunately, was also
unsuccessful. Once again, despite the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, and the active participation of the
Russian side, the unconstructive position of the
Abkhaz side made it impossible to adopt a document
on mechanisms of the return of internally displaced
persons: the so-called letter of intent. I call again on
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the Group of Friends and the Russian Federation, as
facilitator, to increase their efforts tenfold to reach a
just solution, to give these people the right to return
home and to live in a dignified, secure environment.

I would like to make special mention of new
relations with the Russian Federation. Members are
well aware that that relationship during past years was
not always paved with roses. For years, the relationship
between us was strained, above all by the stalemate
over the Abkhazia issue.

Today the situation is qualitatively different.
Georgia has new leadership, which has taken
unprecedented steps to improve relations between our
two States. President Saakashvili's first order of
business was to visit Moscow and meet with President
Putin. At that meeting, the President of Georgia
extended the hand of friendship to the President of the
Russian Federation, and that handshake was truly
accepted by President Putin.

I would like to state that in a number of areas
the results were instantaneous; the destructive rhetoric
in the mass media was halted. Georgia is no longer
viewed as a State with an enemy posture. Furthermore,
Georgian and Russian border guards have reached an
agreement on joint patrolling of the common border.
Many such examples can be found. Similar processes
remain ahead with regard to the conflict in Abkhazia.
In that connection, we still have serious problems and
the key to their solution lies in the good will of all of
us and of the Russian authorities.

The most important issue in this regard is the
problem of the political status of Abkhazia, Georgia.
Three years have elapsed since the Group of Friends
agreed on and supported the Boden document on the
distribution of constitutional competencies between
Tbilisi and Sukhumi. The Russian Federation, as the
special facilitator, has been trying to transmit the paper
to the Abkhaz side, but to little avail. We still hope
that, with the increased and more persistent
involvement of our Russian colleagues, we will be able
to begin meaningful deliberations on the political
status of Abkhazia based on the aforementioned
document.

President Putin's election to a second term was
very important for us and we are sure that we are
indeed entering a new phase in our bilateral relations.
Both countries now realize how many common
interests and concerns they have in our region, and I
am sure that both will benefit greatly from this new
dialogue.

We hope that this new dialogue with the
Russian Federation will facilitate our efforts to reach a
fair, just and comprehensive resolution of the Abkhazia
conflict. The problem of separatism is as painful for
Georgia as it is for the Russian Federation. Separatism,
ethnic cleansing and terrorism are evils that all of us,
collectively, have to combat.

Let me, in closing, reiterate that Georgia has a
new leadership whose main goal is to restore the
territorial integrity of the State and to achieve that goal
only through peaceful means. We are ready to buttress
our statements with actions. We have already done so.
We have taken substantial steps to improve bilateral
relations with the Russian Federation. We assume our
responsibilities with a new sense of purpose and
determination, including our relationship with
international organizations and particularly the United
Nations. We welcome all attempts aimed at improving
relations with the Abkhaz side, but, at the same time,
we cannot allow the separatists to continue to hold the
peace process hostage.

At this time in our history, we look to the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, to respond to the new realities in my country
and to reinvigorate their efforts to reach a
comprehensive, peaceful resolution to the conflict.

