Ms. Wronecka (Poland): We appreciate the idea of
holding this open debate, which will certainly contribute
to the improvement of our efficiency in ensuring
peace and security in Africa through United Nations
peacekeeping operations. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General and African Union Commissioner
Chergui for their informative and helpful briefings.

Please allow me to begin by saying how much
our thoughts are with the families and friends of the
Malawian and Tanzanian Blue Helmets who perished as
they were carrying out their duties in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. On behalf of Poland, let me
convey our most sincere condolences to their families
and friends and to the Governments of Malawi and
Tanzania. We condemn in the strongest terms all acts
of violence targeting United Nations peacekeepers.

As the Secretary-General stated when addressing
the African Union Peace and Security Council in
Addis Ababa in July, the African Union is the most
important strategic partner of the United Nations in the
realm of peace and security, development and human
rights. In that context, let me use this opportunity to
encourage the African Union and the United Nations
to continue strengthening cooperation, based on shared
respect for international law and human rights, as well
as comparative advantages. We also recognize the
role of subregional organizations, which can uniquely
contribute to early-warning mechanisms. Their
role is also crucial in the promotion of dialogue and
reconciliation, as well as good governance principles.
As a strong advocate ofinternational law principles, we
welcome the development of a compliance framework
for international humanitarian law, human rights
and the conduct and discipline for African Union
peace support operations. We strongly encourage the
Secretariat to continue its close cooperation with the
African Union Commission to enhance prevention
activities and the response to sexual exploitation and
abuse, as well as pursue important initiatives on training
standards for the integrated protection of civilians.
That should also be strengthened by multiple efforts
that would allow peacekeeping personnel to identify
and implement the rules and standards of international
law, especially with regard to child protection and
specific protection measures for women in the context
of peacekeeping operations.

Every day, as Security Council members, we are
challenged by serious threats that are of a transboundary
nature. In that regard, I would like to draw the Council's
attention to the concept of inter-mission cooperation,
which helps to better tackle regional threats. One
might want to consider streamlining certain procedures
and budgetary arrangements to enable more efficient
practical and economic cooperation. Numerous
benefits from such a complex and holistic approach
include a more productive use of human, financial
and equipment assets. Let us increase cooperation
among United Nations peacekeeping missions and
transfer inter-mission cooperation experiences and best
practices from Africa to other regions of the world.
That should inspire analysts and decision-makers to
adopt a regional perspective during the peacekeeping
mission planning process.

Let me also underline the issue of national
ownership of the political process, which is the key
element to successful United Nations engagement
and the achievement of the desired end state. It
has significant impact on the effectiveness and
performance of a mission as well as on the security of
our peacekeepers. We should therefore continuously
monitor the fulfilment of the mandate of each mission,
any infringement of the status of forces agreement and
possible risks and challenges resulting from changes in
the political situation.

Let me reiterate that peace and security in Africa
can be achieved only by comprehensive engagement
by regional organizations. As the role of the African
Union has already been mentioned, I would also like
to underline the commitment of the European Union in
that regard. For instance, the strong contribution of the
European Union was visible during the July elections
in Mali, and in the Sahel region in general, where the
European Union provided financing for the Group of
Five for the Sahel and supported the African Union
Mission in Somalia.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing that
the aim of political settlement should remain central
to peacekeeping missions in Africa. We must work
together to find the best possible solutions to help
African countries build sustainable peace, while
allowing all segments of society to be included and
empowered, with special attention paid to children,
women, and the elderly.

