Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): I would like to join the
other delegations in thanking Mr. Guehenno, Ms.
McAskie and Mr. Fall for their valuable briefings,
which cover various aspects of the situation in the
region and give us a comprehensive analysis of the
crisis in West Africa.

We have given careful consideration to the report
of the Inter-Agency Mission to West Africa and the
recommendations contained therein, which, in our
view, represent a constructive plan of action for the
United Nations system towards developing a
comprehensive approach to durable and sustainable
solutions for priority needs and challenges of the
region.

The recent Inter-Agency Mission to West Africa
clearly demonstrated that the multidimensional nature
of the crisis in the region demands effective
coordination and partnership among the United Nations
family, the regional organizations and the other
relevant stakeholders. We therefore welcome the
submission of the report of the Mission to the
Economic and Social Council and its communication to
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
the World Bank, the European Union and other major
multilateral and bilateral partners.

My delegation took careful note of the
recommendations of the Mission, in particular those
falling within the primary competence of the Security
Council concerning peace and security in West Africa.
I would like to make a few comments on the specific
issues within this area.

We agree with the conclusion that resolution of
the conflicts in the Mano River Union area is crucial in
any approach aimed at addressing priority needs and
challenges in the subregion.

Members may recall that upon return from its
visit to West Africa, the Security Council Mission
made it very clear there is an urgent need to develop a
comprehensive, coordinated strategy for Sierra Leone.
This report reaffirms the importance of a two-track
approach to the resolution of the Sierra Leone conflict,
promoting both military deterrence and political
dialogue between the parties to the Abuja Agreement.
My country, as it participates in the United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Sierra Leone, will continue
to support this strategy.

We believe that some specific recommendations
concerning the resolution of the conflict along the
borders of the Mano River Union countries and the
expanded role of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) should be further studied by the
appropriate departments of the Secretariat. Such an
analysis would be particularly useful for the Security
Council to act in the most effective way.

We maintain that, in light of the nature of the
deteriorating political, security and humanitarian crisis
in the region, it is imperative that a solution to the
situation in the subregion should be sought by the three
leaders of the Mano River Union countries without
further delay.

The report raises a number of issues concerning
conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peace-building,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and
implementation of sanctions, which together with the
problems of governance and human rights,
humanitarian assistance for the refugees, as well as
economic development and regional integration, will
constitute important elements of a subregional
approach to the problems faced by West Africa.

We are of the view that, in line with the efforts to
develop a comprehensive subregional strategy, there
should be in place an effective coordination mechanism
in the region to implement it. We support the idea of
establishing a United Nations office for West Africa as
a welcome step towards intensifying collaboration of
the United Nations system activities with those of
ECOWAS and other subregional and relevant
organizations. We entirely agree with the analysis of
the Mission that a prime factor in addressing priority
needs and challenges of West Africa is effective
subregional integration in the political, security,
economic and social spheres where ECOWAS has a
central role to play.

It is also important for the international
community to support and assist ECOWAS activities
and initiatives, in particular those related to capacity-
building measures for the ECOWAS secretariat, and for
promoting mechanisms of early warning and conflict-
prevention, as well as law, judiciary and human rights
issues and regional economic integration.

In conclusion, we hope that today's very broad
discussion with the family of United Nations organs
and agencies, relevant institutions and Member States
will be a step forward to the successful implementation
of a fully integrated and broad-based subregional
approach aimed at addressing the multifaceted
problems confronting the region and promoting durable
peace and sustainable development in West Africa.

