Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala has the honour to chair the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals. Perhaps that explains
why we have the privilege of being the first to intervene
in this debate, a debate that we would have liked to have
been more open to other States Members of the United
Nations.

I would like to begin my statement by thanking the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
for their respective reports (S/2013/308 and S/2013/310)
as well as for the report on the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (S/2013/309).

My delegation would like to recognize the huge
commitment demonstrated by the staff of both
Tribunals to the goals laid out in the completion
strategies. In that spirit, we welcome the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 827 (1993),
through which the Security Council unanimously
established the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. That historic resolution gave clear
expression to the commitment of the Council to the rule
oflaw and the fight against impunity.

Twenty years after the establishment of this
Tribunal, we recognize its considerable success and
progress in developing its international jurisprudence
and in providing justice to victims by apprehending all
fugitives, by trying individuals who hear the greatest
responsibility for serious violations of human rights,
irrespective of their rank. The Tribunal has contributed
to strengthening national systems, working closely
with local authorities.

Regarding the ICTR, we take note of the forecasts
asserting that almost all trials will conclude within
the established deadline. However, we are concerned
that nine persons continue to be fugitives from justice.
We would recall the mandatory character of Security
Council decisions and the requirement that States
cooperate. The ICTR will be able to complete its work
successfully only ifit receives the effective cooperation
of all States.

Likewise, as the closure of the Tribunal approaches,
we are concerned about the human rights situation of
those acquitted or who have served their sentence but
have not been relocated. We support the recent strategic
plan prepared by the ICTR for the relocation of those
individuals. We are studying recommendations to
find the most efficient way to implement them. In that
respect, we would urge States to cooperate with the
Tribunal and provide it with all necessary assistance
to support its strategic plan for relocating those
individuals. As is well known, the Tribunals are still
having considerable difficulties in concluding their
mandates, and we recognize the need to show flexibility
in case assignments and the setting of dates for appeals
and trials.

More generally, we welcome the fact that both
Tribunals are continuing to take all possible measures
to conduct their proceedings swiftly, fully respecting
due-process guarantees. We remain concerned about
the reports from both Tribunals concerning their
difficulties in retaining staff, which is a key obstacle
to the timely achievement of the goals and strategies.
This is why we support the proposals of the President
of the ICTY aimed at achieving the objectives of the
completion strategy.

The work of both Tribunals is at a crucial stage,
at which they are attempting to effectively conclude
their cases while carrying out their outstanding tasks
in connection with the Residual Mechanism. The
Mechanism will guarantee that there are no gaps in
the fight against impunity, given the large number of
ongoing functions that must remain after the closure of
the Tribunal.

We welcome the fact that both Tribunals have been
working together to ensure a gradual and effective
transition towards the Residual Mechanism. We note
the progress made in connection with the Mechanism
and welcome the process under way whereby by 1 July
the new branch of the ICTY mechanism will begin its
work.

In conclusion, we would like to express our national
position to the effect that the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals is in an optimum position,
given its technical composition and its flexible
mandate, to address additional issues related to
international criminal justice, such as matters related
to the International Criminal Court on the agenda of the
Security Council.

