Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Allow me to say, quite
frankly, that we do not feel that what has happened
today in this Chamber has been very dignifying for
the Council - the organ of the United Nations with
great responsibility, the primary responsibility for
international peace and security. That is perhaps a
signature of the times we are in. We know that the way
by which the international community will succeed in
controling chemical weapons and eliminating their use
is for countries such as the United States and Russia
to work together to ensure that that noble objective is
achieved. There is no other way.

Frankly speaking, the issue has become so
politicized that it seems it is becoming extremely
difficult to focus on the real problem. Incidentally, we
have always felt that the situation in Syria - not only
on this issue, but on others as well - has always been
politicized. In our view, it is not wise to blame this or
that State for the logjam that we are in. All the problems
we are facing appear to be the result ofa lack, of failure
to focus on the major issue, which is a common danger
and a reflection of a much more complex issue that we
are currently facing.

Allow me to explain why we decided to vote in
favour of the draft resolution (S/2017/962). First of
all, we are very keen to contribute to the renewal of
the mandate of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM). We believe that it is and will
continue to be useful. Sweden has explained why, and I
do not want to repeat what was said.

Secondly, we had some doubts about whether it was

time for the JIM. to draw the conclusion it made in its
seventh report (S/2017/904, annex). With regard to that
issue, the United States showed sufficient flexibility,
for which we were very grateful. There was therefore
no reason for us not to support the American draft
resolution, all the more so because that country was
ready to engage with us and accept amendments, which
we appreciate.

However, we are again in a stalemate, a logjam.
The future of the JIM. is in the balance. We only have
one day to save it. We are hopeful that we will come to
some consensus to ensure that the JIM. will exist beyond
tomorrow, for which we need the support of everybody.
We hope that a technical rollover is something that we
could consider. We do not believe that we have come to
the end of the road; we disagree with that contention by
the United Kingdom. We can still proceed and achieve
something meaningful to ensure that the life of the JIM
is protected and assured.

