Mr. Ndiaye (spoke in French): I would first of
all like to thank you, Mr. President, for allowing me
to take the floor this morning to present the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Central African Republic (8/2019/822) in the run-up
to the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), which, as
the Council is aware, will expire in a few days' time.

First, let us for a moment turn our thoughts to the
Blue Helmets - 10 military officers and one police
officer - and the three civilian staff members who lost
their lives this year in the line of duty in the Central
African Republic. Their contribution in the service of
peace in that country, at the cost oftheir own lives, will
never be forgotten.

Over the past year, MINUSCA has worked to
implement the complex, multifaceted mandate that
the Security Council entrusted to it in its resolution
2448 (2018), of December 2018, paying, as always,
particular attention to the protection of civilians, the
restoration of State authority, the promotion of human
rights andjustice, and good offices in the context of the
peace process.

As the Council is aware, 2019 began with hope for a
new era for the people of the Central African Republic
through the Khartoum negotiations conducted under
the auspices of the African Union (AU) and with the
support of the United Nations and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), which
led to the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic
on 6 February in Bangui. Beyond the implementation
of our mandate, support for the implementation of
the agreement has involved a great deal of effort on
the part of MINUSCA, working hand in hand with
the Government and with the guarantors, the African
Union and ECCAS.

Since my most recent briefing to the Council in
June (see S/PV.8558), the process of implementing the
agreement has seen progress and faced challenges,
which I would very briefly like to share with the
Council so as to inform its deliberations on the renewal
of MINUSCA's mandate.

Concerning the progress made, the monitoring
mechanisms that exist at the national and local levels
are now largely operational. These mechanisms have
helped to avert or contain crises at the level of the
prefectures and sub-prefectures. In Bossangoa, for
instance, the meetings of the prefectural implementation
committee allowed for Muslim residents to return
to the town, and they can now move around freely
for the first time since the tragic events of 2013. The
first joint security unit, one of the key elements of the
agreement's implementation, was officially launched
by the President, Faustin Archange Touadera, in Bouar,
in the north-western part of the country, on 16 October.
The Government plans to launch similar units in the
north-eastern and south-eastern parts of the country
as soon as possible, which will help to keep the armed
groups engaged in the peace agreement.

National disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration efforts have also continued in recent
months, bringing to 583 the number of fighters who
have been disarmed and demobilized since December
2018. But the reluctance of the Retour, reclamation et
rehabilitation (3R) armed group to participate in this
process represents a major challenge that delayed the
launch of the first joint security unit. I am pleased,
however, that the robust posture adopted by MINUSCA
has helped to slow the repeated violations of the
agreement by 3R and helped to compel its leader, Sidiki,
to be more cooperative.

Additional progress has been made in the area
of justice and reconciliation. National consultations
on the law on the creation of the future justice,
reconciliation and reparations commission, launched
on 6 June, are continuing in several cities in the country
with the support of MINUSCA. These participative
consultations are also contributing to the process of
national reconciliation. The inclusive commission that
was established to analyse the causes of the conflict
and to propose judicial measures is continuing to
gather information across the country and is supposed
to present its report next month. However, these two
institutions alone will not be able to bring fulljustice to
the many victims of the conflict in the Central African
Republic. That is why MINUSCA is continuing its
tireless support of the activities of the Special Criminal
Court and to capacity-building for ordinary Central
African courts and the criminal justice chain in
its totality.

I would also like to underscore the work done by
MINUSCA, with the support of UN-Women and the
Peacebuilding Fund, to promote awareness of the peace
agreement across the country among civil society,
including women, young people and religious leaders.
This should automatically allow for better national
ownership of the peace agreement.

Progress has also been made in the development
sphere, where the implementation of the National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan has seen significant
headway with the disbursement of nearly $2.4 billion
on 1 October, bringing the financial delivery rate
to 67 per cent. Four hundred projects in various
socioeconomic sectors are under way, with the chief
objective of tangibly improving the living conditions of
the Central African people.

All that progress has been made possible by
the commitment of the Government, supported by
MINUSCA, and of guarantors and other partners.
Restoring State authority remains a collective
priority. Thus far, prefects have been designated
in all the country's 16 prefectures, as have 66 of the
71 sub-prefects, and the number of officials deployed in
the field has more than doubled as compared to 2015. In
addition, 1,346 members of the Central African Armed
Forces have been deployed across the national territory,
including in Kaga Bandoro, Bria and Birao, and 1,050
police officers and gendarmes have been deployed
in 15 prefectures, some of whom are co-located with
MINUSCA. Those redeployments, together with the
encouraging progress made in reforming the Central
African security apparatus, have, as the members know,
led the Council to ease the embargo and sanctions
regime on the Central African Republic.

We all know that, despite this progress, important
challenges remain, which, let us admit, seriously
hamper our collective efforts to stabilize the Central
African Republic. Violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law continue, although the
number of incidents, attacks against civilians, sexual
violence, restrictions on the freedom of movement and
kidnappings has been halved over the past year. I remain
particularly concerned by the tense situation prevailing
in the north-east of the country since July. Several
serious incidents sporadically opposed members of the
Mouvement des liberateurs centrafricains pour la justice
to members of the Front populaire pour la renaissance
de la Centrafrique in July, September and October.
The clashes between the two armed groups, which
signed the peace agreement, have produced dozens of
victims, mainly among combatants, and one civilian
victim. However, the number of displaced persons is
now considerable, more than 10,000, which is having a
significant socioeconomic, health and security impact,
particularly in Birao near the border with the Sudan.

MINUSCA, the African Union and the ECCAS, in
support of the Government, have mobilized to stop the
violence and prevent the conflict, which has already
taken on a regrettable ethnic character, from leading to
direct intercommunal clashes and spreading throughout
Vakaga prefecture, with an impact at the regional level.

I am also concerned about other challenges that
threaten our efforts, including the risks of violence in
connection with population movements, which will soon
begin with the arrival of the dry season, the persistence
of illegal taxation, the radicalization of some actors'
political discourse and, to a lesser extent, delays in
the adoption of certain bills provided for in the peace
agreement, including those on decentralization and the
status of former Heads of State. I take this opportunity
to reiterate the outcomes of the high-level meeting on
the Central African Republic held on the margins of
the General Assembly on 26 September, as well as of
the tripartite United Nations-AU-European Union (EU)
visit to Bangui from 4 to 7 October. I also urge the
signatories to redouble their efforts to implement all
the commitments made under the peace agreement. In
accordance with its mandate, MINUSCA will continue
to lend the signatories all its political and technical
support, but it will also not hesitate to assume all its
responsibilities, as demonstrated in Operation Anvil in
the west, and adopt a robust stance against those who
threaten the civilian population.

The context in which MINUSCA will be discharging
its next mandate will be dominated not only by continued
support for the implementation of the peace agreement
of 6 February but also by the preparation of the 2020 and
2021 presidential and legislative elections. I would like
to point out that resolution 2448 (2018) could not foresee
the extent of the logistical and technical means required
for the implementation of the peace agreement, which
was signed almost two months after the resolution was
adopted. Therefore, in addition to MINUSCA's good
offices and the many tasks that will be assigned to it, it
is essential that the Mission be provided with a mandate
and adequate resources to support the implementation
ofthe peace agreement, as the only path to lasting peace
in the Central African Republic.

Similarly, the elections in 2020 and 2021, like those
in 2015 and 2016, will mobilize a great deal ofenergy and
effort from the international community, as they will
enable the consolidation of democratic achievements
in the Central African Republic. The electoral calendar
published by the national electoral authority provides
for voter registration from January 2020, a first round
of coupled presidential and legislative elections on
27 December 2020 and a second round, if necessary,
on 14 February 2021. Local elections, which have not
been held since 1988, are scheduled for 21 November
2021. They should help to address the root causes of
the Central African crisis and strengthen democratic
governance and decentralization.

I am pleased that the Central African authorities
have already begun preparations for the elections. A
new electoral code was adopted in July by the National
Assembly and promulgated on 20 August by the
country's President. The Government has disbursed
just over $2 million for the financing of electoral
operations, in addition to the $17 million pledged by
the European Union and the $2 million pledged by the
United Nations Development Programme, out of a total
budget of approximately $41.8 million. Preparations
are also under way for electoral mapping, a prerequisite
for voter registration.

However, despite those encouraging steps, the
holding of elections on the scheduled dates remains
threatened by insufficient technical, financial and
human resources. The lack of financial resources,
the absence of an appropriate logistical mandate for
MINUSCA and the persistence of insecurity in various
places raise concerns among part of the Central African
political class about the feasibility of countrywide
elections within the deadlines provided for in the
Constitution. Indeed, a serious delay in holding the next
elections could create a vacuum at the highest echelon
of the State and lead to another political transition that
some political actors are strongly calling for but which
would, I am convinced, be harmful to the consolidation
of democracy, stability and peace in the Central
African Republic. It is important that the international
community band together to ensure that the elections
take place according to the planned timetable, in a free,
inclusive and fair manner throughout the country.

Accordingly, I request the Security Council,
as recommended by the Secretary-General in his
report, to endow MINUSCA with an appropriate
mandate so that the Mission can provide the necessary
technical, logistical, security and operational support
for the conduct of the elections within constitutional
deadlines. I also appeal to the generosity of all partners
and friends of the Central African Republic to make
contributions as soon as possible, as funds are lacking
to start the process.

(spoke in English)

Finally, allow me to conclude with a strong appeal
to the countries in the region, whose contribution to
the stability of the Central African Republic remains
crucial. The recent crisis in the north-east of the
country has shown again how essential it is for the
region to support the Central African Republic in its
efforts to achieve lasting peace and stability. In that
regard, I commend the Governments of the Central
African Republic, Cameroon and the Republic of
the Congo for the revival of their respective joint
commissions. I encourage sustained efforts aimed at
launching similar joint commissions with Chad and
the Sudan. I also welcome President Paul Kagame's
State visit to the Central African Republic last week,
which will enable the country to strengthen ties with
Rwanda. The Central African Republic needs all its
partners and friends in order to transform the dream
of peace, prosperity and development of millions of
Central Africans into a lasting reality. I know they can
also count on the unanimous and generous support of
the Security Council.

