Ms. Grignon (Kenya): I would like to commend
the Polish presidency for the manner in which it has
steered the work of the Council for the month of May.
We welcome the convening of this meeting, which
focuses on an important subject that has not been
given the centrality it deserves, and we are grateful
for the concept note (S/2018/417/Rev.l, annex). I would
also like to recognize and thank the briefers for their
statements this morning.

The delegation of Kenya aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

I reaffirm Kenya's commitment to the rule of law
and to the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, which guarantee the sovereign equality
of States and the peaceful resolution of disputes. I would
also like to reaffirm that international law is essential
in addressing the challenges to peace and security on
the global agenda.
My delegation proposes four measures that the
Security Council could take to strengthen and uphold
international law.

First, on the guarantee of equality of States in the
application of international law, my delegation wishes
to emphasize that in order to strengthen respect for and
acceptance of international obligations critical to the
maintenance of international peace and security, there
should be fairness, uniformity and consistency in the
application of international law by the Council.

International law is a product of political
interactions between States. Member States should
not allow individual political interests to override the
collective commitments to international solidarity,
peace and security. A politically skewed application
of international law erodes the foundations of a rules-
based international system and multilateralism and
brings into question the credibility of the Council.

The application of international human rights law
and international humanitarian law must also be equally
regulated within acceptable norms. The alternative has
proved to be an even greater threat to international
peace and security as compared to the traditional
drivers of conflict.

We are seeing violations at the international level
under the cloak of the maintenance of international
peace and security. A reformed Security Council would
ensure that the Council is a master of its own mandate.
Kenya is an active participant in the African Union
Committee of Ten Heads of State and Government,
aimed at spearheading the security reform process,
because we believe that the Security Council should
be inclusive.

Secondly, with regard to respect for national
ownership, the Council, in maintaining international
peace and security, could better uphold international
law without undermining national ownership and
sovereignty. The actions and interventions of the Council
should support national efforts in political, legislative,
judicial and institutional reform programmes, including
national healing and reconciliation aimed at upholding
international law. This is particularly important for
delicate reform processes and politically sensitive
transitions in conflict-affected countries or in countries
emerging from conflict.
The Council should strive to find the right balance
on how to offer support for national efforts while
addressing impunity and violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian
law. Strengthened national legal and institutional
frameworks are preventive tools that can enhance
national ownership and sovereignty and allow
countries to exercise their respective sovereign right
and responsibility to guarantee justice, peace, security
and development for their own citizens. The principle
of complementarity should always be upheld and given
first priority. We should invest more in efforts to
promote the peaceful settlement of disputes.

We recognize the value added by international
jurisprudence platforms, in particular the International
Court of Justice, which has proven its important role in
settling disputes between States. However, the Council
has referred parties to the Court only once, in 1947. The
Council should look into ways on how to objectively use
that platform, given the increasing inter-State tensions
we face, with their tragic implications for regional and
international peace and security.

The process of upholding international law should
be more sensitive and objective, especially in connection
with national realities on the ground. Unilateral
economic sanctions should not be applied in situations
where they are counterproductive or contradictory to
continued support for sustainable peace and sustainable
development, specifically the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

My third point concerns partnerships. The
Security Council should pay closer attention to the
regional dimension of peace processes. The Council
is a meaningful partner of regional and subregional
mediation mechanisms. That partnership needs to be
strengthened, because regional and national actors are
usually the immediate responders in averting situations
that could easily escalate into critical conflicts. The
Council therefore should trust more, for example,
in Africa's ability to understand its realities, and
especially its ability to act in the best interests of its
peoples and countries.

Partnership with regional and subregional
organizations can ensure that the Council is part of
a multilateral mechanism that ensures the peaceful
settlement of disputes everywhere. The Council may
wish to partner more robustly with other organs and
subsidiary bodies of the United Nations system,
including the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
so as to ensure that conflict prevention and the
sustainability of peace and development are upheld. In
particular, such partnership should create space for the
role of the General Assembly in international peace,
particularly when the efforts of the Security Council
fail to guarantee it, as has been the case on many
recent occasions.

Lastly, it has been 15 years since the Council held its
first thematic debate on the rule of law (see S/PV.4835).
Since then, there have been several debates, presidential
statements, reports of the Secretary-General and
resolutions that in various ways address the importance
of supporting and strengthening the rule of law and
justice as indispensable elements in conflict prevention
and the maintenance of international peace and
security. Additionally, conclusions have been drawn
regarding the importance of an integrated approach
and the coherence of political, security, development,
human rights and rule-of-law activities.

However, as the concept note rightly observes,
despite the strong positions and commitments expressed,
violations of international law and insufficient
implementation of Security Council resolutions persist,
with an adverse impact on international peace and
security. Member States should therefore support
the Council's efforts for the peaceful settlement of
disputes, in accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter,
in genuine partnership with the Council.

Kenya is a proud member of the community of
nations that has contributed immensely, despite its
limited resources, to the achievement ofpeace, security
and multilateralism. We remain committed to the
maintenance of international law to address current
global challenges and realities on the ground. To that
end, we expect genuine international cooperation
and partnerships.

