The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the Council
table.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/ 1996/834, which contains the text of
a letter dated 8 October 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered, in the
light of its resolution 1034 (1995) of 21 December
1995, the current situation with regard to the
investigation of violations of international
humanitarian law in the areas of Srebrenica, Zepa,
Banja Luka and Sanski Most as well as in the areas of
Glamoc, Ozren and elsewhere throughout the territory
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

"The Security Council recalls the report of the
Secretary-General of 27 November 1995 (S/ 1995/988).

 

"The Security Council expresses deep concern
about the very little progress achieved so far in these
investigations and strongly appeals to all the parties
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to make every effort to
identify the fate of the missing persons, both for
humanitarian and legal purposes.

"The Security Council is concerned that
endeavours by the relevant international authorities
to identify the fate of the missing by, inter alia,
carrying out exhumations has met with limited
success largely due to obstruction by Republika
Srpska. It notes with concern that the fate of only a
few hundred missing persons has been so far
established.

"The Security Council welcomes the recent
visit by the delegation from Republika Srpska to the
International Tribunal on former Yugoslavia in The
Hague and expresses hope that this visit marks a
turning point in relations between Republika Srpska
and the International Tribunal and will facilitate
cooperation with regard to investigations conducted
by personnel of the International Tribunal.

"The Security Council condemns all attempts to
obstruct the investigations or to destroy, alter,
conceal or damage any related evidence. The
Council stresses again the obligations of all the
parties to cooperate fully and unconditionally with
the relevant international authorities and among
themselves with respect to such investigations and
reminds the parties of their commitment under the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the Annexes thereto
(collectively the Peace Agreement S/1995/999, annex).

"The Security Council reaffirms that the
violations of international humanitarian law
throughout the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina
as described in resolution 1034 (1995) must be fully
and properly investigated. The Council reiterates that
all States and concerned parties have an obligation,
in accordance with resolution 827 (1993) of 25 May
1993, other relevant resolutions and the Peace
Agreement, to cooperate fully with the International
Tribunal and to comply without exception with
requests for assistance or orders issued by a trial
chamber. The Council expresses again its support for
the endeavours of the international agencies and
authorities involved in these investigations and
 

invites them to pursue and intensify their efforts. It
encourages Member States to continue to provide the
necessary financial and other support.

"The Security Council will continue to follow
this issue closely. It requests the Secretary-General to
keep it regularly informed on progress reached in the
investigation of the Violations of international

 

humanitarian law referred to in the report mentioned
above."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1996/41.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at I] am.

