The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Zerrougui, Special Envoy Whitaker, Deputy
Executive Director Brandt, Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous, Foreign Minister Asselborn and Sandra
Uwiringiyimana for speaking with us today and for
their tireless efforts on behalf of the world's children.

We have heard a lot of statistics measuring the
massive scale of this problem. They include 3 million
kids out of school in Syria and 9,000 children recruited
to fight in South Sudan. Many of my colleagues have
rightly spoken to the enduring big-picture problems we
have to address, such as sexual violence and attacks on
schools. Amid so many numbers and issues, it is easy
to forget that we are talking about a lot of individual
children - boys, girls and infants who suffer these
deplorable injustices. As the last speaker among the
Council members, I should like to tell three stories in
the hope of reminding us that, no matter how hard we
are working to protect children, we have to work harder.

An 18-year old woman from Mosul, in northern
Iraq, relayed in a whisper what happened after she
was abducted by armed men from the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). The fighters took her to a
village called Kocho, where they separated the men and
boys over 12 from the women, girls and younger boys.
This young woman, just 18, was forced to watch as the
fighters massacred the men and older boys. Then her
captors took her back to Mosul, where she said she was
held with more than 300 Yazidi girls and women. They
were locked up, two or three to a room. Every day, the
routine was the same; they were told to shower, and
then the men came to rape them. The young woman
had managed to hide a cell phone before the fighters
abducted her, and she called a family member from
captivity to tell her story. That was on 20 August, just a
few weeks ago. It is the last news we have of this young
woman.

Matthew, aged 16, was in math class in January
in Bentiu, South Sudan, when rebel fighters raided
his school. Matthew is an ethnic Nuer, as are most
inhabitants of his village. The armed men told Matthew,
one of some 300 students there, that the students were
being taken away to fight against the Government,
led by the rival Dinka group. Matthew did not want to
fight, but he was told that his family would be killed
if he refused. He gave in, and was taken for military
training. He learned how to march, find cover and
shoot. One night when he was sent to gather firewood,
he fled and eventually reached a United Nations camp,
where he told his story to Al-Jazeera. He is afraid that
fighters will catch him if he leaves the United Nations
site. "If they find me, they will kill me", he says.

Abu Ibrahim lost his wife and four of his children
when the Syrian regime struck his home in Ghouta
with a barrel bomb in April 2013. His only surviving
child - a 10-year-old boy - nearly died from shrapnel
wounds in his leg, head and chest. For eight months, a
desperate Abu Ibrahim carried his son from city to city
in Syria seeking medical help. In January, he finally
made it to Amman, where his son was treated. When I
met Abu Ibrahim in a refugee camp in June, his son's
physical wounds were healing, but the boy was still
deeply traumatized. He had not been to school in over
a year.

These are just three of the 23 places covered by
the report on children and armed conflict (S/2014/339),
where children have been the victims of violence. There
are many places - Pakistan, Palestine and Israel,
Nigeria, the Central African Republic, Afghanistan
and so many other countries. What is happening to the
18-year-old girl and other Yazidi captives in Iraq, to
Matthew in South Sudan and to Abu Ibrahim's children
is part of a disturbing pattern.

First, we are seeing the continuing rise of extremist
groups that are openly hostile to children's rights,
and particularly the rights of girls. Girls captured by
groups like Boko Haram and ISIL are being sold into
markets, given to fighters as so-called brides or kept
as sex slaves. Secondly, as others have noted, we have
a repeat offender problem. Thirty-one of the 59 armed
groups listed in the report have been named in the
report for the past five years and 11 of those persistent
perpetrators have been named in every single report
issued by the Secretary-General since the Office of the
Special Representative began issuing reports in 2002.

We have to do better in protecting kids. One key
step is condemning in a single, unified voice those
abuses. Resolution 7129 (2014), which was adopted
by the Council in March and condemns military use
of schools, is one example. The only battles fought in
schools should be battles over ideas. We also need to
try to work with all groups i State and non-State * to
set concrete, time-bound action plans to root out those
practices. That can be especially challenging with
non-State groups, but in 2013, nine non-State groups
issued public statements or command orders prohibiting
the use of child soldiers. Last month, the Free Syrian
Army sent a letter to the Council announcing it had
banned the use of child soldiers and pledging to punish
child recruiters.

As the persistent perpetrator problem makes clear,
global campaigns, action plans and trainings will
not do it alone. As Sandra told us today so movingly,
perpetrators have to be held accountable. Groups that
fail to change their behaviour must be hit where it hurts.
The United Nations can apply that pressure, of course.
So can individual countries. In 2008, the United States
passed the Child Soldier Prevention Act, which limits
United States military assistance to Governments that
recruit or use child soldiers.

Chad provides an example of how multilateral
pressure can bring about real change. Last year, a
chorus ofactors pressed Chad to address its child soldier
problem in the run-up to re-hatting its peacekeepers
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. Chad responded by
setting up child-protection units in its military,
conducting age verification reviews of its troops with
the United Nations and signing a presidential decree
making 18 the minimum recruitment age, among other
steps. As a result, Chad was taken off the list of abusive
parties in the Secretary-General's annual report. Now,
that does not mean that our work is finished, but real
progress has been made. Governments can change, and
when they do, so do the lives of kids.

We were all so moved today by Sandra's story. She
is a child, as she described it, born into war. She is a girl
driven from her school and her home, who witnessed
her relatives gunned down in cold blood in a refuge that
they thought was safe. But the most defining part of
Sandra's story is not the trembling, lO-year-old girl who
said that what she feared was her last prayer at the barrel
ofa gun. The defining feature is the young woman who,
with tremendous strength and determination, addressed
the United Nations today. A young woman who spoke
not of revenge, but ofjustice. A young woman who has
already done so much to assist children recovering from
experiences like hers and dedicated herself to changing
the world so fewer children endure such horrors.

To see Sandra today is to see the potential of all the
children out there whose destinies hang in the balance in
today's conflicts. There are so many ofthem - Sandras
held captive in Nigeria, Sandras suffering through
humanitarian blockades in Syria and Sandras fleeing
massacres in the Central African Republic. They are
children who, like Sandra, have a world to change. We
must do more to ensure that they can.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Pakistan.

