Mr. Mikec (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
thank Mexico's presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this open debate and for its dedicated work
on the issue of children and armed conflict. Croatia
would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm its
support for the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, and of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.

Croatia aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representative of the European Union and by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends for Children and Armed Conflict.

As a non-permanent member of the Security
Council in 2008 and 2009, Croatia contributed to the
adoption of resolution 1882 (2009). Croatia is pleased
to see that, in the annexes of the Secretary-General's
report (S/2010/181), the parties to armed conflict that
engage in patterns of killing and maiming and or rape
and other sexual violence against children, have been
listed. In future reports of the Secretary-General,
Croatia would like to see strengthened monitoring and
reporting mechanism capacities with a view to the
implementation of resolution 1882 (2009).

Croatia welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General and its recommendations, the rigorous
implementation of which could greatly alter the lives
of these children. Croatia further welcomes the
progress achieved by several parties to armed conflict
in releasing children, addressing impunity for
perpetrators of grave violations, and undertaking
measures to prevent rape and other forms of sexual
violence against children, as indicated in the Secretary-
General's report. However, we remain deeply
concerned about the lack of compliance by many
parties to armed conflict with signed action plans as
well as with the conclusions and recommendations of
the Council's Working Group.

The implementation of concrete time-bound
action plans and the adoption of measures against any
party that fails to thus comply are crucial for halting
child recruitment, killing and maiming, rape and other

sexual violence committed against children. It is
important for the Security Council to develop a plan
for tracking the progress and implementation of the
action plans. It is also important that the concerned
Member States allow contact between the United
Nations and non-State actors.

Croatia encourages the Council to include child
recruitment and use, rape and other sexual violence
against children in the mandates of the relevant
sanctions committees. We would also like to encourage
the Council to ensure that the Special Representative is
regularly invited to brief the sanctions committees. In
the countries where a national justice system is not
willing or able to do so, the Security Council should
consider referring cases of identified perpetrators to the
International Criminal Court. These measures can be
used efficiently to compel persistent violators listed in
the Secretary General's annual reports to finally cease
their abhorrent practices.

Croatia attaches great importance to paragraph 11
of resolution 1882 (2009) on the inclusion of specific
provisions for the protection of children in all relevant
United Nations peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
political mandates. In order for violations committed
against children to be addressed more efficiently,
Croatia encourages the Council to call upon parties
mentioned in the Secretary-General's report to engage
with the United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Croatia welcomes the newly implemented child
protection policy directive of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. Croatia strongly believes
that child protection concerns should be included in all
mission planning processes, as well as in reports to the
Council.

Building on everything I have mentioned, Croatia
urges concerned Member States and non-State actors to
address child concerns in peace processes and peace
agreements. This will give child-related issues priority
within the post-conflict peace consolidation and
peacebuilding.

As a member of the Security Council, Croatia
contributed to previous debates on the same issue with
a clear focus on the eradication of these human rights
violations. The Security Council needs to find a way to
agree on targeted or other vigorous measures against
persistent perpetrators of grave violations against
children; otherwise, the United Nations and its Member
States will be faced with the same issues year after
year. For almost a decade, we have seen the same
names on the lists annexed to the Secretary General's
reports, and we find the situation unacceptable.

Croatia believes that the Security Council can act
more systematically and more urgently as a part of its
mandate on peace and security, using all of its powers
to ensure that there are no more violations against
children in armed conflict. Let me assure the Council
that the Republic of Croatia remains committed to this
important issue.

