The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Foreign Ministers and other representatives present in
the Security Council Chamber. Their presence today
underscores the importance of the subject matter under
discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Andorra, Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cabo
Verde, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Israel,
Italy, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the
Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden and Turkey to participate
in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: Mr. Kim Won-soo,
Under Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, and Mr. Lassina Zerbo, Executive
Secretary of the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
8/2016/800, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
submitted by Andorra, Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
the Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.

I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. John Kerry,
Secretary of State of the United States of America.

