Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We commend the
Chinese presidency for convening this important
briefing. We also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Zouev, the Police Commissioners of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as Ms. Reitano, for
their informative briefings. Reflections from those
three field missions and Ms. Reitano on the role of the
United Nations police are very important for us to move
forward our collective effort to promote peace and
security. On behalf of my delegation, I would like to
offer the following observations and recommendations.

First, we see the world as a family of United
Nations States Members that lives interconnected in a
globalized world, meaning that no country can feel safe
if there is strife and conflict in another country. The
problems encountered by one country in the form of, for
example, illegal migration, trafficking or terrorism, can
have a spillover effect. Those effects are transnational
and cross-border, therefore ensuring that our common
security and well-being are basic pre-requisites for
regional and global stability. Our actions with regard
to the police component of peacekeeping therefore
have to be focused on enhancing the capacities of
host nations, which bear the primary responsibility
for strengthening their national security, police and
justice and correctional institutions, as well as holding
them accountable.

Secondly, even though our efforts may be
multilateral, the concept of national ownership is
imperative. The priorities identified by host nations
have to be given the highest consideration. Our efforts
should be consistent with their cultures and legal
traditions, yet non-contradictory to international
norms, which would provoke greater tensions and
therefore worsen the humanitarian situation.

Thirdly, restoring and maintaining peace and
stability in countries that undergo conflict are
long-term processes that require consolidation and
cooperation among all the relevant stakeholders, such
as Parliament, political and religious leaders, the private
sector, academia, civil society and the media - all of
which have a great impact. Community outreach and
addressing issues on the ground are necessary through
confidence-building measures on our part.

Fourthly, in the light of the overall United Nations
reforms, and especially in peace operations, we need
to develop clear mandates and directives for police
contingents, with strong units for the rule of law,
security sector reform, the protection of civilians
and human rights and the empowerment of youth and
women, especially by ending all impunity for gender-
based violence. Only then will we have national stability
in host countries and direct strategies to build capacity
in order to prevent new conflicts, as well as relapses or
recurrences of existing ones.

Fifthly, collective actions require unity of effort
and close collaboration. Today's peacekeeping
operations involve concurrent operations by military
and police units, especially with regard to the protection
of civilians. They also call for new modalities and
approaches of coordination between the police and the
military in various overlapping protection situations,
based on the type of violence and other community-
based variables. In that regard, we would like to learn
from the reflections of the briefers, especially those
from the field missions, about the mechanisms and
operational strategies that must be instituted between
the police and military components on the various
aspects of the mandates.

Sixthly, we will also need to address the broader
capability and training gaps by expanding the number of
police-contributing countries with high capabilities for
a larger deployment ofwomen in their forces. We believe
that the capabilities of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization could strengthen United Nations policing
in terms of proper training and capacity-building.
We also agree with the speakers who mentioned that
increasing the presence of women in the United Nations
police strengthens the force's ability to establish trust
with local populations and also contributes to creating
a safe environment for the victims of sexual violence to
report crimes.

Finally, let me reiterate that Kazakhstan will work
with the UnitedNations to achieve stability and peace and
is always ready to engage in reaching higher standards
and capabilities for United Nations policing, which is
an integral component of peacekeeping operations.

