Mr. Ward (Jamaica): My delegation welcomes
your presidency, Sir, and your stated commitment and
efforts to bring further transparency to the Security
Council. You have Jamaica's full cooperation.

I thank Mr. Annabi for his briefing. As Jamaica's
core positions on East Timor have already been stated
in this Chamber on a number of occasions, I will take
this opportunity to pose a few questions to Mr. Annabi.

We recognize the importance of maintaining a
credible security presence in the West Timor refugee
camp. We are also very concerned that the refugees
continue to live under extremely dire humanitarian
conditions; there are reports of refugees on the verge of
starvation. We also understand that, while making
significant efforts to deal with the situation, the
Indonesian Government lacks the necessary resources
to deal adequately with the refugee problem. In view of
the recent incidents of security breaches reported by
Mr. Annabi, can we expect the security assessment
team to reclassify the security situation so as to allow
for the return of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and if so,
when?

Secondly, has any progress been made on the
question of property rights in order to facilitate the
return of refugees to East Timor?

Thirdly, we are of the view that the East Timorese
political leadership must be fully consulted with regard
to the role of the United Nations in the period
immediately following the achievement of
independence by East Timor. We would like to know
whether the East Timorese have given any indication of
the specific areas in which they would need assistance,
in particular, areas of security and of capacity-building
in their judicial system and law enforcement. In that
context, is the Secretariat engaged in preparing an exit
strategy for the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), and if so,
when might it be presented to the Council?

Finally, what efforts, if any, are being made to
encourage the return of East Timorese of the diaspora
to assist with the building of an independent East
Timor?

