The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Denmark.

Like others, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (8/2006/361) and Mr. Soren
Jessen-Petersen, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his briefing.

I would also like to thank Ms. Sanda Raskovic-
Ivic, President of the Coordination Centre of the
Republic of Serbia for Kosovo, for her statement.

I associate myself with the statement to be
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Austria
on behalf of the European Union.

I recall the discussion in the Council on the
UNMIK report (S/2006/45) in February this year (see S/PV.5373). The general assessment by Council
members was that standards implementation had been
too slow. Thus, the prevailing message was a call for
Kosovo's political leaders to renew their efforts to
improve the implementation of standards. We are
pleased to note that efforts have indeed improved.
Denmark would like to welcome the alertness and the
political willingness to move forward shown by the
new administration in Pristina. Denmark shares the
assessment by the Secretary-General that the
Provisional Institutions are indeed enhancing their
efforts to implement the standards.

While we welcome the concrete steps taken by
the Provisional Institutions, it is also clear that these do
not automatically alter the situation on the ground. The
leadership of the Provisional Institutions needs to keep
up the commitment and ensure that political decisions
trickle down, yielding improvement on the ground.
Denmark agrees with the assessment by the Secretary-
General that real reconciliation depends on the
prevailing mindset of the majority population. Every
effort has to be made to create confidence amongst
Kosovo's groups, confidence that is sorely missing.
That is essentially the main challenge ahead for the
political leaders of Kosovo.

It is with some concern that we have received
reports about Kosovo Serb representatives cutting off
cooperation with the Provisional Institutions and
urging public servants to withdraw from their
positions. Encouragement of a spirit of non-
cooperation is not in anyone's interest. It will only lead
to isolation and forced decisions. We hope that
Belgrade will encourage the Kosovo Serb leaders to
participate constructively in the Provisional
Institutions. We all wish for a sustainable solution to
Kosovo's future. That will not be brought about by a
spirit of non-cooperation and isolation. The primary
beneficiaries of a sustainable status solution will be all
Kosovans regardless of ethnic group, the population of
the Republic of Serbia and indeed all the people of the
Western Balkans. Therefore, cooperation and
participation are in everyone's best interest.

My country views Kosovo as a key regional
issue. Denmark steadfastly supports UNMIK, the
UNMIK police and the Kosovo Force. We look forward
to a more peaceful and prosperous future, which the
peoples of the Western Balkans deserve. That will
entail close regional cooperation between former foes
and efforts towards the common integration of these
truly European countries into the Euro-Atlantic
institutions where they rightfully belong. However, the
Euro-Atlantic perspectives depend on implementation
of standards and a sustainable solution to Kosovo's
future status.

Let me conclude, still in my national capacity, by
thanking Mr. Soren J essen-Petersen for his outstanding
work in Kosovo and wishing him all the best in the
future.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Austria.

