Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom supports the draft resolution before the
Council. The situation in Iraq does need attention. The
humanitarian situation on the ground does need treatment.
Of course, much of the work that can now be done is in
Iraq's own hands; there is an enormous programme that
could be moved forward with effect for those most closely
affected by the economic situation if there was full
cooperation with the United Nations programme. But that
is not what we are talking about today. I believe that we all
agree that real improvements in the humanitarian situation
will not be possible until and unless there is a
comprehensive approach, fashioned by the Council, to our
overall relationship with Iraq that will include taking steps
for the suspension or lifting of sanctions under conditions
that relate to the Council's resolutions.
A reference has been made in this debate to the
timing of the current negotiations. I entirely agree that
there is no linkage with any other matter. The
comprehensive draft resolution needs negotiations in their
own time and for their own purpose. But there is a
relationship with our intention to improve the situation on
the ground, which will not be improving day by day until
we take more comprehensive steps. There was no real
reason not to have an extension of the oil-for-food
programme from phase VI to phase VII, if there was no
such linkage. But it has been sensible to agree to the
extension of the current phase for a two-week period.

I would like to report again to the Council that five
members of the Council are indeed involved in extremely
detailed negotiations on a comprehensive text. We believe
that there is solid commitment to an early outcome to
those negotiations. More work needs to be done. I would
sincerely hope that we could bring a draft text back to the
Council within a very short period.

It is not actually a question of the extension of time;
it is a question of coming to decisions - very difficult
decisions, as we all acknowledge - to reach the kind of
negotiated compromise that is going to be essential on
this subject. Perhaps we have been a bit diverted by the
question of time, when the real question is one of
determination to reach a solution. I hope we will have the
encouragement of the whole Council, and of the United
Nations membership at large, in bringing the negotiations
to a successful close.

