Mr. Mahmuduzzaman (Bangladesh): I congratulate
Spain on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council and thank it for arranging this debate, which
shows its sense of responsibility and commitment with
regard to the issue of the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. The Palestinian
issue is now the number one long-standing issue in
the field of international peace and security and its
resolution deserves the utmost priority. The people of
Palestine cannot live with this uncertainty of life and
livelihood forever.

We regret the appalling human rights and
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories andthattherepeatedappealoftheinternational
community to improve the deteriorating conditions of
the Palestinian people remains unheeded. Furthermore,
the slaughter of innocent Palestinian children, women
and men; the wanton destruction of homes, schools,
hospitals and vital civilian infrastructure; and the
terrorizing and traumatizing of the entire civilian
population in the Gaza Strip in Palestine have become
very frequent. The people in the occupied territories
continue to suffer due to Israeli blockades, closures, the
confiscation of land and the demolition of houses. The
illegal separation wall continues to divide and isolate
communities, destroying livelihoods and preventing
access to their jobs, families, markets, schools and
hospitals.

Gaza's borders have been subject to a regime
of closure that is without precedent anywhere. The
closure is tantamount to the strangulation of an entire
population in the form of collective punishment. The
quality of life of the Palestinians had already diminished
to subsistence level. The periodic escalation ofviolence
only leads to further despair and destitution. Israel is
doing so purposefully to generate fear, fury and distress
among Palestinians.

We deplore the Israeli policy of collective
punishment, forcing Palestinian people off their land,
detaining people for a long time without charge,
restricting the freedom of movement of and property
ownership by Palestinian people, the deportation of
Palestinian inhabitants and depriving people from their
legitimate claim to natural resources, including scarce
water resources. The Government of Israel has continued
its settlement campaign in the occupied Palestinian
territory, with a particularly aggressive settlement
expansion in East Jerusalem. Those measures have
been soundly rejected by the international community
and their illegality unanimously confirmed.

Having monitored the situation closely, we would
like to register our concern about the grave crisis, in
which not a single day passes when civilians are not
intimidated, arrested, detained in inhuman conditions
and subjected to constant abuse and torture. As a result,
the humanitarian and security situations continue
in a downward spiral and tensions continue to rise,
destabilizing the total peace initiative.

We urge Israel to fulfil its legal obligation, as the
occupying Power, to ensure that all inhabitants are
safeguarded against all acts of violence or threats;
to cease the illegal detention of Palestinian people,
including children; to stop the destruction of homes and
land confiscation; to allow Palestinian people access to
their lands, employment and natural resources; to desist
from transferring its population to the territories it has
occupied; and to lift its embargo against Palestinians
and immediately open all border crossings to allow free
movement of goods, persons and humanitarian aid.

We express our total solidarity with the Palestinian
people and reiterate our full and unwavering support
for their legitimate and inalienable rights to a sovereign
and independent State. At this juncture, we demand an
end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967, the
establishment ofa two-State solution on the basis ofthe
pre-1967 borders, the just resolution of all final-status
issues and the mobilization of international support for
assistance to the Palestinian people without delay.

