In 2007, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the first joint African Union and United Nations peacekeeping mission, was deployed in order to protect civilians and humanitarian operations and help bring stability to the war-torn Darfur region of the Sudan. Today, more than 13 years later, the Security Council will close the chapter of peacekeeping in Darfur, as the Sudan continues to make progress in its democratic transition. The draft resolution presented to the Security Council by the penholders, the United Kingdom and Germany, and just adopted as resolution 2559 (2020), lays out the modalities of UNAMID's drawdown for a period of six months, followed by a subsequent liquidation period. It will provide a legal basis for a safe and orderly withdrawal and help ensure a smooth transition as the Government of the Sudan assumes full responsibility for the protection of civilians in Darfur. The penholders have engaged extensively with the Government of the Sudan before and during the negotiations. We are convinced that resolution 2559 (2020) is fully in line with the requests of the Government of the Sudan, as well as the recommendations of the African Union-United Nations joint special report on terminating UNAMID's mandate as of 31 December 2020 and subsequently commencing the mission's drawdown and liquidation. We welcome the Government of the Sudan's commitment to fully cooperating with the United Nations during this period. However, we regret that the mission will not be able to continue to complete the remainder of its tasks, as is - and should remain - established practice during the drawdown of peacekeeping missions. With the end of UNAMID's mandate, the Government of the Sudan must be ready to fill the gap left by the departure of the mission. While the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan will assist the authorities, it is not designed to replace UNAMID in terms of providing physical protection. Germany therefore urges the Sudanese Government to expedite its preparations for protecting civilians in line with its own national plan for civilian protection (see S/2020/429). We would like to thank all Council members for their constructive engagement on the text of the draft resolution. We also thank the United Kingdom for its excellent cooperation as fellow penholder on the Sudan file during Germany's tenure as a non- permanent member of the Security Council over the past two years. Most of all, our gratitude goes to the brave mission staff of UNAMID, who have done their utmost to assist the people of the Sudan in their quest for durable peace.
