Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): Given the
impressive number of mass graves and victims found in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo, the number of
individuals indicted seems remarkably low. If we consider
the massacres and the savage brutality of the acts that
have been committed, the question that arises is, what
seems to be the problem? Why is there such a clear
imbalance between the number of victims and the number
of individuals who have been indicted and brought to
trial? This is especially true in the case of high officials
and leaders. The commanders who directed these
massacres in Bosnia and then reappeared in Kosovo
remain at large. Have modern investigative methods,
including the use of satellite technology, proved powerless

 

in identifying these people, or are there some parties that do
not wish to bring them to justice? What are the true
reasons? We are bound to note in this regard that when it
comes to bringing these people to justice the system
appears to be very soft, and the evidence will likely
disappear over time.

Ms. Del Ponte, like her predecessor, has told us that
it is often impossible to rely on the cooperation of States
that are in a position to give information concerning the
indictees, with a view to bringing them to justice. She has
reported that these States do not always provide the
evidence requested of them, a matter we cannot understand.

We also fail to understand this kind of justice that is
based on tardy cooperation with the Tribunal that the
Council set up for this purpose. Do we need more
convincing evidence than the mass graves? We know that
there are victims who were killed under the most appalling
circumstances, reminiscent of the Dark Ages. We would
like to warn against these tendencies of delay, leniency and
non-cooperation with the Tribunal, which can only have
gravely detrimental effects.

We would like to sound an alert concerning the
criminals who remain at large and who, unfortunately,
would not be deterred from committing other horrible
crimes if not brought to justice. This situation must not be
allowed to continue.

