Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Let me begin by
extending the felicitations of the Pakistan delegation
on Peru's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. It is particularly gratifying to
see an old friend back in New York. We would also like
to extend our congratulations to Ambassador Kenzo
Oshima and the Japanese delegation for a very
successful and active presidency last month.

We appreciate the decision of the Security
Council to hold this emergency meeting in response to
the call by the League of Arab States, the Organization
of the Islamic Conference and the Non-Aligned
Movement. It is perhaps a measure of the impunity
enjoyed by Israel that, even as the Council decided to
meet, additional horrendous actions took place, such as
yesterday's action in Beit Hanoun, which killed 18
members of a family, including 8 children and
06-61024

7women. We join the call for an independent
international investigation into this incident and its
implications for the violations of international
humanitarian law.

This slaughter comes in the wake of the images
of unarmed Palestinian women being fired at and killed
in the streets of Gaza. These images represent the ugly
faces of occupation, sustained by indiscriminate and
disproportionate use of military force and utter
disregard for international human rights and
humanitarian law.

It is unfortunate that the momentary sense of
optimism generated last year by the Israeli withdrawal
from Gaza quickly dissipated into despair and renewed
violence. Hopelessness and violence have both risen
sharply in recent months. Each passing day of violence
and reprisals is a setback to the quest for a peaceful
settlement of the Palestinian question and durable
peace in the Middle East.

After the devastating conflict in Lebanon earlier
this year, which raged while the Security Council
watched helplessly for 30 days, it became obvious that
a comprehensive approach was essential to bringing
about a durable peace and stability in the Middle East.
A high-level delegation of the League of Arab States
came to this Council last September with an important
initiative - to bring an end to the Arab-Israeli conflict
and to achieve comprehensive peace through the
revival of the peace process and negotiations. It is
unfortunate that the Security Council did not deem it
appropriate to take any follow-up action on that
initiative and on the strong commitment for peace
which it embodied. No wonder there is a crying need
for the Council to restore its credibility.

We must address all the festering problems of the
region comprehensively and fairly. It is time to end
Israel's conflicts with all its neighbours. It is time, first
and foremost, to end the tragedy of Palestine, which is
at the core of the Middle East conflict and the major
source of the humiliation, anger and desperation that is
felt by people throughout the Muslim world. Given the
human suffering, given the threat to international peace
and security, and given the responsibility entrusted to
this Council by the Charter, this Council must respond
to the call of the Arab and Islamic world for an
immediate ceasefire in the occupied Palestinian
territories - a ceasefire which is credible, sustainable
and verifiable.
3

To this end, Pakistan would urge the two sides,

Israel and the Palestinians, to take a series of

immediate and simultaneous confidence-building
measures.

To Israel, we ask that it immediately end its
military campaign in Gaza; release Palestinian
prisoners, including cabinet members and legislators;
remove checkpoints and other obstacles to facilitate
access and movement of civilians and humanitarian
workers; halt and reverse construction of the separation
wall; freeze settlement activities and dismantle
outposts constructed in the West Bank since 2001;
release customs and back payments to the Palestinian
Authority; and accept negotiations with the Palestinian
Authority led by President Mahmoud Abbas.

To our Palestinian brothers, we also appeal that
they halt rocket attacks and violence, secure release of
the captured Israeli soldier, achieve internal cohesion
and establish a national unity Government, with
authority given to the Palestinian Authority and to
President Abbas to negotiate with Israel.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the Middle
East is a great challenge. President Musharraf has
stated that the greatest challenge to global security, to
the campaign against terrorism, to the promotion of
harmony among civilizations and to the credibility of
the United Nations is the cauldron of conflict that is
the Middle East. We must put out these fires.

