Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the convening of today's meeting
and the briefings by Ms. Bintou Keita, Mr. Maman
Sidikou and Ambassadors Fatima Kyari Mohammed
and Joao Vale de Almeida.

Peru has been following the difficult humanitarian
situation and the continuing deterioration of security
in the Sahel region with concern. We condemn the
latest terrorist attacks and the violent extremism that
is especially prevalent in the border areas shared by
Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger. Today we would like
to highlight three points that we consider fundamental
to achieving lasting peace and stability in the Sahel.

My first point is about coordinating responses. The
various efforts, initiatives and mechanisms deployed
in the field must maintain political and operational
coherence, reflecting and responding to the needs and
priorities of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
countries, as well as the provisions of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. In that regard, we welcome
the signing of a technical agreement by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the European Union
and the members of the G-5 Sahel, in accordance with
resolution 2391 (2017).

We underscore the importance of the operational
link that has been established between the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force and MINUSMA. We also want to highlight
the creation of the European Union Emergency Trust
Fund to channel complementary donations and the
decision of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union to extend the mandate of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force for another year. We believe that such
initiatives should serve to accelerate the required
strengthening ofthe operational capabilities ofthe Joint
Force, especially when a lack of adequate financing
jeopardizes the technical cooperation that MINUSMA
is called on to provide. We emphasize that financing
must be foreseeable and sustainable.

My second point concerns the root causes of the
conflict. As has been said, responses to the critical
situation in the Sahel must go beyond the military
dimension. What is needed is a holistic approach that
addresses the root causes of the conflict, promoting the
development and relevance of human rights, together
with enhanced security. We consider it particularly
important to promote the rule of law and economic
growth, deal with the effects of climate change and
increase women and young people's participation in
national processes, in line with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. We believe that the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel provides
an adequate framework for working to strengthen
governance, security and development in the region,
and we stress the importance of providing it with
adequate resources.

My third point has to do with the peace process
in Mali. We note with concern its lack of progress
and the deteriorating security situation, which are
fostering further radicalization in various areas of
the region. We hope that the upcoming elections in
Mali can serve to strengthen institutional frameworks
and democratic governance and relaunch a political
dialogue. We emphasize the importance of promoting
extensive involvement on the part of citizens and a
greater awareness of the need to include and address
the needs of vulnerable groups and minorities. It is also
essential to pay special attention to the links between
cross-border organized crime and terrorist groups and
to strengthen the regional response to those scourges.

I would like to conclude by expressing our support
for the efforts of the G-5 Sahel member countries, as
well as those of MINUSMA, the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel, the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
European Union, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, among the other
agencies and actors that are committed to achieving a
sustainable peace. We believe that the G-5 Sahel is a
clear example of how African countries are capable of
assuming greater responsibilities in the shared work of
promoting peace and security on the continent. However,
that requires the strong support of the international
community, including the Security Council and the
United Nations system as a whole.

