Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We, too, would like
to convey the South African Government's
appreciation to the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and its predecessor, the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) for the outstanding and
highly professional work they have carried out, often in
the face of seemingly insurmountable obstacles that
were placed in their way. We pay tribute to the present
and former staff members of these organizations,
including the former Executive Chairman of
UNMOVIC, Dr. Hans Blix, who worked under
extremely difficult conditions.

At the outset, we should recall that the
destruction of Iraq's chemical, biological and nuclear
weapons programmes and missile systems was set out
by the Security Council in resolution 687 (1991) as a
precondition for the ceasefire that ended the first Gulf
war. The sanctions against Iraq have been linked to the
question of whether Iraq still possessed weapons of
mass destruction programmes and related delivery
systems or the intention to reconstitute those
programmes.

It is also important to recall in that regard that the
entire Security Council programme to disarm Iraq was
based from the outset on a regional dimension.
Paragraph 14 of resolution 687 (1991) clearly states
that disarmament in Iraq would,

"represent steps towards the goal of establishing
in the Middle East a zone free from weapons of
mass destruction and all missiles for their

delivery and the objective of a global ban on
chemical weapons".

That provision was later to be re-emphasized
through the adoption of resolution 1284 (1999). Those
Chapter VII resolutions remain in force, and hence the
Council continues to be bound by its duty to help bring
about nuclear, chemical and biological weapons
disarmament and the removal of related delivery
systems in the Middle East. The draft resolution also
does not adequately clarify what will become of the
proliferation-sensitive material in UNMOVIC's
archives and the roster of experts. It is now incumbent
upon all members of the Security Council to discharge
their responsibly to oversee the appropriate
reallocation or disposal of the UNMOVIC material and
equipment so that available information and expertise
is retained within the United Nations system with
appropriate safeguards.

The international community now needs to
support the new Iraqi Government in its efforts to
transform Iraq into a stable and peaceful country that is
part of a Middle East region that is free of weapons of
mass destruction.

South Africa will vote in favour of the draft
resolution, even though we would have preferred the
mandate of the United Nations weapons inspectors to
be closed on the basis of a United Nations report.

