The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I propose to invite the members of the
Political Committee for the Implementation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, as well as Zambia, the
representative of the current Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity, the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs of the Organization of
African Unity and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to participate in this meeting.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency General Assani
Tidjani, Special Envoy of the President of Togo, His
Excellency Mr. Gnassingbe Eyadema, current
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, to take
a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tidjani
(Togo) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I invite the
Minister for External Relations of Angola, His
Excellency Mr. Joao Bernardo de Miranda, to take a
seat the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Miranda
(Angola) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): I invite the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
His Excellency Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, to take a
seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. She
Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): I invite the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Namibia, The
Honourable Theo-Ben Gurirab, to take a seat at the
Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gurirab
(Namibia) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): I invite the
Minister in the Office of the President of the Rwandese
Republic, The Honourable Patrick Mazimpaka, to take
a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mazimpaka
(Rwanda) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): I invite the
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Uganda, The
Honourable Alfred Mubanda, to take a seat at the
Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mubanda
(Uganda) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): I invite the
Minister for Presidential Affairs of Zambia, The
Honourable Eric Silwamba, to take a seat at the
Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Silwamba
(Zambia) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): I invite the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zimbabwe, The
Honourable Stanislaus I. G. Mudenge, to take a seat at
the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mudenge
(Zimbabwe) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Valentine Senga, representative
of the Movement for the Liberation of the Congo
(MLC) to the Joint Military Commission, to take a seat
at the Council table.

I invite Mr. Azarias Ruberwa, Secretary-General
of the Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD), to take a
seat at the Council table.

I invite Professor Pashi-Claver, representative of
the Congolese Rally for Democracy-Kisangani
(RCD-K), to take a seat at the Council table.

I invite Mr. Said Djennit, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), to take a seat at the Council
table.

I invite Mr. Kamel Morjane, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
sixth report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), document
S/2001/128.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to the following documents:
S/2001/l47, letter dated 18 February 2001 from
Rwanda; and S/2001/150, letter dated 20 February
2001 from Uganda.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome Secretary-
General Kofi Annan and express my appreciation for
his presence here. I also welcome his submission to the
Council of the sixth report of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which contains very important
recommendations.

On behalf of the members of the Security
Council, I welcome the ministers and members of the
Political Committee for the Implementation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement; the Minister for
Presidential Affairs of Zambia; the Minister for
National Defense of the Republic of Togo, the
representative of the Current Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity; the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs of the Organization of
African Unity; and Brigadier Njuki Mwaniki,
Chairman of the Joint Military Commission. I also
welcome Ambassador Kamel Morjane, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and General
Diallo, Force Commander of MONUC.

I take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the
efforts exerted by the members of MONUC.

Our meeting today is an extension of the dialogue
that began early last year between the Security Council
and the parties signatory to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement. The Security Council's initiative of
holding this meeting in the current circumstances
affirms its intention of assuming its responsibilities for
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the wider region. We have noted the readiness of
the participants in this meeting to proceed with the
peace process. Their presence here today is an
affirmation of that willingness.

There is a conviction that the current situation in
the region is ripe for a new impetus to the peace
process. Today's meeting has been convened following
a series of very important meetings held in the region
and the important and valuable initiatives of many
African leaders and the OAU to contribute to the
search for a solution to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. This meeting is also a part of
the ongoing efforts of the United Nations, and the
Security Council in particular, to address the conflict.
This is a very important and rare opportunity that may
never arise again to put into practice the political will
to make a decisive start in adopting the necessary
practical steps, means and mechanisms to move the
peace process forward and to achieve the aspirations of
the Congolese people and the peoples of the region as a
whole.

In welcoming the progress that has been made in
the past few weeks towards respect for the Ceasefire
Agreement and the positive initiatives that have been
announced, we look forward to a continuation of this
commitment; to the genuine implementation of the
Security Council's resolutions and the provisions of the
Lusaka Agreement and the Kampala and Harare
disengagement plans; and to the rapid withdrawal of
foreign forces from the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in accordance with resolution
1304 (2000).

The members of the Council welcome the
readiness of the Congolese authorities to implement the
inter-Congolese dialogue with its facilitator, Sir
Ketumile Masire. We encourage all the Congolese
parties to cooperate in achieving the success of this
process in the interests of the Congolese people.

MONUC's deployment in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has been delayed, to the
disappointment of many. The United Nations is now
preparing to implement this deployment. We call on all
parties fully to cooperate in the deployment of
MONUC and to safeguard the security, safety and
freedom of movement of United Nations and related
personnel.

We have followed with extreme concern the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo during the lengthy
struggle and conflict, and we would like to affirm the
urgent need to provide humanitarian assistance to the
Congolese people.

Today's meeting is of great importance to the
war-stricken Congolese people, who aspire to the
restoration of the country's full sovereignty and
territorial integrity and to complete reconciliation
between its inhabitants, and to the peoples of the Great
Lakes region, whose goal is to live in peace and
security and to continue with the development of the
region.

Our meeting today is the focus of attention for the
African continent and the people of the world. An end
must be put to the volatility and conflicts that have
plagued the Great Lakes region and that threaten peace
and security in the area. As the Secretary-General
stated in his last report, we are therefore called upon to
shoulder our responsibilities and to work together to
restore hope and to respond to this aspiration for peace.

I am pleased to give the floor to the Secretary-
General.


