Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): My delegation
welcomes the Council's renewal of the mandate of the
European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR)
Althea in Bosnia and Herzegovina for another year, and
would also like to thank High Representative Valentin
Inzko for his update.

While the transition process is still ongoing, some
progress has been made in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
terms of building strong State institutions, inclusive
dialogue and democratic procedures, as well as in
working towards progress and an impartial judiciary.
The focus must also remain on the economy, as it
will be important to attract foreign direct investment
and create jobs and to formulate common strategies
for energy, agriculture and employment. Kazakhstan
therefore welcomes Bosnia and Herzegovina's signing of
a transport community treaty with the European Union
(EU) and five other States of the Western Balkans,
which opens up major opportunities for the security-
development nexus in, for example, the infrastructure
and transport sectors, and for doing business with large
regional and international partners and stakeholders
and moving consistently towards integration in the EU.

We believe that for socioeconomic reforms to be
successfully implemented, Bosnia and Herzegovina's
strategic development depends directly on the political
climate and on guarantees of peace and stability. In
that regard, I should add that the country's sovereignty
and territorial integrity should never be challenged.
The country is preparing for the main elections in
October 2018, and all parties must focus their efforts
on continuing a political dialogue to discuss potential
amendments to the election laws, with further adoptions
on agreed dates. We call on the leaders of all the parties
concerned to implement the General Framework
Agreement for Peace and observe all provisions and
procedures that are integral to that settlement, including
the rulings of the Constitutional Court.

We welcomed the political will shown by the
Serbian leaders who visited Sarajevo in September.
We also believe that direct contact with the leadership
in neighbouring States is the most effective way to
promote dialogue and trust between the parties. As a
general principle, my delegation welcomes the positive
ongoing dialogue between the Governments of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Serbia, with regular high-level
contacts, and encourages the parties to continue.

On other fronts, efforts must also be focused
on converting defence properties into State
and civilian structures, ensuring greater fiscal
responsibility and sustainability, strengthening the
Parliamentary Assembly and developing media and
broadcasting communications.

The country needs further support in improving
its energy system and infrastructure, foreign trade,
economic relations and other areas of social and
economic development. The issue of returning and
resettling refugees and displaced persons will also
have to be addressed. Most of all, the engagement of
civil-society organizations and grassroots movements,
and the participation of women, young people and
representatives of other vulnerable groups, will also
be critical to swiftly achieving social harmony and
building intercommunal trust and confidence.

Finally, the noble task facing Bosnia and
Herzegovina is that of improving the daily lives
of citizens and promote reconciliation. We believe
that the progress achieved on the European Union
integration track will be a catalyst for reconciliation
and help to resolve long-standing issues and address
the various reforms.

