Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I welcome you, Sir, as President of the
Security Council at today's meeting.

Our delegation is grateful to the Secretary-
General for his report on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and to the head of the Mission, Mr. Jessen-
Petersen, for his comprehensive briefing on the
situation in the province. We welcome and support the
participation in today's meeting of the President of the
Coordination Centre of Serbia and Montenegro and of
the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija,
Mr. Nebojsa Covic.

Russia has carefully considered the Secretary-
General's report. We endorse his primary conclusions
and tenets and agree with his conclusion that, in the
area of standards implementation, a good deal of work
remains to be done. Our primary concern in that regard
is the fact that, according to the report, not one of the
eight primary standards has yet been fully
implemented. We are especially distressed by the
extremely low number of refugee returns, which are
the most useful indicator for assessing the situation in
the province. There are also considerable shortcomings
in the efforts to reform local institutions of self-
government in Kosovo. At the same time, progress in
the area of decentralization offers the opportunity to
assess the extent to which the authorities have taken
into account the legitimate interests of minorities.

Like the Secretary-General, we underscore that
the genuine implementation of standards - aimed
primarily at ensuring the rights, freedoms and security
of ethnic minorities - is not only a test of the
readiness to take the political process to the next phase
of the settlement, but is above all a criterion of the
maturity of the province's government structures and
their capacity to establish a truly democratic and multi-
ethnic society in Kosovo. On that basis, we are
convinced that the process of standards implementation
should be analysed on the basis not of emerging trends
that may be genuinely positive in themselves, but of
concrete results. In that context, however, it would still
be premature to talk about substantive progress having
been made.

At this critical juncture of the settlement in
Kosovo, the task of elaborating a coordinated
international strategy is of fundamental importance.
We are pleased that the outcomes of the meeting of the
Balkans Contact Group in London demonstrated the
clear intentions of its participants to work together to
achieve a stable Kosovo settlement. One such outcome
was the agreement of all parties to launch a review
process, although the comprehensive review is not an
end in itself. We are convinced that its implementation
must be consistent with highly specific requirements;
above all, it must be thorough and protracted so that
the future special envoy dispatched by the Secretary-
General to conduct the review will have a genuine
opportunity to draw an objective picture of the
development of the situation in Kosovo and to prepare
a comprehensive policy report for the Security
Council. It would also be appropriate for the head of
UNMIK to continue to issue technical reports.

The results of the policy review cannot and
should not be biased. The process of review must be
carried out in all phases of its implementation with the
oversight of the Security Council and culminate in a
presidential statement. It is crucial that the Contact
Group send consolidated signals to the government
institutions in Pristina and Belgrade. Belgrade must
remain a full participant in the Kosovo process. I
reiterate that such consolidated signals must be sent to
both parties.

Unfortunately, a number of participants in today's
meeting have addressed their criticism primarily to
Belgrade. We are certain that the primary effort to
ensure the implementation of standards must be taken
by the Albanian leadership of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government. We share the view
that the involvement of Kosovo Serbs in those bodies
is perfectly expedient. In that regard, direct contacts
between Belgrade and Pristina are vitally important.
We welcome the recent initiatives of the Serbian side
in that respect.

We reaffirm our fundamental position that
resolution 1244 (1999) is the sole political platform for
achieving a settlement in Kosovo. The lasting stability
of the province will be possible only if an agreed
international strategy is elaborated, with the Security
Council playing a lead role.

For our part, we are prepared to cooperate closely
with the Secretary-General; his Special Representative
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, Mr. Jessen-Petersen; the future
Special Envoy who will conduct the review; and our
partners in the Contact Group, in the common interest
of consolidating stability and security for all of the
inhabitants of the province.

