Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his comprehensive briefing.
I welcome both Her Excellency the President of the
Republic of Kosovo, Ms. Atifete Jahjaga, and His
Excellency the President of the Republic of Serbia,
Mr. Nikolie, and thank them both for their statements.
Allow me to convey the condolences of the Kingdom of
Jordan to the Government of Serbia and its people and
to the Governments of neighbouring countries for the
victims of the flood that hit the Balkans region earlier
this month.

The progress made in Kosovo and the calm security
situation prompts a certain optimism at a time when
the agenda of the Security Council is crowded with
complex disputes and delicate situations in various
regions. Today we must commend the leaders in Kosovo
and the different parts of the Kosovar community for
their dedication in building a unified multi-ethnic and
democratic State and for their serious engagement with
the international community. We call on all countries to
support them in their endeavours.

Jordan supports the ongoing active participation of
Belgrade and Pristina in the European Union-facilitated
dialogue, and the serious commitment shown by
both sides during those meetings. We applaud recent
agreements regarding technical judicial matters. We
believe that both parties share the responsibility to
pursue the dialogue and to continue making progress
towards the full and faithful implementation of the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations.

The European Union continues to play a pivotal role
in advancing progress in that dialogue. We express the
hope that the aspirations of both parties to integration
into the European Union and to strengthening
relations with regional organizations will contribute
to promoting regional security and stability, as well
as the development of cooperation among countries
of the region in various fields in a manner that meets
the aspirations of the people and contributes to their
prosperity.

We welcome the ongoing cooperation between
Kosovo and the European Union on extending the
mandate of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo and the strategic review of the role of the
Mission and its functions in the upcoming period of its
mandate, while taking into account the progress made
in the implementation of relevant agreements on the
rule of law on the ground.

Ensuring the prosecution of the perpetrators of
grave crimes committed during conflicts, regardless of
the ethnicity of the perpetrator or the victim, is a main
pillar of transitional justice. It is equally important
in post-conflict societies seeking to consolidate
reconciliation to ensure that all parties feel that justice
in the future will always be sought and provided for
in a fair and adequate manner. In that regard, Jordan
commends the commitment of Kosovo to ensuring the
rule of law and its establishment of a special court to
look into the allegations contained in the 2010 Marty
report.

All issues arising from the past conflict must
continue to be addressed because they have a
significant impact on the collective psychological state
of the different communities in Kosovo and the region,
including issues related to internally displaced persons,
returnees and missing persons. We hope that UNMIK
and other international organizations will continue to
contribute to addressing such issues in order to build
trust and deepen reconciliation.

The successful conduct of local elections in the
Republic of Kosovo is proof of the Government's
commitment to building inclusive State institutions and
of the abilities of the Kosovo authorities to manage the
democratic process and to hold free and fair elections,
as has been emphasized by international observers.
Jordan hopes that preparations for the legislative
elections in Kosovo will continue apace and with wide
participation. We also hope that the elections will be
held with equal success.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
appreciation to the Head of UNMIK for his and for the
efforts of all UNMIK personnel in the implementation
of all aspects of the Mission.

