Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are concerned by the very complex
humanitarian situation in Syria, which has arisen
as a result of the continuing internal armed conflict.
We note the efforts that have been undertaken by the
humanitarian agencies of the United Nations and by the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent. It is of critical importance
that all sides to the conflict - as well as the States
enjoying influence over them - make every possible
effort to provide all the basic necessities to the
inhabitants of the besieged cities. We are undertaking
the relevant contacts with the relevant Syrian authorities,
prompting them towards constructive cooperation with
the humanitarian structures of the United Nations.

Of particular concern, however, is the situation
of the inhabitants of the cities besieged by fighters of
the terrorist groups Jabhat Al-Nusra, the Islamic State,
Ahrar Al-Sham and Jaysh Al-Islam, which hide behind
civilians and use them as human shields, kidnap them
for ransom and loot humanitarian assistance convoys.
Even groups acting under the banner of the Free Syrian
Army are guilty of these violations.

The kinds of issues that we are discussing today
require an objective, comprehensive and professional
approach that takes account of the realities of the
region. Reference has been made to Madaya, but not a
word has been said about other areas such as Nubul and
Al-Zahraa, in the province of Aleppo, and here we are
speaking of the fates oftens of thousands ofindividuals.

United Nations humanitarian agencies are fully
aware of the efforts that were undertaken to lift the
sieges on the Yarmouk Palestinian refugee camp and in
the area of Al-Waer, where there has been very strong
compliance with the agreements reached by all the
sides. If we look at the situation practically, however,
humanitarian shipments to the problem areas that were
referred to today, including Madaya, take place with
the active assistance of the authorities of the Syrian
Arab Republic. This has been confirmed by the staff
of United Nations humanitarian agencies, who are
monitoring the delivery of aid to the city. A second
convoy is heading for Madaya, Fu'ah and Kafraya, and
a third is being prepared for 17 January.

The United Nations Resident Coordinator, Yacoub
El Hillo, has taken note of the satisfactory situation
concerning the continuing direct contacts between
the World Health Organization and the Government of
Syria regarding the issue of organizing an emergency
medical evacuation of civilians in need thereof.

Humanitarian operations have also been launched
by the Russian armed forces active in Syria, upon the
request ofthat Government. Assistance has been sent to
the city of Dayr al-Zawr, which is currently under siege
by terrorists. We have not heard a word about this in our
meeting today. Russian parachute pallets have made it
possible to deliver 22 tons of cargo. Work on this track
will, of course, continue.

The Security Council is paying close attention to
the humanitarian situation in Syria. This is already the
second meeting this week on this issue. Today we are
meeting in an open format, and we would note that even
from the perspective of the Council's standing practice,
this is somewhat unusual. Very soon, on 27 January,
we will be discussing the humanitarian aspects of the
Syrian crisis, following the issuance of the monthly
report of the Secretary-General.

It is almost as if, under the pretext of the
deteriorating situation in besieged cities and regions,
attempts were being made to derail the launch of the
intra-Syrian talks planned for 25 January. All of this
runs counter to resolution 2254 (2015), pursuant to
which there must be no preconditions to the launch of
the talks. Humanitarian issues must form an integral
component of the intra-Syrian negotiations, and yet
experience has shown that when no one interferes with
the sides, they can quickly reach a lasting agreement.

As the launch of the inter-Syrian talks grows
closer, there is a great deal of unnecessary noise and an
increased use of the dishonest tactic, previously used
on many occasions, of politicizing humanitarian issues,
and the issue is being raised in international forums
with, unfortunately, double standards prevailing once
again. It is clear that those behind this do not like the
Vienna agreement and will not abandon their doomed
plan for a forceful solution in Syria. We have not
forgotten the level of opposition we had to overcome
to ensure that resolution 2254 (2015) included mention
of the Vienna Statements. Even those States that played
a positive role in elaborating the Vienna decisions
and Security Council resolution 2254 (2015) could
be more consistent and focused when it comes to its
implementation.

However, one cannot avoid resolving the
fundamental issues, namely, those of promoting
dialogue on resolving the Syrian issue. This most
important thing now is to compile a representative list
of Syrian opposition delegations and to consolidate the
list of terrorist organizations active in Syria.

But there is one other, no less important issue:
the fact that there is no alternative to forging a broad,
intergovernmental form of cooperation among States,
including on the military presence in Syria, so as to
enhance the effectiveness of the fight against terrorist
organizations. The proposals made by the Russian
Federation in this respect remain on the table.

