Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like to
thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Mr. John Ging for
their briefings and express my deep appreciation for the
work of their teams under difficult circumstances.

I will address two topics today in the Chamber:
first, the escalating violence in south-western Syria, and
secondly, the issue of the need for a political solution.

First, we are deeply concerned about the grave
escalation of violence and atrocities in the southern
de-escalation zone in Dar'a province. We are also
deeply concerned about the massive use of violence by
the Syrian regime - supported by its allies - against
its own people. In particular, as one of the guarantor
Powers, the Russian Federation has a grave responsibility
to uphold its commitment to a ceasefire. All relevant
parties must do all in their power to prevent another
humanitarian disaster. In that regard, we also call on
the Russian Federation to exert pressure on the regime
in order to create room for a negotiated solution.

The risk of regional spillover is simply too great
in such a politically sensitive region, as it is close to
Israel, Jordan and the Golan Heights. The hostilities
have already caused major displacement from Busra
al-Hariri and elsewhere. As Mr. Ging mentioned, more
than 45,000 people have had to flee in the direction of
the closed border with Jordan and many more might
follow if the violence continues to escalate. We fear
a repetition of the countless serious violations of
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law by the regime and its allies, which we
have seen throughout the war.

Mr. Ging just quoted statistics from the World
Health Organization, which has published shocking
numbers on the attacks on medical facilities throughout
Syria. Let me repeat those statistics. In 2017, 112 attacks
took place, resulting in more than 200 casualties.
Already in the first six months of the year, the same
number of attacks have taken place, causing more than
250 casualties. In Idlib, south-western Syria, such
attacks are ongoing and occur almost daily. Let me be
clear, the Syrian regime attacks its own people, medical
facilities and first responders. All parties must comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law. Attacks against medical facilities and personnel
must stop.

All parties should facilitate the rapid and unimpeded
passage of impartial humanitarian relief to all those
in need, including first responders, such as the White
Helmets, who risk their lives to provide assistance.
We would like to echo the words of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry, whose report on
the siege and recapture of eastern Ghouta (A/HRC/38/ CRP.3) was presented yesterday in the Human Rights
Council. That siege and recapture by the regime was
marked by war crimes and crimes against humanity.
According to that report, the people of eastern Ghouta
saw the longest-running siege in modern history. We
need accountability. The use of the veto has blocked
the Security Council's referral of the situation to
the International Criminal Court. We will therefore
continue our work elsewhere, in the Commission
of Inquiry and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.

Secondly, there is an ever-increasing need for a
political solution. The current escalation of violence
and the dire humanitarian situation further underscore
the urgent need for a sustainable political solution
to the conflict. We commend the resilience, efforts
and perseverance of Staffan de Mistura in that
regard. Progress on the development of an inclusive
constitutional committee is welcomed and needed.
We call for further engagement in Geneva, under the
guidance of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, in line
with resolution 2254 (2015). We share the concerns
of the representative of the United Kingdom on Law
Number 10 and its potential implications for the quest
for a political solution.

