Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to join others
in thanking Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Burundi, my colleague
Ambassador Jiirg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), and my sister Ambassador, Fatima Mohammed,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations. Their briefings have provided us a clearer
picture of the situation in Burundi. I also welcome
my brother Ambassador, Albert Shingiro, Permanent
Representative of Burundi, to the Chamber.

My statement today will centre on three
issues - the progress being made on the situation in
Burundi, humanitarian assistance in the country and
Burundi's role in maintaining peace and security in
the region.

First, we note that the briefers mentioned that the
situation on the ground in Burundi remains calm, which
is a good sign that we hope will continue. We have seen
the negative impact of political impasses on Burundi's
economic and social situation in the past, leading to

increases in unemployment and the cost ofbasic services
and commodities, which in turn have had a negative
effect on the population. Nevertheless, there has been
political progress that should not go unnoticed. Today's
briefings and the Secretary-General's November report
(S/2018/1028), for example, have noted improvements
in the situation on the ground. Efforts made by the
leadership of the Burundian Government, such as
the announcement that the President will not seek
re-election in 2020, have also had a positive effect. As
we look forward to those elections, we also welcome
the Burundian Government's initiative in taking
ownership and full financial responsibility for them.
We encourage the authorities to continue creating
an environment conducive to democratic processes.
However, the Secretary-General's report makes it
clear that there is still work to be done. We urge the
Government of Burundi to work together with the
United Nations mechanisms on the ground.

We also want to acknowledge the efforts of the
African Union and the East African Community (EAC),
and we note the submission of the final report on the
EAC-led inter-Burundian dialogue process at the recent
EAC summit in Arusha. Of course, we encourage close
cooperation between Africa's regional and subregional
organizations and United Nations entities, including
the Peacebuilding Commission. In that connection, we
welcome the recommendations made by the Chair of
the Burundi configuration of the PBC that adequate
assistance should continue to be provided to help
address the Burundian people's urgent needs and
reduce their vulnerability, and that Burundi and its
international partners should continue to focus on mid-
and long-term socioeconomic development. At the end
of the day, socioeconomic development is closely tied to
political development, and we look forward to further
progress in that regard.

Secondly, our priority should be to increase
humanitarian assistance to Burundi and support its
economic and social development, including through
the work of the PBC and the Peacebuilding Fund. We
note from the Burundi Regional Refugee Response
Plan 2019-2020 of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees that refugee returns
to Burundi will peak in 2019, with a projection of more
than 100,000 returnees, compared to 58,262 in 2018.
We also note that the innovative cross-border project
supported by the Peacebuilding Fund has improved
peaceful coexistence among returnees, refugees and
host communities in the targeted areas. It is nonetheless
disheartening to hear that the Refugee Response Plan
is among the lowest-funded appeals in the world, as
Ambassador Lauber mentioned in his briefing. I urge
countries to continue their support and to deliver on
their commitments made to Burundi in consultation
with that country, including commitments made
through the Peacebuilding Fund, as well as their support
for Burundi's 10-year national development plan, which
has provided a road map for reaching sustainable
development by 2030.

Lastly, we recognize Burundi's contribution to the
peace and security effort in the region. Like Indonesia,
Burundi is a participant in peacekeeping operations in
Africa, contributing more than 6,000 peacekeepers to
United Nations and African Union missions and thereby
demonstrating that it is a responsible member of the
United Nations. We also want to congratulate Burundi
on being elected a member of the African Union Peace
and Security Council for a term of three years, starting
this year. Those contributions will certainly help to
restore confidence in Burundi. And as an important
member of the countries of the Great Lakes region,
Burundi's own stability, security and development will
contribute to peace and stability there. We therefore
encourage the Government and the people of Burundi
to continue on this trajectory of peace, a luxury that is
hard to obtain and more difficult to maintain. Indonesia
looks forward to working as a partner with Burundi
and sharing our own experience with our brothers and
sisters in the region.

