The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

Bolivia thanks Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Central Africa, Mr. Fall, for his
informative briefing and wishes him every success in
his duties.

Bolivia supports and acknowledges the work of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) and understands the challenges the Office
faces in achieving peace, security and development
in the region. Although it is clear that several
Central African countries currently face challenging
security, humanitarian and economic conditions, we
recognize that UNOCA has contributed to significant
achievements in those areas.

The political situation in the Central African
subregion is plagued with tensions linked to various
types ofprocesses. Bolivia believes that those processes
must be allowed to take place with full respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of each State. Although each country's situation is
unique, we believe that conflicts in the region can
be resolved only through constructive dialogue and
respect for prevailing norms. In addition, neighbouring
countries, regional organizations and the international
community must pool and coordinate their efforts in
that endeavour.

With regard to security, cooperation in the fight
against Boko Haram, the so-called Lord's Resistance
Army and other groups must be a priority for UNOCA
and other organizations and Governments in the
region. With respect to action against Boko Haram,
we commend the positive outcomes of programmes
developed by the Governments of the region and of the
Lake Chad basin and through international cooperation.
Although Boko Haram's ability to launch attacks has
been reduced, its activities continue to pose a threat to
millions of civilians, who are victims of terrorism and
who find it difficult to recover from the scars it leaves.

Governments' efforts to combat the root causes
of conflict must be supported. In that connection,
I take this opportunity to welcome the work of the
Multinational Joint Task Force, the Lake Chad Basin
Commission and the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel, among other organizations.

Although the so-called Lord's Resistance Army has
been weakened, it nevertheless continues to be a threat
to the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. As a result of the recent
withdrawal of troops that were fighting the Lord's
Resistance Army, a joint strategy should be developed
with the African Union and the countries involved in
order not to leave vacuums that could be exploited by
members of that group and to cooperate in the fight
against poaching and illicit trafficking in wildlife,
which is a source of financing for this and other groups.

Concerning the humanitarian situation, in the
Lake Chad basin alone approximately 10 million people
urgently need humanitarian assistance. Hundreds of
thousands of internally displaced persons and refugees
are vulnerable to food insecurity, diseases and a lack of
basic services. We call on the international community
and financial institutions to provide the necessary
resources to address the needs of vulnerable people of
the region.

In conclusion, Bolivia encourages UNOCA,
along with other regional organizations and the
international community, to continue working to
achieve peace, stability and development in the Central
African subregion.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.

The meeting rose at 3.30pm.
