Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Iwish to thank the Lithuanian
delegation for taking the initiative to convene today's
open debate on a very serious issue that has been the
subject of a series of debates in the Security Council
for almost 15 years, but with little progress to show.
Clearly, it is very difficult to make progress on such a
complex and difficult issue.

The protection of civilians in armed conflicts is a
treaty obligation under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, which States have
the responsibility to respect and observe. But few treaty-
based obligations are as abused and overlooked as the
obligation to protect civilians in armed conflicts. That
is a real tragedy, and it highlights how much we have
failed as an international community. There can be no
higher obligation than protecting civilians - women,
the young and the old - during times of armed conflict.

As mentioned earlier, the protection of civilians
is also a treaty obligation that all self-respecting
nations have a responsibility to scrupulously observe.
I am deliberately stressing the role of the State in this
context because States obviously have the primary
responsibility for ensuring the protection of civilians
in times of armed conflict. I do so also because in the
various reports of the Secretary-General on the matter
there appears to be a yawning gap with respect to the
way in which the role of the State is presented. I will
come back to that shortly, but first permit me to make
a general comment on the five challenges to ensuring
more effective protection for civilians that have been
underlined by the Secretary-General in his various
reports.

While all five challenges - enhancing compliance
by parties to conflict with international law, enhancing
compliance by non-State armed groups, enhancing
protection through United Nations peacekeeping
missions, improving humanitarian access, and
enhancing accountability for violations - are all
extremely relevant, one wonders nonetheless if there are
no other challenges that are possibly equally relevant.

From our experience in the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) region, it appears
necessary to stress the value of respecting the
principles of international law governing inter-State
relations. That is critical, including from the point of
view of enhancing trust - which is a critical element
in this endeavour - between humanitarian agencies
of all kinds and their workers, on one hand, and the
concerned States, on the other.

Another challenge is the need to enhance
transparency with respect to the way in which those
who take up the noble task of protecting civilians in
armed conflicts as a vocation carry out their activities.
It must be emphasized that while indeed there are those
who take their responsibility and calling seriously, there
are also adventurist types who are there to help what
they take to be the underdog and give scant attention to
the concerns of State authorities. The result is suspicion
directed at the activities of those who carry out their
obligation with scrupulous neutrality. The cause of the
protection of civilians suffers as a result.

There is also sound justification for objecting to
the way in which one of the five challenges mentioned
in the report (S/2013/689) of the Security-General is
supposed to be promoted. This relates to what is referred
to as enhancing compliance of non-State armed groups
with international law. First of all, that fails to make
a distinction between situations where States have
collapsed and situations where there are States fully
capable of discharging their responsibilities but which
might face difficulties with respect to some part of their
territories and for a given duration of time. The reports
of the Secretary-General rely heavily on the work of the
Geneva Academy of International Humanitarian Law
and Human Rights to find ways of ensuring compliance
by non-State armed groups with international law.
In our view, that goes overboard in seeking with
incentives with which to cajole non-State armed groups
into offering their cooperation. It seems clear that the
result of all of that is the partial undermining of State
authority. In the long run, the cause of the protection of
civilians also suffers.

That brings us back to what I said at the beginning
with respect to the gap in how the role of the State is
presented in the reports of the Secretary-General. We
in the IGAD region have had a lot of experience in that
regard. Of course, based on the latest developments in
our region, we would be mindless to ignore the failure of
States to provide protection to civilians. That requires
extensive analysis, for another day. But different
situations should not be conflated, and context matters.
Where there are strong State institutions, undue
overtures to non-State actors might contribute to the
weakening of States, thus compounding the challenge
of providing protection to civilians.

Undoubtedly, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is becoming more, not less, complex and
difficult. Technological progress and resort to various
methods of waging war have made the challenge ever
more complicated.

Let us be frank a few States can claim to have
fully met their international obligations in protecting
civilians. It is very difficult as well to argue that the
United Nations record in this area has been sterling.
Perhaps what is critical now is to undertake a frank
assessment of what we have done over the past 15
years, where we are now and how we wish to proceed to
ensure that the protection of civilians in armed conflict
is a genuine commitment devoid of the inclination to
politicize the issue.

