Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Government and delegation of
Austria for convening this meeting, which reflects the
commitment of the United Nations to strengthening
international humanitarian law in order to protect
victims of armed conflict. We would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his detailed report, as well as
Mr. John Holmes, the Under-Secretary-Gerieral for
Humanitarian Affairs, and Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, the
Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights.

Mexico attaches a great deal of importance to this
topic, and we commend the Security Council for the
work it has done in this area over the past decade. In
particular, we welcome the recent adoption of
resolutions 1882 (2009), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009),
to which we can now add the resolution adopted today
(1894 (2009)), which will no doubt revitalize the
protection in armed conflict of civilians, especially the
most vulnerable groups, such as women and children.

The improvements that have been made to
legislation and to international bodies of standards help
better to define the concepts relating to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and are undoubtedly
important. However, despite good intentions, we have
not gone beyond the realm of theory. Sadly, the
situation on the ground gets worse by the day. That is
why it is essential that we achieve a better connection
between theory and practice, in order to avoid
situations where civilians become the chief victims of
violence during armed conflict. We should emphasize
that lack of adherence to the standards of international
humanitarian law, as well as the imperfect
interpretations of the law made by the parties to armed
conflict during that conflict, result in serious violations
of those laws that may constitute war crimes and fall
within the jurisdiction of the International Criminal
Court. For these reasons, it is essential to establish a
strategy based on three pillars: first, enforcing
compliance with international humanitarian law;
secondly, strengthening the work of humanitarian
organizations; thirdly, improving accountability, in
order to put an end to impunity.

International humanitarian law must be complied
with, regardless of the type of armed conflict in
question. The four Geneva Conventions of 1949, their
Additional Protocols and other instruments of
international humanitarian law, as well as customary
international law, form a solid foundation of principles
and norms that protect the life and dignity of all those
who no longer participate in hostilities or who never
have. We call on those States that have not yet done so
to accede to all international instruments in the area of
international humanitarian law, and on the parties to
conflicts to comply with their international obligations.
We know very well that the obligation to respect
international humanitarian law cannot be fulfilled
without due implementation, at the national level, of
these international obligations. This is why we would
also urge States to incorporate these standards and
principles in their national legislation and practices.

It is clear that denying or blocking humanitarian
assistance exacerbates the situation of populations in
armed conflict. When humanitarian assistance is
inadequate, given the cross-cutting nature of this topic,
peacekeeping missions and the specialized agencies of
the United Nations in conflict areas carry out the
essential task of protecting civilians, and this should be
acknowledged.

We also acknowledge the work carried out by
humanitarian institutions, in particular the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and by civil society,
especially with respect to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and the importance of guaranteeing safe,
timely and unimpeded access to humanitarian
assistance in conflict and complex emergency
situations.

Access of humanitarian assistance to civilians in
armed conflict is a topic to which we attach particular
importance, as it is a sine qua non for protection. As
Mexico indicated during the debate in January (see S/PV.6066), my delegation would like to reiterate our
disagreement with interpretations that can restrict or
exclude human dignity in complex situations and that
favour positions that set this humanitarian principle
against the principle of sovereignty.

When violent acts are committed against civilians
and other persons protected in situations of armed
conflict, justice must be done in order to put an end to
the impunity of the alleged perpetrators of serious
crimes or those ordering them to be committed in
contravention of international law. The existence of the
International Criminal Court and its complementary
role vis-a-vis national jurisdictions should not only
serve as an incentive to strengthen national justice
systems, but also represent an effective mechanism for
dealing with crimes when national judiciary structures
have disappeared as a result of conflict. That is why it
is important to achieve the universality of the Rome
Statute.

In conclusion, it is important to reflect on the
progress achieved and on the challenges to come, in
order to consolidate a culture of respect for the
principles and standards of international humanitarian
law and to eradicate impunity. The resolution that we
adopted this morning is a significant step in that
direction.

I would like to conclude by saying that this
reflection should lead us to face and overcome the
entrenched political interests that often prevent full
compliance with the obligations that flow from
international law, prevent rapid and resolute action to
deal with humanitarian crises and prevent
accountability in the face of flagrant impunity. We can
begin to move towards this goal by ensuring prompt
follow-up to the recommendations contained in the
relevant reports of the Secretary-General and the
decisions adopted by the Security Council and other
United Nations organs, with a view to ensuring their
full implementation. When this does not occur, robust
measures should be adopted to guarantee international
peace, justice and security.

