Mr. Hasegawa: It is my privilege to address this
meeting of the Security Council - first on the recent
political and security developments and then on the
progress made in the three mandated programme areas
during the past three months, since the establishment of
the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) in
May 2005.

Since the peaceful resolution of the dispute
between the church and the Government in May, the
overall situation in Timor-Leste has remained calm and
stable. No major border or security incidents have
taken place. However, there were some isolated clashes
involving martial arts and political interest groups.
Clashes among martial arts groups prompted President
Gusmao to bring those groups together to sign a
declaration committing them to eradicating acts of
violence. The activities of political interest groups,
largely in the Baucau district, led the police to seize
weapons and to hold some of their members for
questioning.

Concerning political developments, I am pleased
to inform the Council that in the saw elections held
during the reporting period, voting was conducted in a
peaceful and orderly manner, with high voter turnouts
across the six southern and south-western districts. The
final round of local elections will take place in late
September in the Dili and Liquica districts. As those
local elections are coming to a close, public attention is
gaining momentum for the presidential and national
parliamentary elections to be held in 18 months.
President Gusmao and Prime Minister Alkatiri have
both recently requested that the United Nations provide
assistance in drafting electoral laws in order to
establish a legal framework for nationwide elections.
In addition, Timorese authorities have requested
external assistance to set up database-management
systems and administrative support. Given that free
and fair elections will determine the sustainability of
democracy, I believe that the United Nations should
provide all necessary assistance, as suggested by the
Secretary-General in his current report (S/2005/533).

As provided for in the constitution, the Superior
Council for Defence and Security and the Council of
State were both established in May, providing the
President with further institutional support to carry out
his duties as head of State. The restructuring of the
Government was announced on 28 June, and new
Cabinet members were sworn in by the President on 29
July. The Cabinet now includes five new ministers and
five secretaries of State for the coordination of
development activities in four regions and the
autonomous zone of Oecussi.

On the diplomatic front, Timor-Leste's
relationships with Australia and Indonesia continued to
grow. An agreement between Timor-Leste and
Australia over the sharing of Timor Sea oil and gas
resources is close to finalization. At the Joint
Ministerial Commission meeting between Indonesia
and Timor-Leste held in July, it was agreed that the two
countries would reach an agreement on the remaining 4
per cent of their common border. Following the
provisional agreement on the border signed in April
2005 during the visit of Indonesian President
Yudhoyono to Timor-Leste, the two countries have
started the process of further delineating the borders
through surveys in selected locations. In addition,
Timor-Leste and Indonesia have launched the bilateral
Commission for Truth and Friendship.

New opportunities and challenges have emerged
in the economic sphere. Revenues from Timor Sea oil
and gas resources have started to flow in to make up
for declining budgetary support from development
partners. The Government has drawn up legislation to
bring about effective management of petroleum
resources for the benefit of current and, more
important, future generations. After an exhaustive
public consultation process, the National Parliament
unanimously passed three pieces of legislation, namely,
the Petroleum Fund Act and the law on petroleum
taxation, on 13 July, and the law on petroleum
activities, on 23 August. UNOTIL civilian advisers
played an important role in the formulation of those
pieces of legislation and in the establishment of the
Petroleum Fund itself. In addition, laws on domestic
and external investment were promulgated on 27 May
and are expected to encourage foreign direct
investment in T imor-Leste.

Let me now turn to the status of the
implementation of UNOTIL's mandate in the three
respective areas outlined by resolution 1599 (2005).
The first component is support to critical State
institutions through the provision of 45 civilian
advisers. Those advisers have continued to play a key
role, not only in the mentoring and training of their
Timorese counterparts but also through embarking
upon formal academic training activities, particularly
in the justice sector.

I am pleased to report that as a result of the
tireless efforts of UNOTIL's civilian advisers,
Timorese counterparts have increased their ownership
of the functional responsibilities carried out by their
offices. Yet, the effectiveness of UNOTIL's civilian
advisers in transferring skills and knowledge has
continued to be hindered by the lack of a minimum
national capacity in such highly technical and
specialized as the justice and finance sectors, as well as
by the difficulty faced by State institutions in
establishing and implementing a viable career-
development system. These challenges require
concerted and well-coordinated support by the
international community.

In that regard, UNOTIL has developed a new
strategy, in close consultation with stakeholders, on
how best to strengthen the capacity of key sovereign
State institutions responsible for public administration,
the maintenance of law and order, justice, respect for
human rights and democratic governance. Constructive
dialogue has indeed taken place to ensure that Timor-
Leste will be able to assume the responsibility for its
institutional capacity development by itself, within the
sustainable development assistance framework, by the
end of May 2006.

The first Consultative Group meeting was
convened on 28 June, opened by the President and
chaired by the Prime Minister and myself, to ascertain
the strategic approach for enhanced institutional
capacity-building support. It was followed by a series
of policy review and coordination meetings to identify
specific institutional capacity-building requirements in
such areas as financial management, customs
administration and drafting of legislation.

I will now turn to the second component: support
to the development of the national police and the
further development of the Border Patrol Unit (BPU)
through the provision of 60 police training advisers and
15 military training advisers. UNOTIL police and
military training advisers have conducted joint
assessments of each unit within their Timorese
counterparts to measure the existing capacity of the
police force and to plan a strategy for their further
development. That exercise is in itself a capacity-
building process, as it has trained the Timorese police
on how to conduct assessments and formulate plans
based on perceived needs.

The second Consultative Group meeting of all
stakeholders was held on 26 July to examine the four
pillars of that joint strategy for police development:
professional ethics, leadership and strategic
development, integration with bilaterally supported
activities and effective border management.
I am pleased to report that the 15 military training
advisers, working closely with UNOTIL police training
advisers, are now conducting a training programme for
the Border Patrol Unit. This training is focused on a
broad range of border management skills that will
provide the BPU with the necessary capacity and
confidence to interact with their Indonesian military
counterparts as professional partners. Following this
training phase, the military training advisers will
conduct a comprehensive validation of the BPU's
border management skills to confirm the BPU's
capacity to work without United Nations assistance.

Let me now turn to the third component: support
to democratic governance and human rights through
the provision of 10 human rights officers. As a key
element of UNOTIL's mandate, we have assigned six
human rights officers to respective national State
institutions - the Office of the Prime Minister, the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Interior
and Defence, the Ministry of Education, the Office of
the Provedor and the National Parliament - to
strengthen their capacity to protect and promote human
rights at all levels. We have also assigned five national
human rights officers to State institutions to play an
increasingly important role as part of the transition to
sustainable human rights development in Timor-Leste.
I wish to stress that I personally follow the
developments in this area closely and maintain a
vigorous and constructive dialogue with key
government and State actors to enhance our efforts.

I am delighted to report that the long-awaited
Provedor for Human Rights and Justice has recently
been sworn in by the National Parliament. This is a
significant step toward enhancement of transparency
and accountability in public administration, not only in
the human rights area but also in the fight against
corruption. UNOTIL will make the greatest possible
effort to strengthen the technical and functional
capacity of the Office of the Provedor as well as the
Offices of the Inspector General and Prosecutor-
General. UNOTIL is also prepared to assist in the
creation of legislation to establish the High
Administrative Tax and Audit Court, as envisaged in
the Constitution, and other administrative courts of
first instance.

Bringing to an end four years of its work, the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation -
CAVR - is nearing completion of its final report,
which will be delivered to the President and the
National Parliament, and then to the Secretary-General
by the end of October. The report will include
comprehensive recommendations, including on further
action on the issues of justice, reconciliation and
assistance to victims of past human rights violations.

Before I conclude this opening presentation of the
report, I also wish to report on the follow-up to the
serious crimes process. UNOTIL produced a copy of
the records compiled by the Serious Crimes Unit with
the support of experts from the United Nations
Department of Management. We are currently
discussing with the Timorese Government the draft
agreement on the preservation of serious crimes
records, which, once the agreement is signed, could be
shipped to United Nations Headquarters for safe
custody and archiving.

With regard to the serious crimes process itself,
the national judicial system demonstrated its capacities
to act upon the return of a former militia member who
had been indicted under the serious crimes process in
Timor-Leste. The first pre-trial hearing took place on 4
August and the Dili district court has scheduled a trial
for 3 September.

With respect to the follow-up on the report of the
Commission of Experts, the Secretary-General has
provided the Council a copy for review (8/2005/458). I
look forward to the deliberations by the Security
Council and the Council's advice in due course.

I should also add that in the absence of a United
Nations security force, the security and safety of
United Nations personnel remains a major concern and
a challenge to us in UNOTIL. In this regard, necessary
security measures have been developed within the
existing resources to ensure that all United Nations
personnel will remain safe and secure.

In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation
for the valuable work carried out by all the civilian,
police and military staff of UNOTIL for their dedicated

efforts in discharging the UNOTIL mandate in its In accordance with the understanding reached in
consolidation phase. the Council's prior consultations, I should now like to
invite Council members to informal consultations to

