The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion
Without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Misic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a place at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
response to the request contained in a letter dated
24 July 1995 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the
Permanent Mission of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, document 8/1995/610.

Members of the Council have received photocopies of
the following communications: letter dated 25 July 1995
from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent
Mission of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United Nations,
transmitting the text of a letter of the same date from the
President of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
addressed to the President of the Security Council, which
will be issued as document 5/1995/611; letter dated 25 July
1995 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the
Permanent Mission of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council, which
will be issued as document S/1995/612; letter dated 24 July
1995 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the
Permanent Mission of Yugoslavia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council, which
will be issued as document S/1995/613; and letter dated
25 July 1995 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the
Permanent Mission of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, which will be issued as document S/1995/617.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is deeply concerned
about the situation in and around the safe area of
Zepa in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Council notes the letter of 25 July 1995 from
the President of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the President of the Security
Council (S/l995/611).

"The Security Council reaffirms its previous
relevant resolutions and itsstatement of 20 July
1995 (S/PRST/1995/33). It reiterates in the
strongest possible terms its condemnation of the
Bosnian Serb offensive against the safe area and
demands that the Bosnian Serbs comply fully with
the requirements set out in that statement as well as
its earlier resolutions. The Council further demands
that Bosnian Serb forces withdraw from the safe
areas of Srebrenica and Zepa.

"The Security Council remains particularly
concerned at the plight of the civilian population and
other persons protected under international
humanitarian law in the Zepa area. It welcomes and
supports the efforts being made by UNPROFOR and
the international humanitarian agencies, as requested
by the President of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to achieve a safe evacuation of those
civilians who wish to leave and stresses the
importance it attaches to the success of these efforts.
It requests the Secretary-General to use all resources
available to him to that end and calls on the parties
to cooperate.

"The Security Council demands that
UNPROFOR and the international humanitarian
agencies be provided with immediate and unhindered
access to the population of the area and, in
particular, that the Bosnian Serb party provide
access to representatives of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to all civilians
 

who decide to remain and permit the ICRC to register
any persons detained against their will and visit them
immediately."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1995/34.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda,

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 840 pm,

