The President (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Honduras.

Honduras views with the utmost concern the events in
Afghanistan, a country afflicted by an interminable civil
war that is continuing to sap its economy and damaging the
security and well-being of its people. The prospects for
peace and stability in Afghanistan seem to be receding as
the Taliban movement and the forces of the previous
Government continue to resort to military force to achieve
their objectives.

My delegation reminds the Afghan parties that the
resort to force is not a viable option in the search for a
solution to the Afghan conflict. The parties must resort to
peaceful means by beginning, first and foremost, a dialogue
that will enable them to reach a broad, political settlement
restoring peace and leading them to national reconciliation.

 

We consider that the United Nations Special Mission
to Afghanistan is playing a major role in promoting a
peaceful solution to the conflict. Accordingly, we would
urge the parties to cooperate with the Special Mission to
achieve that objective.

My delegation is also concerned that recent political
events may further aggravate the situation of human rights
in Afghanistan. We appeal to the Afghan parties to
respect the fundamental human rights of the civilian
population and scrupulously to abide by international
humanitarian law.

In the current situation of civil war and political
instability in Afghanistan, the sense of insecurity
prevailing throughout the country is fuelled by the
constant flow of arms and munitions sent to Afghan
factions from other countries. We remind all States that
it is necessary to comply with the relevant resolutions on
the illicit traffic of weapons.

Finally, my delegation wishes to reiterate its appeal
to the Afghan parties that, for the sake of peace and
national reconciliation, they desist from armed struggle,
establish a ceasefire and begin a constructive dialogue, in
cooperation with the United Nations, leading to peace.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker is the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

