Mr. Stenlund (Finland): At the outset, Madam
President, let me express our sincere thanks to the
United States delegation for convening this very
important debate.

The situation in Iraq remains critical on the
humanitarian and security fronts. The advance of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has
been a shock. It is a matter of grave concern for the
international community. The brutal terrorist actions of
ISIL must be unequivocally condemned.

The recently appointed Government in Iraq
represents an important step forward. The international
community needs to continue its support to Iraq in
maintaining its territorial integrity and strengthening
the inclusiveness of its governance structures.
Responsible religious and traditional leaders can
play a constructive role in reconciliation, uniting the
population and fighting ISIL.

The humanitarian situation is a priority. In Iraq,
1.8 million people have been forced to leave their homes,
while refugees from Syria pose an additional burden.
To respond to the needs of displaced people in Iraq,
Finland has allocated €500,000 through the World Food
Programme. By the end of this year, with an additional
allocation of €2.5 million, our humanitarian assistance
to the Syrian crisis will amount to €31 million. This,
we hope, will also help to alleviate the situation in Iraq.

As far as development cooperation with Iraq
is concerned, €800,000 will be channelled through
the Danish Refugee Council to ease the situation of
women refugees from Syria in northern Iraq. Finland is
convinced that women's full participation is a priority
in efforts to build an inclusive society. We have also
donated €500,000 to a UN-Women project that increases
women's political participation in Iraq. Finland is
considering giving further assistance, primarily to
Syria, based on needs and financing requirements,
thereby helping the region as a whole.

The global threat of ISIL can be successfully
countered only by means of a broad and inclusive
coalition supported by the United Nations. It is important
that the Governments most directly threatened by ISIL
play a prominent role in this endeavour. We welcome
the United States initiative to build such a coalition to
address the danger posed by ISIL. We also welcome
the fact that the Security Council has voiced itself clear
on this subject, and hope that the Council remains
persistent in supporting the international efforts.

As President Obama underscored, success will not
be achieved only by military means. It is also essential
to adopt a long-term, comprehensive approach with a
wide range of measures, including capacity-building,
humanitarian assistance and actions to prevent terrorism
and extremism. Finland is committed to participating,
together with the international community, in
addressing the threat of ISIL. We recognize the need
to respond through military means, although we are
not planning to participate in combat actions or arms
deliveries.

Finland is in favour of an active role for the
European Union (EU) in supporting Iraq. Support
for capacity-building to address challenges related to
fighting a terrorist organization like ISIL should be
further explored by the EU. The protection of civilians
and respect for international law and international
humanitarian law could form part of the EU's capacity-
building assistance. Finland would be prepared to
contribute. International assistance to building the
capacities of security sector structures is crucial.
Finland could look at certain niche capabilities, such as
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear, provided
an appropriate framework is available. We attach great
importance to addressing the issue of foreign fighters.
In that regard, we are currently assessing our national
measures and look forward to finding solutions in
cooperation with the European Union and beyond.

