Mr. Annabi: Thank you, Madam President, for
giving me this opportunity to introduce the Secretary-
General's end of mandate report on the United Mission
of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) (S/2005/310)
and to provide an update on the preparations for the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL), which was
established under Security Council resolution 1599
(2005) of 28 April.

During the period covered in the Secretary-
General's report, there were a few notable political
developments. Local elections were conducted in a
peaceful and orderly manner in the eastern districts of
Timor-Leste on 17 and 23 March. Although the ruling
Fretilin party fared well, independent and opposition
candidates won a significant number of seats,
especially in the districts of Lautem and Monatuto.

Another notable development was the
organization by church leaders of a large demonstration
outside the Government building in Dili in response to
a Government proposal to designate religious
education as an optional subject in some primary
schools across Timor-Leste. The demonstration, which
lasted 20 days, with numbers oscillating between a few
hundred and several thousand, remained largely
peaceful.

On the advice of the UNMISET civilian police,
the Timorese national police exercised restraint,
opening and maintaining lines of communication with
the organizers of the demonstration. The Government
also adopted an overall conciliatory approach towards
the protest. A joint declaration was eventually signed
by Prime Minister Alkatiri and the two bishops of
Timor-Leste on 7 May, recognizing that religious
education should be included as a regular discipline in
the school curriculum, with attendance subject to
parental wishes. The demonstration thus came to an
end with participants dispersing peacefully shortly
after the signing of the joint declaration.

Relations between Timor-Leste and Indonesia
continued to improve, culminating in the visit of
President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono of Indonesia to
Timor-Leste on 8 and 9 April. During that visit, the
Foreign Ministers of Timor-Leste and Indonesia signed
the Provisional Agreement on the Borderline, which
came into effect on 8 May and defines about 96 per
cent of the entire land border. Most of the remaining 4
per cent of the border relates to the Oecussi enclave.
The relationship between the Indonesian Armed
Forces (TNI) and the Timorese Border Patrol Unit
(BPU) also continued to develop with assistance from
the UNMISET military liaison group. On 21 April,
however, the BPU exchanged fire with Indonesian
military personnel, who were reportedly pursuing a
group of smugglers at the border between the two
countries. During the exchange of fire, one Indonesian
soldier received a gunshot injury to the leg. The
Timorese police and the TNI are conducting separate
investigations to ascertain the full circumstances of the
shooting. UNMISET'S military liaison officers have
facilitated two meetings between the BPU and the TNI
to exchange information, and they continue to assist
both sides to conduct an impartial investigation.
However, the TNI cancelled a third meeting with the
BPU, indicating that it would not participate in further
talks with the BPU until the Timorese police were
prepared to share the results of their investigation.

That incident highlights the continuing need for a
United Nations presence to facilitate interaction
between the Border Patrol Unit and the Indonesian
military. Further training assistance is also required to
support the development of the Border Patrol Unit and
to enable it to assume full responsibility for contacts
with its Indonesian counterparts by 20 May 2006, when
UNOTIL's mandate comes to an end.

Similarly, despite the professionalism displayed
during the recent demonstration in Dili, the Rapid
Intervention Unit still relies to a large extent on the
advice of UNMISET's civilian police component.
Other specialized units of the Timorese police, such as
the Police Reserve Unit and the immigration and
marine units, also require further training assistance to
become fully self-sufficient in the performance of their
tasks.

With regard to Timor-Leste's State institutions
and administration, further progress was achieved
towards their consolidation, with assistance from
UNMISET civilian advisers. Local ownership has been
enhanced, especially in the finance sector. The
functioning of the judicial system, however, continues
to depend on the support of international advisers who
provide legal advice to the Government and training
for judicial officials and who still have to perform
certain key line functions.

In that context, the decision of the Security
Council to authorize a one-year follow-on mission in
Timor-Leste will enable the United Nations to make a
further contribution towards addressing the country's
outstanding needs for assistance.

I visited Timor-Leste from 26 April to 2 May, and
I can assure members that, although Security Council
resolution 1599 (2005) does not fully respond to the
expectations of the Timorese Government, they
welcomed its adoption and the further assistance it
entails for the continued development of Timor-Leste's
State institutions and internal security agencies.

During my stay in Timor-Leste, I had the
opportunity to discuss the UNOTIL mandate
implementation plan with the Timorese Government
and the UNMISET leadership. Some of its main
features are included in the report before the Council.
Meanwhile, the allocation of the 45 approved civilian
adviser posts to the various Timorese State institutions
has been finalized in consultation with the Government
of Timor-Leste.

UNMISET is currently reviewing the profiles of
the international advisers who are deployed in Timor-
Leste to evaluate the extent to which they match the
new requirements. For those who match the new
requirements, their retention for another year has been
recommended. Nevertheless, it is estimated that the
current pool of advisers does not include the skills
required for some 23 new positions out of the 45
authorized. Those will have to be advertised. All
current advisers will remain in place until the new ones
have been deployed, to avoid gaps in assistance and to
ensure a smooth transition. The job descriptions for all
the adviser posts are available to interested Member
States.

With regard to the 40 police advisers authorized
under resolution 1599 (2005), their primary task will
be the provision of targeted training to the specialized
units of the Timorese police, including the Rapid
Intervention Unit, the Police Reserve Unit, the
immigration unit, the marine unit and the national
security unit. The training will cover areas ranging
from riot control techniques and the use and
maintenance of fire arms, to immigration and human
trafficking, navigation skills and close protection.

Most training will be implemented through
conducting courses on the training of trainers in order
to ensure a widespread and sustainable transfer of
skills. Specialized training will also be provided to the
Border Patrol Unit (BPU) of the Timorese police. For
that purpose, resolution 1599 (2005) authorizes the
deployment of 35 additional advisers, 15 of whom will
be military advisers.

As indicated in the report of the Secretary-
General, the other 20 positions will be filled by police
training advisers, who will focus on imparting policing
skills to the Border Patrol Unit. These skills will
include border area community policing, evidence
gathering and suspect handling, as well as knowledge
of immigration law and customs legislation,
communications skills and reporting procedures. The
15 military advisers will assist the 20 additional police
advisers in the training and mentoring of the BPU in
the area of border management. To that end, a joint
concept of operations has been developed, which
provides for the police and military advisers to be co-
located on the three border areas of Bobonaro, Suai and
Oecussi.

The UNOTIL military advisers will focus on
coordinating contacts between the BPU and the
Indonesian military, including through regular inter-
command and border meetings. The aim of this joint
assistance programme is to enable the BPU to assume
full border management responsibility and to interact
independently with the Indonesian TNI at the
appropriate levels by May 2006.

As in the case of the civilian advisers, some of
the existing police advisers will be retained, while
others will be replaced to meet the new requirements
for specialized training. In that connection, a selection
of those police advisers who possess the appropriate
skills for continued service under UNOTIL has already
been completed. Similarly, some of the current military
officers will remain in Timor-Leste for a few weeks
beyond 20 May in order to ensure a smooth transition
from UNMISET to UNOTIL.

As Council members are aware, resolution 1599
(2005) did not authorize the deployment of the 144-
strong backup security force recommended in the
18 February 2005 report of the Secretary-General
(S/2005/99).

During my recent visit to Timor-Leste I had the
opportunity to travel to the border area, where I was
briefed by the UNMISET contingents deployed there
on the implications of their imminent withdrawal. It is
clear that their departure will create some gaps. Not
only did they provide, by their presence, a significant
deterrent to criminal activities and a reassuring
presence, they also ensured - through the services of
the engineering unit - the maintenance of the land
route from Dili to the border. That land route is
expected to become impassable without such
intervention, especially during the rainy season.

The services of the military component's level-
two medical unit will also be missed by both United
Nations personnel and the local communities. In
addition, the removal of UNMISET's troops could
have implications for the security of United Nations
personnel. Consultations will therefore be undertaken
with the Government of Timor-Leste, as well as with
neighbouring countries, with a view to putting in place,
on a contingency basis, the arrangements necessary to
ensure the security of United Nations staff deployed to
Timor-Leste.

While in Timor-Leste, I also had the opportunity
to be briefed on the serious crimes process, and to meet
with staff from the Serious Crimes Unit, the Defence
Lawyers Unit and the Special Panels for serious
crimes. I wish to note that, according to all those who
are familiar with their work, they have done a very
professional job under difficult and challenging
circumstances. However, as Council members are
aware, in accordance with resolution 1543 (2004),
adopted on 14 May 2004, the serious crimes process is
to be terminated in a few days, on 20 May 2005.

In the meantime, as indicated in the report before
the Council, the Secretary-General has established a
Commission of Experts which is conducting a review
of the prosecution of serious human rights violations
committed in Timor-Leste in 1999. The Commission of
Experts has written to the Secretary-General to request
that the liquidation of the Serious Crimes Unit be
suspended until the findings of the Commission have
been submitted and the Security Council has had a
chance to consider them. It is expected that the
Commission of Experts will submit its report by the
end of this month, following the Commission's
upcoming visit to Jakarta, which is scheduled to take
place from 18 to 20 May. In the meantime, 10 staff
members of the Serious Crimes Unit will be retained
during UNMISET's liquidation phase in order to
ensure that a complete copy of all records compiled by
the Serious Crimes Unit is preserved in accordance
with paragraph 9 of resolution 1599 (2005).

In conclusion, let me say that while most of the
credit for the remarkable progress achieved in Timor-
Leste must be given to the Timorese leaders and
people, there is no doubt that UNMISET, and the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor before it, have made a key contribution to this
historic process. More needs to be done, and UNOTIL
will do its best to make a further contribution over the
next 12 months to the peacebuilding efforts of the
United Nations in Timor-Leste.
However, further generous support from the
international community will remain indispensable in
order to consolidate the remarkable gains made so far
in building sustainable State institutions and to enable
the people of Timor-Leste to achieve the stable and
democratic State that they have pursued with such
determination and courage.

