Mr. Aman (Malaysia): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting and for this
opportunity to address the Security Council. I also
wish to convey my appreciation to Under-Secretary-
General Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing on the latest
developments in Ukraine.

I recognize my colleagues, Her Excellency
Ms. Julie Bishop of Australia, His Excellency Mr. Jean
Asselborn of Luxembourg and His Excellency Mr. Frans
Timmermans of the Netherlands. I wish to thank
Ms. Bishop for her tireless efforts in seeking justice for
the victims and closure for their families. I also wish
to also thank Mr. Timmermans for the comprehensive
briefing and for the Netherlands leadership in this
international investigation.

Over the past few months, we and our Governments
have worked very closely in various areas, including on
the recovery and repatriation of the remains of victims
as well as the ongoing investigation on the downing
of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. I hope that, over
the coming days, we will continue such cooperation in
order to ultimately bring closure to this tragic incident.

I wish to take this opportunity to convey my
deepest and heartfelt sympathy and condolences to the
families and loved ones of those who lost their lives on
board that ill-fated plane.

The downing ofFlight MH-17 starkly highlights the
tragic consequences when a situation deteriorates into
violent armed conflict. In that connection, Malaysia
welcomes the announcement of the ceasefire agreement
between the parties concerned on 5 September,
including those in eastern Ukraine, where Flight MH-
17 was downed and where its wreckage still lies, more
than two months later.

As highlighted in Under-Secretary-General
Feltman's briefing earlier, the situation on the ground
remains fragile. In that regard, Malaysia urges all parties
to exercise maximum restraint to prevent a further
escalation of the conflict. Malaysia also reiterates the
call on all parties to respect the ceasefire agreement
and spare no effort to work towards a sustainable peace.
In Malaysia's view, a sustained ceasefire, particularly
in eastern Ukraine, is crucial so as to enable a full,
thorough and independent international investigation
into the incident, as demanded by the Council in
resolution 2166 (2014).

In the immediate aftermath of the downing of
Flight MH-I7, Malaysia was very clear on its priorities.
Primarily, those were to secure assurances on, first, the
recovery of the remains of the victims; secondly, the
recovery of the flight data and cockpit voice recorders;
and, thirdly, safe access by international investigators
to the crash site. In seeking to achieve those objectives,
Malaysia reached out to all the parties concerned. For
Malaysia, the humanitarian and human element was of
first and foremost concern.

Consequently, an understanding was reached on
the three priorities Ijust mentioned. Thus far, the first
two assurances have been implemented. Unfortunately,
coordinated and unfettered access to the crash site by
the international team of air safety investigators has not
yet been possible, due to the ongoing fighting in and
around the crash site.

With regard to the ongoing efforts to identify the
remains of the victims, as stated by the Netherlands
Foreign Minister earlier, to date 225 out of a total of
298 victims have been identified. Of the 43 Malaysian
victims, 40 have been identified and 35 of them have
been repatriated to Malaysia.

On that note, I wish to extend the heartfelt
appreciation of the people and the Government of
Malaysia to the Dutch authorities for making that
possible. As we speak, forensic experts are relentlessly
undertaking the painstaking work of identifying the
remaining victims, with a view to reuniting them with
their loved ones as soon as possible.

Malaysia welcomes the preliminary report of the
independent international investigation team led by the
Dutch Safety Board, which was released just last week.
Among other things, the report confirms that the aircraft
was flying in unrestricted airspace, was following the
route and flying at the altitude prescribed by the air
traffic control authorities. The report also confirms that
the aircraft was in an airworthy condition at departure.
There were no indications of any technical problems or
actions by the crew that could have contributed to the
crash. The report also concludes that the aircraft was hit
by a large number of high-energy objects that pierced
it from the outside, causing the aircraft to disintegrate
in the air.

The findings of the report notwithstanding, crucial
questions remain unanswered, including the following.
Who was responsible for the downing of the aircraft?
What exactly happened when communications between
Flight MH-l7 and the air traffic controllers stopped
abruptly at 13.20 hours on 17 July?

In the light of such lingering questions, last
week Malaysia dispatched a high-level delegation,
led by its Defence Minister, to Ukraine, Russia and
the Netherlands to further explore the possibility of
affording the international investigation team safe and
unfettered access to the crash site. Malaysia wishes
to inform the Council that it has secured renewed
commitment and assurances from the Governments of
Ukraine and Russia to assist in facilitating safe passage
to the wreckage area. We hope that such assurances will
be translated into concrete action as soon as possible.

Time is of the essence. The approaching winter
could severely hamper recovery and investigation
efforts. Malaysia will not rest until justice is done. It
would be totally unacceptable for the families and loved
ones of the victims to experience the unimaginable
pain of losing their loved ones, only to learn that the
perpetrators might not be held to account due to our
inaction. The international community owes it to the
victims' families and loved ones to ensure that those
responsible for this heinous crime be swiftly brought
to justice. We need to cooperate fully to establish
accountability for the perpetrators of this crime. I
strongly reiterate the importance of transparency,
impartiality and thoroughness in the conduct of the
investigation to ensure that the truth prevails.

