Mr. Kridelka (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Under- Secretary-General Lowcock for their relevant briefings, including on the importance of the role of women and the courage of Yemeni children and their teachers. I will focus on three issues today: the rising violence in Al-Hudaydah, the recent prisoner exchange agreement and the findings of the Group of Eminent Experts on Yemen, particularly with regard to violence against children. Belgium is very concerned about the recent escalation of violence in Al-Hudaydah and _ the ongoing fighting in Ma'rib. This violence increases the pressure on an already exhausted civilian population. It undermines the efforts of Special Envoy Griffiths. For months, we have been waiting for a joint statement that would put the parties back on the path to peace. The lack of progress on the joint statement leads us to question the true political commitment of the parties. Only dialogue can put an end to the war and resolve the profound differences in the country. We urge all actors to remain engaged in the peace talks under the auspices of the United Nations and to implement the Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement. Once again, I would like to place particular emphasis on the issue of the oil tanker FSO SAFER. No one can ignore the ecological disaster that would occur in the event of a spill. We urge the Houthis to provide access to the United Nations team as soon as possible. The agreement between the parties to exchange more than 1,000 prisoners is good news. It has the potential to contribute to increased confidence, which is fundamental to progress towards lasting peace. We commend all those involved in achieving that agreement, in particular the International Committee of the Red Cross. Let me draw attention to a closely related and particularly worrisome aspect of the war in Yemen - the fate of civilians arbitrarily detained and forcibly disappeared, people who have disappeared because of their political views, profession, activism or religious affiliation. Since 2016, the independent Yemeni organization Mwatana for Human Rights has documented a total of 1,605 cases of arbitrary detention and no less than 770 cases of enforced disappearance. As the American investigative journalist Patrick Radden Keefe writes in his book Say Nothing: "Perhaps the cruelest feature of forced disappearance as an instrument of war is that it denies the bereaved any closure, relegating them to a permanent limbo of uncertainty." Belgium urges all parties to the conflict in Yemen to respond to the appeals of the families of the victims, to reveal the fate and whereabouts of those forcibly disappeared and to urgently release all those arbitrarily detained, including journalists. I would like to welcome the renewal of the mandate of the Group of Eminent International and Regional Experts on Yemen, as endorsed by the Human Rights Council in Geneva last week. The report of the Group of Eminent Experts on the situation of human rights in Yemen (A/HRC/45/6) is fundamental to the work of the Security Council. Human rights and accountability for serious human rights violations are inextricably linked to the maintenance of international peace and security. Belgium is particularly concerned about the conclusions of the Group of Eminent Experts regarding children. Over the past year, there has been a high rate of casualties among children in several cases of illegal attacks against civilians, including during air strikes that the Group has been able to investigate. Children account for almost one third of civilians killed or maimed in armed violence in the first half of 2020. Those figures are horrific. The violence must stop. Accountability must be ensured. The Yemeni people have suffered for too long. They deserve peace and stability.
