Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We join other
delegations in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening today's meeting. We also express our heartfelt
gratitude to Special Representative David Shearer
for his briefing, which was, as usual, comprehensive.
We thank him and his team from the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) for their tireless
work in peacemaking in South Sudan. We further
welcome the report (S/2019/722) of the Secretary-
General on UNMISS and on the protection of civilians
and its recommendations (S/2019/74l). We also want
to welcome our friend and colleague the Permanent
Representative of South Sudan. We look forward to his
statement to the Council, which he will make in a few
minutes' time.

The decades of instability, conflict and
underdevelopment will continue to require our
collective and steadfast commitment to ensuring
that we put South Sudan on a trajectory of peace and
prosperity. I would like to limit my statement three
issues: the political process, the security situation and
the humanitarian situation in South Sudan.

With regard to the political situation, South Africa
welcomes the recent face-to-face meetings between
President Salva Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar as a step in
the right direction. It was a much-anticipated meeting,
as there is a clear realization that it will help in unlocking
the political impasse that has stalled the implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. South Africa
would like to thank the new authorities in Khartoum
for assisting their family in the south to meet and talk.
We also want to thank the Prime Minister of Ethiopia
for his ongoing tireless efforts to further peace and
stability in the Horn of Africa.

The road ahead has been charted. The
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan
is key in addressing a number of challenges that the
people of South Sudan continue to grapple with,
including instability, security and humanitarian and
human rights crises. We have to address the root causes
that led to the conflict. Otherwise we will continue to
deal with the perennial symptomatic features, which
include humanitarian challenges and conflict-related
sexual violence.

There are many grass-roots peace initiatives
throughout the country have been taken in earnest,
because the people of South Sudan are yearning for
peace. The leadership of South Sudan needs to redouble
its efforts and join with the people through action in
the form of the implementation of the Revitalized
Peace Agreement.

The inclusion of women and their meaningful
participation in the peace process remains an integral
part of ensuring that all citizens' aspirations are
addressed. We are encouraged by the work already being
undertaken by women-led civil society organizations to
contribute to the peace process and rebuild the country.
By appointing a woman Foreign Minister, President Kiir
has acknowledged the capacity and capability of South
Sudanese women. We congratulate the Government for
taking that step.

South Africa appreciates the ongoing work by
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
in conjunction with the African Union, to facilitate
and mediate the peace process in South Sudan. It is
important that the Council continue to support and
complement those efforts.

On the security situation, we are encouraged
that the cessation of hostilities continues to hold and
has led to a significant reduction in security-related
incidents, as Special Representative Shearer reported
this morning. However, we remain concerned about
ongoing violent incidents with opposition groups, as
well as the intercommunal violence that is taking place.
In that regard, we commend the work of UNMISS and
the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism in their role to support the
Revitalized Agreement, to be signed and, hopefully,
implemented by 12 November.

On the humanitarian situation, the crisis unfolding
and the magnitude ofthe number ofpeople in distress, as
highlighted in the Secretary-General's report, is totally
reprehensible. Such human suffering is an indictment
of us all, as humankind. We urge the international
stakeholders to continue contributing to post-conflict
reconstruction and development programmes and to
support efforts to repatriate and resettle internally
displaced persons and returning refugees in South
Sudan - as they return in the thousands. South Africa
will continue to offer South Sudan humanitarian
assistance, especially as many communities return to
their villages and towns.

Lastly, we would like to echo my colleagues from
the United States and the public statements by most
Council members in welcoming the forthcoming
Security Council visit to South Sudan, led by
South Africa and the United States. We hope that
it will provide further impetus to the parties in the
implementation, without delay, of all the provisions of
the Revitalized Agreement.

