Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
Permit me to express my satisfaction, Sir, at seeing
you, the representative of the friendly country
Mauritius, presiding over the work of the Security
Council this month. It gives me pleasure also to convey
our thanks to the friendly countries whose tenure as
members of the Security Council has expired, including
Mali, whose Permanent Representative served as
President of the Security Council last month. It further
gives me pleasure to congratulate the new members of
the Council - Bulgaria, Cameroon, Guinea, Mexico
and the Syrian Arab Republic - and to wish them
success in their work.

We endorse the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Morocco in his capacity as Chairman
of the Arab Group for this month. It was intended that
members of the Group would be content with that
statement, because of the Council's wish to hear
regional statements in today's debate. But a statement
made a short time ago, as expected, prompted us to
request to participate in this important discussion; here,
we thank you, Mr. President, and the other members of
the Council for permitting us to take this valuable
opportunity to participate.

I wish at the outset to express our respect for the
efforts of the Counter-Terrorism Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) and for those of its
Chairman, Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock.

In our statement to the Council on 14 December
2001, we said the following:

"On the question of terrorism, the Palestinian
side has taken a clear stand against international
terrorism and against terrorist groups with a
global dimension. The Palestinian side joined the
international consensus on this issue following
the September disaster in the United States. In
line with that clear position - as well as prior to
those events - we have also rejected suicide
bombings carried out in Israel targeting Israeli
civilians. We condemn them as terrorist acts, and
we view them as incompatible with Palestinian
commitments and as acts that harm the national
interests of the Palestinian people." (S/PV4438)

That position remains clear and fair, in spite of all
the acts carried out by official Israel - not only by
Israeli groups or organizations that committed acts of
war against our people - and regardless of the facts -
which were recalled by the representative of Israel -
prior to and after the establishment of Israel. These
were acts that took place under the British mandate,
such as the assassination of Count Bernadotte, the
Mediator of the United Nations and the massacres
committed against our people over the years.

We also said, with regard to any acts of violence
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, that:

"We do not support or condone such acts, because
we are trying to reach a peaceful negotiated
solution. Moreover, we affirm that these acts are
incompatible with our commitments, including
our commitment to the ceasefire. But we
absolutely do not accept any attempt to label
those acts as terrorist acts. Over the years,
resistance to foreign occupation has been, and it
remains, a legitimate right under international law
and international humanitarian law. In the
Palestinian case, there are no protected Israeli
civilians in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem. Israeli settlers are there
illegally, and were sent in grave breach of the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War and
of the first Protocol Additional to the
Conventions. They came to colonize Palestinian
lands and thus to deny the rights and the
existence of our people. I would add that most of
the settlers are armed, which makes them illegal
combatants or members of militias. Over the
years, they have terrorized and attacked
Palestinian civilians. One example was the
massacre committed by a settler at al-Haram Al-
Ibrahimi at Hebron." (S/PV4438)

The acts of these settlers and their safety is the
exclusive responsibility of the occupying Power.

Also, on the basis of the clear provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention and the First Protocol, we
accuse the Government of Mr. Sharon - the
Government of the occupying Power - of committing
war crimes against our people. We also accuse Israel,
the occupying Power, of committing State terror
against our people. It has been involved in killing
civilians and destroying establishments in order to
spread terror among the population and to force them
to accept its political point of view.

The responsibility of the international community
is very clear, as is the responsibility of the Security
Council, particularly in the light of this campaign
against international terror. It was encouraging to listen
here to the representative of Israel speaking in a very
uncustomary way of the need to abide by the
resolutions of the Security Council. In this respect, we
admit that we did not understand the reference this
morning to the lack of a legal basis for the term "State
terrorism". If a certain act constitutes terrorism, is
considered terrorism, it is terrorism, whether it was
committed by individuals, organizations or States.

Moreover, how could there be a term such as
"State-sponsored terrorism" if there were no such thing
as State terrorism? If individuals sponsored by a
Government commit a terrorist act, it is terrorism.
Israel is a State that sponsors terrorism. However, if the
same act is perpetrated by people working within the
structures of a State, is this not State terrorism?

We believe that this strange talk cannot serve our
common objectives in combating terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, whenever and wherever it
happens.

Such a discussion may underline the importance
of finishing the work of the General Assembly in
putting the final touches on the comprehensive
convention on terrorism. We and many Member States
have adopted a very flexible position, hoping to crown
our efforts with success. Unfortunately, some insist on
using this flexibility in the service of illegitimate
political interests. Worse still, some are actually trying
to change some of the rules of international law and
international humanitarian law. They are trying to
accomplish what appears to be a negation of the First
Protocol of the Geneva Conventions. This is illogical
and does not serve the interests of the international
community with regard to combating terrorism. We call
on all Member States to make some additional efforts
to arrive at the necessary solutions and accomplish this
major achievement, which will assist the international
community in combating international terrorism in a
more effective manner.

