The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

At the London conference on Somalia 10 days
ago, the international community set out a vision for
bringing peace to Somalia and for supporting the
Somali people in their search for a better future for
their country. I would like to offer my thanks and
sincere gratitude to all the countries that attended.

We agreed that we needed to focus on addressing
the underlying causes of instability, as well as to take
immediate action to address the symptoms of Somalia's
problems in the form of piracy, terrorism, poverty and
famine. We were clear that, while the famine in
Somalia was now over, the humanitarian situation
remained grave, and that we should prioritize our
support to the Somalis in need.

I would like to focus today on how we can build
on the platform of London to maintain our focus on
those underlying causes, by sustaining the momentum
of the political process, building security and justice
capacity, and supporting stability at the local level.

First, with respect to the political process, as my
Prime Minister said in London, the Garowe meetings
have made really positive steps towards replacing the
Transitional Federal Institutions in August with
something more accountable, more inclusive and more
representative. Our responsibility now is to support the
United Nations and the Somalis in order to ensure that
the Somali-led process for selecting the independent
interim electoral commission and the national
Constituent Assembly are truly representative. Somali
leaders must work towards a political process that is
open to all those prepared to reject violent opposition.
Only if Somalis have a say in the shape of their future
institutions will they feel inclined to give their backing
to a new Government.

We need to consider how we can support the
process, both by incentivizing those currently in
positions of power to be prepared to step down and
allow new arrangements to be introduced, and by
maintaining pressure on potential spoilers to prevent
them from blocking progress. I entirely agree with
remarks made by the United States representative on
that particular point. The timelines set out to lead the
process up to August are tight. We need to help the
Somalis maintain the momentum needed to meet them.

Secondly, with regard to security and justice, I
am delighted that we were able to adopt resolution
2036 (2012) ahead of the conference, thus providing a
proper package of support to an expanded African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). Along with a
number of other speakers today, I would like to pay
tribute to the brave soldiers, especially those from
Uganda and Burundi, who have paid the ultimate price.
They deserve proper logistics.

We now look to partners in Africa to provide the
additional troops mandated and to ensure the proper
coordination of efforts in Somalia under the AMISOM
banner. In the meantime, we and other international
partners need to continue to support elements of
AMISOM. not funded through the United Nations,
including troop stipends. In that respect, I join with the
representative of France in welcoming the European
Union's announcement of an additional €100 million in
funding.

The London conference sent a clear message. In
addition to supporting AMISOM, the international
community must redouble its support for the
development of local Somali security solutions,
including improved access to justice across the
country, which is a vital ingredient of human security.
Despite the efforts of a number of partners, Somali
security and justice institutions are currently poorly
resourced and lack capacity. We can and should do
more. We should improve our coordination and focus
in that area, in line with the principles agreed in
London, and we should work closely with the United
Nations Joint Security Committee. The end goal for us,
as well as for Somalis, is a Somalia that can provide
security for its own people without the need for
international troops. The development of effective
Somali judicial capacity will also enable Somalis to
tackle the scourge of terrorism and piracy. Increased
capability to prosecute pirates and the kingpins of
piracy will complement vital work to undermine the
piracy business model. I certainly agree with what the
French representative said a moment ago, when he
referred to a time in the future when we do not see any
more catch-and-release taking place. I particularly
welcome announcements at the London conference on
the establishment of an anti-piracy intelligence centre
and an international task force on piracy ransoms.

Finally, with respect to building stability at the
local level, the London conference saw the launch of a
new stability fund as a vehicle to help deliver support
in areas working to put in place accountable local
authorities. It is essential that we support those areas.
We must increase the number of people who feel safe
and secure, and we must improve the access of Somalis
to jobs, health, education and water. It is equally vital
that we also help local institutions that are accountable
for their actions and transparent in their management
of resources and that represent the interests of all
Somalis, not just the elite. That will serve as a
foundation for large-scale investment in Somalia's
economic development, thereby in the longer term
paving a path to stability. It will demonstrate to people
in areas liberated from Al-Shabaab that peace offers a
real and better alternative. I welcome contributions to
the stability fund announced in London, and call on
others to support those efforts.

At the London conference, there was wide
recognition that this is a key moment in Somalia's
history. We have an opportunity, now more than ever,
to build stability in Somalia. We need to take that
opportunity, build on gains on the ground, and turn our
consensus in London into actions and change that make
life better for the Somali people. If we succeed, then
people will look back on these few months as a real
turning point. If we fail, then the young of Somalia will
continue to grow up surrounded by violence,
helplessness, evil and degradation. We owe it to them
to redouble our efforts.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I wish to remind speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry on its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to
circulate their texts in writing and to deliver a
condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Somalia.

