Mr. Simonovie (Croatia): I am pleased to greet you,
Sir, as the President of the Security Council for the month
of March and welcome your initiative to hold an open
debate on the centrality of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of ex-combatants
to the restoration of stability and sustainable peace.
Croatia understands well the importance of the role
United Nations peacekeeping has played in the past and
could play in the future in this regard. Hence, we wish to
thank and commend the Secretary-General for his
thorough, systematic and comprehensive report on the
topic under our consideration.

The report represents a major contribution to
furthering the awareness of the importance of DDR to the
cause of consolidating peace in post-conflict societies in
several ways. First, it offers useful definitions of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in a
peacekeeping environment and a reminder that the success
of these activities depends on their comprehensive, mutual
and continuous reinforcement. Secondly, the report
contains a very useful compendium and critical
assessment of the ways and means in which the various
United Nations, regional and other actors have dealt with
DDR in the past within the context of some peacekeeping
operations and follow-on missions. Thirdly, the Secretary-
General identifies a number of challenges for future
implementation of DDR in all segments of the peace-

 

setting, peacekeeping and peace-building agendas. Fourthly,
he puts forward a number of innovative proposals for
further pioneering action or refinement by the Security
Council and other institutional actors with a vested interest
in assuring irreversible peace.

Croatia has hosted five distinct United Nations
peacekeeping operations in the last nine years. We have
gained experience that entitles us to reflect upon the lessons
learned in peacekeeping and peace-building. I wish to
briefly restate three points from the lessons learned from
the successful United Nations Transitional Administration
for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium
(UNTAES). These three points are: the disarmament model
that was used during the UNTAES mission; follow-on
security assistance and political missions that ensued upon
the successful completion of this United Nations Mission;
and national strategy and policy measures regarding the
rehabilitation and reintegration of former combatants.

UNTAES was created in an environment favourable to
its ultimate goal of the peaceful reintegration of the
formerly occupied Croatian territory. There was agreement
of the parties to the conflict. Recourse to the military option
was unattractive to all interested parties and the political
goal of peaceful reintegration was clearly set and known, as
well as supported by the political will of the host
Government, the international community and the skilled
United Nations leadership in the field. And yet, the process
of reintegration was, of course, more than politically
challenging. It represented major technical and bureaucratic
difficulties for the civilian aspects of reintegration.

Critical to the orderly implementation of the civilian

timetable for reintegration, however, was the process of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants. Importantly, this process was not only launched
early on in the operation, but also completed swiftly and in
parallel with an innovative manner of a weapons buy-back
scheme.
The firearms buy-back programme lasted approximately 10
months and was jointly conducted by the Croatian
Government and UNTAES. Under the programme, almost
10,000 firearms were collected, for which approximately
$1.6 million were paid. Since August 1999, any further
illegal possession of arms has been penalized. We do
recognize that, in some other environments, similar
weapons buy-back programmes produced undesired
consequences, but I wish to stress that in Croatia such a
programme worked quite well.

Another important element in UN TAES was the role
played by the Transitional Police Force, which was made
up of 40 per cent Croats, 40 per cent Serbs and 20 per
cent other ethnic groups present in the region. The
international community provided training assistance for
a number of the Transitional Police Force members,
which proved crucial for establishing a high level of
professionalism. This building of local capacity was Vital
to the proper reintegration of former combatants and the
maintenance of law and order.

The critical importance of economic and social
policy measures to speeding up reconciliation and the
overall post-conflict recovery cannot be overemphasized.
In Croatia, we tried to stimulate the reintegration of ex-
combatants in several ways, including by adopting an
amnesty law that exonerated former rebels, except for
those who had committed war crimes. Other measures
included priority access by veterans to higher education
and employment in the public sector; preferential lines of
credit for new business ventures or agricultural leases;
special unemployment benefits, including health care; and
early retirement benefits.

Such economic, social and development policy
measures have proven taxing on the national budget of an
economy burdened with reconstruction, low investment
and real growth rates and high unemployment, as is
always the case in a post-conflict society. The new
Croatian Government, which has also recently mounted a
major refugee return programme, has recognized the
challenges of the practical implementation of a
comprehensive reintegration policy. While offering its
unwavering commitment to implementing such a policy,
it has called for much needed international assistance in
resurrecting an economy that could sustain development
needs. At the same time, we recognize that the
contribution of institutional donors might be limited, as it
is also urgently needed elsewhere. Hence, we are placing
particular emphasis on the potential of the private sector
and direct business-to-business cooperation.

In this regard, we wholeheartedly support the
Secretary-General's emphasis on the potential role to be
played by the business community and his call on the
Security Council

"to explore the creation of mechanisms through
which it could enhance its capacity to enter into
dialogue with business". (S/2000/10]. para. 111)

 

Of equal and timely relevance is his call issued to
Member States to re-examine bilaterally the various
development and trade policies that favour employment
within post-conflict economies.

Although reconciliation is not emphasized in the
Secretary-General's report, we continue to hold that it
constitutes one of the cornerstones of a successful
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme.
Above all, establishing the truth about what happened
during a conflict - particularly establishing responsibility
for war crimes that have been committed - is critical to
healing and reconciliation. The goal of the reintegration of
former combatants thus cannot be attained without this
element of justice. Croatia is aware of its own
responsibilities and obligations in this regard.

It is therefore Croatia's intention to fully implement a
policy of responsible cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. For the sake
of justice, the historical record, reconciliation, and peace
and stability in the area, it is vital that the Security Council
use all its power and influence to ensure that all those
indicted, including those from the Republika Srpska and
from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, are finally
brought to trial.

