The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 37 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Mutrif Siddiq,
State Minister at the Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs
of the Sudan.

It is so decided.

On behalf of the Security Council, I extend
invitations under rule 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, Chair of the Secretary-General's
Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan.

It is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Pagan
Amum, Secretary General of the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement.

It is so decided.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf.

"The Security Council welcomes the
Sudanese parties' reaffirmations of their
commitment to full and timely implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), and
reaffirms its strong support for the parties' efforts
in this regard. The Security Council welcomes the
conclusion of a peaceful registration process for
the Southern Sudan referendum in the Sudan, and
encourages the parties to continue this forward
momentum towards peaceful and credible
referendums held on January 9, 2011, that reflect
the will of the people. The Council strongly urges
the CPA parties to promptly fulfil their remaining
commitments to finance the Southern Sudan
2

Referendum Commission and the Southern Sudan
Referendum Bureau.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the United Nations Secretary-General's Panel
on the Referenda in the Sudan, led by President
Benjamin Mkapa, and welcomes its work,
including its December 9, 2010, statement noting
that the registration process provides the basis for
a credible referendum. The Council extends its
appreciation for the efforts of international and
domestic observers.

"The Security Council notes with deep
concern the absence of an agreement on Abyei.
The Security Council strongly urges the parties to
calm rising tensions in Abyei, to urgently reach
agreement on Abyei and other outstanding CPA
issues and to resolve critical post-referendum
issues, including the border, security, citizenship,
debts, assets, currency and natural resources. The
Council welcomes the work of the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel, led by former
South African President Thabo Mbeki, and its
continuing efforts in this regard.

"The Security Council reiterates its call for
all parties to cooperate fully with the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan in the discharge of
its mandate, specifically with respect to
protection of civilians and to granting unhindered
access and freedom of movement.

"The Security Council reiterates the urgent
need for the parties to provide immediate and
ongoing reassurance to people of all nationalities
in the Sudan, so that their rights, safety and
property will be respected whatever the outcome
of the referendums, and the urgent need to focus
on the security and protection of minorities,
including Southerners in the North and
Northerners in the South. The Security Council
urges the parties to ensure that citizenship and
residency arrangements are in accordance with
applicable international obligations and to refrain
from arbitrarily depriving an individual of
citizenship. The Council urges the CPA parties to
respect their obligations.

"The Council stresses the importance of
inclusive, timely and credible popular
consultations processes in Blue Nile and Southern
Kordofan states, in accordance with the CPA. The
10-69649
Council also stresses the need for Southern
Kordofan state-level elections to be held in
accordance with the timeline established by the
National Elections Commission.

"The Security Council underlines that,
whatever the outcome of the referendums,
continued cooperation between the CPA parties
will remain essential. The Council stresses the
importance of the parties abiding by the
commitments recorded in the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel statement of
15 November, including to find peaceful
solutions to all outstanding matters, to never
resort to war again, and that neither party should
take any action or support any group that would
undermine the security of the other.

"The Council is deeply concerned about the
recent military incidents in the Kiir River Valley
and the subsequent displacement of civilians, and
urges all parties to exercise restraint, avoiding
escalation.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the African Union-United Nations-led peace
process for Darfur, hosted by the Government of
Qatar. The Council strongly urges all rebel
movements to join the peace process without
further delay or preconditions.

"The Council reiterates the importance of
increased participation of women in the Sudanese
peace processes. The Security Council reiterates
its deep concern about the increases in violence
and insecurity in Darfur, including recently in
Khor Abeche, such as ceasefire violations, attacks
by rebel groups, increased intertribal fighting,
attacks on humanitarian personnel and
peacekeepers and aerial bombardment by the
Government of the Sudan.

"The Council recalls the importance it
attaches to an end to impunity and to justice for
crimes committed in Darfur. The Council
reiterates its willingness to consider measures
against any party whose actions undermine peace
in the Sudan."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ZOIO/ZS.

I now give the floor to Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
10-69649

