Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank the
briefers for their valuable remarks and presentations.

Poland aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union
later today.

Let me start on a positive note by saying that the
progress that has been made in Haiti is undeniable.
We acknowledge the understanding that the Haitian
Government's representatives have expressed of
their people's grievances and their assessment that
the situation in the country needs improvement. We
agree that a dialogue is the only way out of the crisis.
Tackling corruption, especially where the PetroCaribe
case is concerned, and the promotion of new economic
measures to provide relief are steps in the right direction
and should help those facing serious economic hardship.

However, we are concerned about the recent
outbreaks of violence. It is disappointing that despite
the significant upgrade in the capabilities ofthe Haitian
National Police (HNP), there are still frequent episodes
of violence resulting in deaths and tensions. Regrettably,
some members of the police are being accused of
overstepping their powers. It goes without saying that
human rights and development are interconnected and
mutually reinforcing. Haiti cannot be truly rebuilt
without addressing those two areas on an equal footing.
The Government's cooperation with civil society is
extremely important in that respect, as it provides a
healthy foundation for the future.

We hope that President Moise and the new
Government will explore every avenue in their efforts
to break the current stalemate by engaging in deep,
inclusive and sincere political dialogue. We believe that
the October elections will be a significant milestone
in Haiti's efforts to achieve stability. We therefore
hope that the Haitian authorities will do everything in
their power to ensure that the elections are free, fair
and transparent, and that the current electoral calendar
remains intact. The new authorities will be expected
to undertake deep structural reforms to revive the
country's economy and social structure.

We recognize the positive role that the United
Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) has played in transforming the
National Police and the significant growth of its role
and capabilities. However, we are concerned about
whether the HNP will be able to conduct effective
operations after various components of MINUJUSTH
have withdrawn. If there are problems, we will not be
able to give the national forces support if they need it,
especially during the usually heated election period.

Turning to the humanitarian situation, we hope that
the Government will work closely with United Nations
agencies and all relevant international actors to bring
humanitarian aid, including food assistance, to the more
than 2 million people in need. It is worrying that the
crisis remains constantly underfunded. We therefore
support the plan of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to concentrate on four strategic
aspects that will prioritize the most vulnerable groups.

We are pleased with the work that MINUJUSTH
has done so far in helping Haiti to address structural
and operational shortcomings in the areas of police
development, human rights, justice, corrections and
strengthening institutional responses with a view to
promoting public trust in those areas. As we approach
the closure of the peacekeeping chapter in Haiti's
modern history, we must bear in mind that a number of
the objectives established for MINUJUSTH's two-year
exit strategy, including those relating to the rule of law
and human rights, are not expected to be fully achieved
by this October. That means that the political mission
that is set to replace MINUJUSTH should be made up
of key components related to democracy, the rule of
law and human rights in order to better assist Haitian
authorities in their rebuilding efforts.

There is a great deal of work to be accomplished
in a short time. We therefore call on the Haitian
authorities to stay vigilant in prioritizing their efforts
so that history does not repeat itself. We stand ready
to assist them in order to secure stability and a better
future for all Haitians.

