Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. McAskie of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
for her presentation.

We are now in the third year since the outbreak of
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which has left millions of people displaced and
homeless. Many refugees from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have fled abroad. At the same
time, large numbers of foreign refugees have entered
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
humanitarian situation in that country and the region as
a whole has further deteriorated. We are very
concerned.

The Chinese delegation condemns atrocities
against civilians. We call upon the parties concerned to
truly comply with the relevant agreements and Security
Council resolutions, cease hostilities promptly and find
a political solution to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The continuation of the conflict
has become the direct cause of the current
humanitarian crisis in that country. Only by resolving
the conflict can it be possible to fundamentally ease the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

For some time now, regional summits on the
question of the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
been held one after another. We encourage this
momentum in the search for a political solution to the
conflict. We also hope that the parties to the conflict
will implement the commitments they have made in
earnest. We are of the view that the United Nations,
including the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, should continue
to work for the peace process in that country.

We appreciate the efforts made by humanitarian
personnel under difficult conditions to improve the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We hope their safety and security will be
ensured.

In conclusion, the Chinese delegation will
continue to support the relevant work of the United
Nations, and OCHA in particular.

