Mr. Blair: First of all, Mr. President, our
congratulations to you on hosting this meeting.

Ijoin in the expressions of outrage at the murder
of United Nations staff in West Timor. I pay tribute to
all our personnel, both military and civilian, who are
under the banner of the United Nations around the
world and who are good and brave people. Many of
them, I am proud to say, are from my own country.

I also support fully the cause for reform of the
Security Council itself.

In focusing on conflict resolution and prevention,
I want to make four brief points.

First, peacekeeping today is a lot tougher and
more difficult than before. We are putting our people
into situations of far greater difficulty than traditionally
was the case, situations not often well defined and
where the hazards from local militia or other people are
far greater than before.

Secondly, at the same time, however, the need for
peacekeeping has never been greater. Indeed, in certain
of the circumstances we can all think of, it is utterly
determinative of the difference between anarchy and
some form of stability in the countries concerned.
Sierra Leone is an obvious example. East Timor,
Bosnia - all are areas where these peacekeepers are
having to perform a hard task, but it has never been
more important.

The conclusion from these two points is that the
Brahimi reforms are absolutely essential. We need to
be better organized, better resourced and better
disciplined to carry out the tougher but more important
work.

The third point is this. I think we all recognize
now that we cannot deal with these problems of
security and conflict without dealing with the causes of
conflict too. Whether it is poverty, debt, aid and
development, infectious diseases or Governments and
the rule of law, we need a far broader concept of how
we deal with these security issues for today's world.
We cannot isolate a conflict from its root causes.

Fourthly, of course we all have our own interests
as countries around this table. But I think there's a big
difference between the type of debate we will have
today and what it might have been 15, 20, or 30 years
ago. Let us be clear there were real, competing spheres
of influence that people clung to very tenaciously.
Today, I think we have a very important common
interest, and that is in the maintenance of order and
stability - not order so that change does not happen,
for change is necessary, but order so that change
happens without chaos.

I think that many of the things that we will face
today in these conflicts are things like fundamentalism,
extremism, terrorism - things that 30 or 40 years ago
we would not have recognized as requiring quite the
priority they do today.

It is a changing pattern, therefore, of context in
which we look at conflict resolution and prevention.
What -does this lead to? It leads surely to this. We have
in the Secretary-General a man who has put forward a
plan and programme for reform of the way that we
work. I think that what we have got to do is to match
the vigour of his ambition with our response and carry
this through. If we do, we will end up not with just a
modernized Security Council but a far better, more
effective way of dealing with these problems of
conflict in the world today.

The final point we all really acknowledge is that
in today's world it is not just technology and the
economy that are global. We are interdependent in a
way we have never been before, so it means that we
must change our own perspective in thinking to face up
to that modern reality.

