I thank today's briefers for their excellent presentations, and the Dominican Republic for its leadership in taking this topic forward in the Council. We note with appreciation that, for the first time ever, we have a report of the Secretary-General on youth and peace and security (S/2020/167). We hope such reports can be provided as a regular occurrence to ensure a consistent focus on this topic by the Security Council. It is very simple: we cannot help build peaceful societies if we do not include young people. The right to participate in public life is a human right. Meaningful youth participation remains a challenge throughout the world, and those in power do not always welcome it. As the Secretary-General's report points out, in 2020 there are 1.85 billion young women and men aged between 10 to 24 in the world, 90 per cent of them living in developing countries and many in areas of conflict. Providing young people of various backgrounds with meaningful and genuine ways to participate in and shape their societies is one way to reduce tension and conflict and, instead, ensure peace. If we fail to do that, we risk alienating the very people it is who will take our societies and our world forward. We must all do more to create an enabling environment for young people. It is important that we recognize the growing role young people play in peace and security. There are still visible barriers to youth participation in decision-making. Youth activists continue to be subject to human rights violations and abuses. Any threats, attacks or acts of intimidation against youth peacebuilders and human-rights defenders, especially women activists, are unacceptable. Young women often face multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination and marginalization. In addition to harassment and acts of violence, the young women participating in political and public life often suffer due to frequent limitation of their economic and educational opportunities, which also leaves them more vulnerable in the long run. We welcome the Secretary-General's recommendation for the meaningful participation of young people in peace and security efforts as well as for greater interaction with youth representatives, young peacebuilders and young human-rights defenders, including on its Security Council country visits. Young people are a huge source of new ideas, solutions and innovation. During the current pandemic, however, they could be among the worst victims. According to estimates, an additional 42-66 million children could fall into extreme poverty. UNESCO analysis shows that 91 per cent of the world's students are affected by school closures, and more than 1.5 billion students in 191 countries have trouble continuing their studies normally. This will lead to increased educational gaps and serious damage to their prospects for a better future, and could potentially sow the seeds of radicalization among young people, constituting a threat to peace and security. Utilizing digital solutions and distance-learning platforms is one way to alleviate the effects of school closures. Today, during the pandemic, such e-education capacities have helped us avoid the paralysis of our educational system. Children and young people being able to stay connected and carrying on studies is essential. Broader implementation of digital learning would make education more accessible for all groups and help limit the risk of increased social inequality. Bridging a digital gender divide in this regard is crucial. We are glad to note that the European Union (EU) has been a frontrunner in implementing the youth and peace and security agenda, and remains strongly committed to implementing resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), on youth and peace and security. The EU was among the first multilateral organizations to partner with the United Nations in the implementation of the agenda. It is currently supporting close to 30 youth-oriented conflict-prevention and crisis-response actions on four continents. Young people are there to remind us that we need to take a long-term and forward-looking approach on peace and security, as well as on climate and human rights. It is their right. I am convinced that multilateralism has a lot to gain from encouraging and supporting youth.
