As others have said this morning, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is a global crisis with testing implications for us all. The virus does not respect borders or political, cultural or religious differences. Cooperation must therefore be our first instinct, and we should work to combat this unprecedented challenge together. We therefore welcome the formation of a national unity Government by Israel. This is an important step that demonstrates the need to put political differences aside in the fight against COVID-19. We continue to welcome the ongoing cooperation between the Palestinian Authority and Government of Israel in their respective responses. It is an example of the responsible approach we need at this difficult time, and is particularly in the spirit of the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire. The United Nations has played an important part in ensuring ongoing coordination among the Palestinian Authority, Israel and the relevant United Nations agencies, and we hope that will continue. It is clear that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) has an important role to play in helping to respond to the crisis brought about by COVID-19. The virus and its impact on Palestinians and the provision of basic services will put additional pressure on UNRWA. The United Kingdom remains firmly committed to supporting UNRWA and Palestinian refugees across the Middle East, providing over $80 million for 2019-2020. In the light of the COVID-19 challenge, we are reviewing our contributions. The United Kingdom is also providing vital support to help respond to COVID-19 in the occupied Palestinian territories. Our $1 million funding contribution will enable the World Health Organization and UNICEF to purchase and coordinate medical supplies, treat critical-care patients, train front-line public health servants and scale up laboratory testing capabilities. We must also be mindful of the impact of the virus on the Palestinian economy and economic development. The Palestinian Authority's revenues, which come mostly from levies on trade, are expected to decline by between 60 and 70 per cent as a result of the crisis. The occupied Palestinian territories are excluded from most international mechanisms, including the World Bank's $14 billion COVID-19 fund. The Palestinian Authority does not issue a currency and cannot adopt the measures many countries are taking to increase liquidity. We welcome the Palestinian Authority's emergency budget and the agreement of the Israeli Government to guarantee minimum levels of monthly revenue. We look to Israel to ensure that the Palestinian economy is permitted to function and to support the Palestinian Authority's economic stability. During this fragile period, we call on both parties to refrain from provocative actions that might undermine the cooperation that is so critical. That includes incitement, settlement activity, demolitions and settler violence. The United Kingdom is particularly concerned that demolitions have continued, including of temporary health centres. Such actions weaken the capacity of Palestinians to respond to COVID-19. Under international humanitarian law, an occupying Power has the duty of ensuring and maintaining public health and hygiene in occupied territories to the fullest extent of the means available to it. That is why continued cooperation is so vital. It is also with regret that we have heard about the deaths of two Palestinians, who were shot by Israeli forces during clashes near Nablus in March. It is important that the Israel Defense Forces investigate this incident in an independent and transparent manner and, if any wrongdoing is found, ensure that those responsible are held to account. Finally, we are deeply concerned about reports that the new Israeli Government coalition has reached an agreement that paves the way for annexation of parts of the West Bank. The United Kingdom position in that regard is clear - any unilateral Israeli move towards annexation of any part of the West Bank would be damaging to efforts to restart peace negotiations and would be contrary to international law. The United Kingdom's long-standing position on the Middle East peace process has not changed. We support a negotiated settlement leading to a safe and secure Israel living alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian State, based on 1967 borders with agreed land swaps, with Jerusalem as the shared capital of both States and a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement for refugees.
