Mr. Ndabarasa (Rwanda): At the outset, I should
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of February. I should also like to join
others in commending your delegation for having
convened this apt and propitious debate on an issue of
critical importance to the future conduct of
peacekeeping operations and for the instructive concept
paper (S/2010/67) circulated to facilitate this
discussion.

We are grateful for and welcome the opportunity
to contribute to this debate, and thank the Secretary-
General, the Under-Secretaries-General and the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General for their
presentations this morning, and all those who have put
forward recommendations that we believe will greatly
enhance our consideration of these issues.

Peacekeeping operations, their conception,
authorization, implementation and eventual transition
are more likely to succeed if a number of key factors
are considered. These include a viable peace process or
a peace to keep; political will, commitment and clarity
of purpose on the part of all stakeholders; clear and
achievable mandates; the impartial implementation of
mandates; adequate and predictable financial, human
and logistical resources; and distinctly defined
transition and exit strategies. The very helpful concept
note circulated by the French delegation to facilitate
this dialogue examines some of these issues and raises
a number of questions that my delegation will
endeavour to address.

One issue raised is the drafting of mandates. All
stakeholders must work together to ensure that we
arrive at clear and achievable mandates that include a
desired end state, benchmarks and adequate resources.

In addition, due to the volatile environments in
which peacekeeping missions often operate, mandates
should allow for enough flexibility to adapt to changes.
The views and perspectives of the host country, troop
and police contributors and other relevant stakeholders
are critical to that end. To enable the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding, mandates should also
seek to reflect the lead role of a viable national
Government, as well as the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

Planning should commence at the conception of a
peacekeeping operation. It is imperative that an
integrated planning process be in place, with strategic
and operational objectives, in addition to clear
benchmarks that allow for evaluation and
accountability.

With regard to capacities and resources,
peacekeeping operations should focus on fostering
national ownership and building the capacity of the
host country to better respond to, and address, the
security challenges it faces. Those efforts should be
matched with appropriate resources that will ensure
long-term sustainability and allow for well-timed
transition and exit strategies.

With regard to the coordination of international
efforts, peacekeeping missions are often blighted by
duplication of effort and contradictory initiatives. The
coordination of international efforts is imperative to
developing successful transition strategies.
Coordination is key in fostering the credibility of
planning and implementation strategies. The buy-in of
key stakeholders can be achieved through coordination
and consultation.

With regard to process, the development of viable
transition and exit strategies is dependent on the
presence of clear benchmarks that allow for evaluation
and accountability. The Secretary-General's reports on
peacekeeping missions should reflect the progress
made in the implementation of mandates. At the same
time, clearly established benchmarks should be
balanced with the need for flexibility - in effect, to be
able to change course when necessary.

In conclusion, it is important to point out that
successful transition and exit strategies are not an end
in themselves but, rather, offer the possibility for
comprehensive conflict resolution.

