Mr. Rodriguez-Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We are deeply gratified, Sir, to see
Cameroon, a brotherly country of Africa, at the helm of
the Security Council, and we wish you every success.
Cuba, as does almost every other country,
opposes further military action against Iraq.

The Non-Aligned Movement has taken a clear
stance in favour of peace. The Arab countries oppose
military action. The majority ofthe European and other
developed countries do not support it, and the
international community is witnessing, with
astonishment and feelings of powerlessness, grave
accusations being levelled with no proof whatsoever, as
well as the seemingly inexorable way in which this
"pre-announced war" is being organized.

As a result of important contributions by the Arab
League and the Secretary-General, Iraq announced that
it was willing to allow the unconditional return of
inspectors and expressed its desire to comply with all
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, so as to
dispel any doubt about the possibility of its continued
possession of weapons of mass destruction.

Iraq's decision was welcomed by the international
community and by all those who believe that it is
possible, and necessary, to avert a conflict that would
have unpredictable consequences. Nevertheless, a draft
resolution is being promoted in the Security Council
that would make war with Iraq unavoidable.

The text includes an automatic mechanism that
would trigger the use of force. New procedures are
being proposed that are already known to be
unworkable, such as having United Nations security
forces accompany the inspectors; having
representatives of the permanent members of the
Security Council participate in the inspection teams,
with the same rights accorded other members of the
team; the establishment of no-fly/no-drive zones; and
an obligation on Iraq to allow inspectors to take out of
the country Iraqi nationals they wish to interview,
along with their families.

A new resolution is not needed. What is needed is
for the inspectors to resume their work in Iraq without
any further delay. Recent discussions in Vienna
concluded with the achievement of important progress
as regards practical arrangements for the resumption of
the inspections, including guarantees for unrestricted
access, which shows that dialogue and cooperation
between the parties is the only avenue to success.

The relevant resolutions must be implemented in
good faith by all the parties in order to advance
towards a comprehensive settlement of the question of
Iraq that will ensure peace and stability for the region
and that includes the lifting of the sanctions regime that
has caused so much suffering to the Iraqi people.

The sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Iraq, Kuwait and all the countries of
the region must be respected.

Cuba is a defender of international law, which we
consider to be the only viable guarantee of
international peace and security. We believe that the
world must be governed by a collective security system
based on cooperation that will provide guarantees to us
all. Such a system cannot be replaced by the law of the
jungle or by doctrines that constitute a violation of the
spirit and letter of the Charter of the United Nations
and that distort the inherent right of legitimate self-
defence, as recognized by Article 51 of the Charter.

The current unsustainable, unjust and deeply
inequitable international order cannot be allowed to
evolve into an even more primitive one.

Cuba, which has never developed weapons of
mass destruction - neither nuclear nor of any other
kind - and has the firm determination never to do so,
reiterates that general and complete disarmament is the
only possible path to peace.

It has been said that the credibility of the United
Nations would be at risk if it does not support a
military attack against Iraq. On the contrary, if the
Security Council does not act to maintain international
peace and security, as it is mandated to do, and if
instead it supports a war that has not been shown thus
far to be the only possible option, the question will
arise as to whether the United Nations can survive a
situation that will destroy its already damaged
credibility.

We all are aware that for several weeks secret
meetings have been taking place among some of the
permanent members of this body on the question of
Iraq, disregarding the rest of the Members of this
Organization whose well-known views are being
ignored, yet on whose behalf the Council is supposed
to act.

It is humiliating for all of us when the non-
permanent members of the Security Council, despite
their credibility as members elected by the
overwhelming majority of Member States, are publicly
excluded from the decision-making process.

Cuba hopes that dialogue and negotiation will
prevail and that appeals for a war against Iraq will not
continue. Cuba hopes that the Security Council will act
in accordance with its responsibilities and that it will
reassume the role that is incumbent on it in these
exceptional circumstances. Were the Council to fail to
do so, the damage to the international order, the
collective security of States and the United Nations
would be irreparable, and the historic responsibility
overwhelming.

