Mr. Tang Jiaxuan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to begin by congratulating Germany on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. It is a great pleasure to see Foreign
Minister Fischer chair today's meeting.

I wish to take this opportunity to express my deep
condolences with respect to the tragic deaths of the
astronauts aboard the space shuttle Columbia, and to
convey my heartfelt sympathy to the bereaved families.

I also wish to thank Secretary Powell for his
presentation.

I would now like to share the following views on
Iraq. First, the fact that the Foreign Ministers of most
Council members are present at today's meeting shows
the importance that all parties attach to the authority
and role of the Security Council and their support for a
resolution of the Iraqi issue within the framework of
this world body. The Security Council has basically
maintained unity and cooperation on this issue. That is
of crucial importance to its appropriate resolution and
represents the desire of the international community.

Secondly, China welcomes the United States
move to provide the United Nations with its
information and evidence on weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq, which we believe is consistent with
the spirit of resolution 1441 (2002) and could help
increase transparency. We hope that various parties will
hand over their information and evidence to the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and to the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). That will help make
their inspections more effective. And, through their on-
the-spot inspections, that information and evidence can
also be evaluated. The two agencies should report their
findings to the Security Council in a timely manner.

Thirdly, the inspections have been going on for
more than two months now. The two agencies have
been working very hard, and their work deserves our
recognition. It is their view that they are not now in a
position to draw conclusions, and they have suggested
continuing with the inspections. We should respect the
views of the two agencies and support the continuation
of their work. We hope that the upcoming trip to Iraq
by Chairman Blix and Director General ElBaradei on
the 8th will yield positive results.

Not long ago, the two agencies pointed out some
problems in the inspections. We urge Iraq to adopt a
more proactive approach, to make further explanations
and clarification as soon as possible and to cooperate
with the inspection process.

Fourthly, the Security Council has a common
stand on the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq. This is fully reflected in the
relevant Council resolutions, particularly 1441 (2002),
which was adopted unanimously. The most important
aspect at present remains the full implementation of
this resolution. As for the next step to be taken, the
Council should decide this through discussions among
all members, based on the results of the inspections.

Fifthly, it is the universal desire of the
international community to see a political settlement to
the issue of Iraq, within the United Nations framework,
and to avoid war. This is something to which the
Security Council must attach due importance. As long
as there is still the slightest hope for a political
settlement, we should exert our utmost efforts to
achieving it. China is ready to join others in working in
this direction.

