Mr. Amin (Bangladesh): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for convening this public meeting on a
situation that requires continued Council attention and
engagement.

I shall first address issues of direct and immediate
concern to the Security Council. I refer to regional
threats to peace and security in the Central African
Republic. As the Secretary-General reports, putschists
who have fled the country have taken refuge in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo is an embattled country, and it
would not be difficult for them to mobilize resources to
cross the border and threaten Bangui. The Council
should take the steps at its disposal to secure the
apprehension of the chief instigators of the coup
attempt, or at least to prevent them from infiltrating.
We are told also that some of the putschists are present
among the refugees, which makes the situation and the
threat still more serious.

We have also been informed about the
proliferation of arms in the subregion, in particular in
the areas bordering Equateur province of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, controlled by the
Front de liberation du Congo (FLC) and the
Mouvement pour la liberation du Congo (MLC) of
Jean-Pierre Bemba. I believe that the Council will have
to find ways and means to address this threat.

The Central African Republic is now in a
situation of crisis that requires an immediate increase
in the levels of external assistance. That is the central
message that my delegation reads in the report of the
Secretary-General. The situation is described in terms
of sharp political tension, further economic decline,
simmering social tension and a troubling lack of
security. The question before us as the Security Council
is what we can and should do. We recognize, of course,
that these socio-economic and political aspects are not
strictly within the Council's competence, and that is
why, in our last presidential statement, the Council
called upon the other relevant actors - in particular,
the Bretton Woods institutions - to consider the
special situation in the Central African Republic.

We are encouraged to note from the World Bank
representative that some $17 million have been
allocated for HIV/AIDS. That responds to a very
urgent need. We have also noted the intention of the
World Bank to provide $8 million for poverty
eradication. However, we are deeply disturbed to learn
that the World Bank has suspended disbursements to
the Government of the Central African Republic for
non-payment of amounts due. This is not a criticism of
the World Bank; possibly that amount is due. What we
are concerned about is to find alternative resources for
the survival of a very fragile Government.

We would like to know from our briefers whether
there is any scope for salvaging the situation. We are
thinking of quick-impact projects that have been
prescribed in other, similar situations. With the national
debt of Bangladesh in mind, I would think of micro-
credit programmes. The World Bank has adopted this
concept as an institution. We would like to know from
Mr. Calderisi of any thoughts in that direction.

Given the situation in the Central African
Republic, clearly there is need for greater coordination
between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council, relevant funds, programmes and
agencies and, of course, the Bretton Woods institutions,
whose participation we are privileged to have today.

Possibly the needs of the Central African
Republic are not enormous. I have added up different
requirements in the Secretary-General's report, and I
believe they come to something like $112 million. In
the context of a nation, that should not be enormous; it
should not be too high an amount for the international
community.

I wanted to support the different projects that the
United Kingdom recommended, along with those to
which we have referred. The assistance of the
international community, as Ambassador Hume
underlined, would much depend on the demonstration
of commitment by the Government. I believe the
Government will take this message seriously from this
Council meeting.

To conclude, we support the Secretary-General's
proposal for strengthening the United Nations Peace-
building Support Office in the Central African
Republic (BONUCA). We will support the Secretary-
General in any further strengthening of the Office so
that General Lamine Cisse can have the possibility to
exercise greater authority and influence in order to
secure the necessary support and cooperation for the
pressing peace-building needs of the Central African
Republic - including, of course, the commitment of
the Government.

