Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his briefing.

Not long ago, the International Syria Support
Group (ISSG) held its fourth foreign ministers' meeting
in Munich, and took the important decision to expand
the delivery of humanitarian assistance in Syria,
stop the hostilities and to quickly resume the Geneva
talks. Positive results were achieved at the meeting.
Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi led a delegation to
the meeting and made an important contribution to its
outcome. Recently, Russia and the United States reached
an agreement on cessation of hostilities in Syria, which
China appreciates. That agreement demonstrates that
the consensus reached at the fourth ISSG foreign
ministers' meeting has been implemented.

Today the Council has unanimously adopted
resolution 2268 (2016), endorsing the agreement on the
cessation of hostilities in Syria. That demonstrates the
international community's support for the diplomatic
efforts of the ISSG members and its firm commitment
to a political settlement of the Syrian question. China
welcomes this development. Political settlement is the
only way out of the Syrian crisis. No matter what the
circumstances, it is imperative to stay the course of
a political settlement. The international community
should take the important opportunity represented
by the Council's endorsement of the agreement on
a cessation of hostilities in Syria to more vigorously
push for the implementation of the existing and
important consensus.

First, the relevant parties in Syria should strictly
implement the agreement on cessation of hostilities, put
an end to fighting and violence within the stipulated time
frame, and speed up humanitarian access to relevant
Syrian areas so as to create conditions favourable to the
prompt resumption of the Geneva talks.

Secondly, the relevant parties in Syria should
strictly implement resolution 2254 (2015) and the
consensus reached at the fourth ISSG foreign ministers'
meeting, put the interests of the country and people
first, and quickly resume talks so as to place the
destiny and future of Syria firmly into the hands of the
Syrian people.

Thirdly, major countries in the region should stop
their mutual finger-pointing and instead take concrete
action to prevent the deterioration of the situation,
and play a constructive role in the forthcoming
implementation of the cessation of hostilities and
efforts to expand humanitarian assistance.

Fourthly, the international community, including
ISSG members, should put peace in Syria and the region
first, assume their respective responsibilities and play
their due roles in the effective implementation of the
consensus reached at the fourth foreign ministers'
meeting and resolution 2254 (2015).

China greatly appreciates the mediation efforts
of Special Envoy De Mistura and firmly supports the
United Nations role as the main channel of mediation
in the political resolution of the Syrian question. China
stands ready to maintain its positive and constructive
role in the political settlement of the Syrian question.

