Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Resolution
2240 (2015), which we have just adopted, authorizing
the European Union military operation in the southern
Central Mediterranean to fight human trafficking and
migrant smugglers on the high seas ofthe Mediterranean,
was the object of lengthy negotiations with a view to
obtaining a broad consensus on its content and scope.
We welcome the flexibility and understanding shown
by the United Kingdom, the initiator of the resolution,
in taking into account most of the legitimate concerns
expressed by African countries.

Aware of the gravity and dimensions of the
phenomenon of migration, Chad can only welcome
and support any initiative aimed at saving human lives
endangered by the recurring wrecks of overloaded
makeshift vessels transporting migrants. It was in
that spirit that Chad voted in favour of the resolution,
hoping that it will be used only to fight the criminal
network of human traffickers and smugglers without
harming migrants or undermining their rights, much
less the territorial integrity and sovereignty of African
countries.

In that regard, we stress the need for the naval
operation authorized by the resolution to be conducted
in accordance with the established framework and in full

respect for international law and the rights of migrants
and asylum seekers. Furthermore, we dare to hope that
the reference in the text to Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations authorizing the use of armed force
will not give rise to extensive interpretations, as has
unfortunately been the case in the past.
For some years now, the Mediterranean has
become a cemetery for thousands of essentially African
migrants, who leave their countries and take enormous
risks to reach Europe in search of a better life. The
many conflicts in the Middle East, in particular in
Syria, Iraq and Libya, have increased the magnitude
of the migration and have created a significant refugee
population. In this context, the smugglers and other
traffickers take advantage of the widespread chaos,
which they did not cause.

As a result, in our humble opinion, launching a
struggle against the smugglers on the high seas without
tackling the root causes of the migration and refugee
crisis would not be a viable solution, especially when
we know that most ofthese traffickers are on land. That
is why we believe that a comprehensive approach that
emphasizes the underlying causes of migration, which
are, among others, poverty, destitution, economic and
social crisis and armed conflicts, could help us to
consider appropriate and lasting solutions.

From that point of view, we hope that the fight
against the smuggling networks will be accompanied by
specific and simultaneous action aimed at development
in a spirit of solidarity with the countries of origin of
the migrants. Furthermore, special emphasis must be
placed on the urgency of reaching a peaceful settlement
to the conflict in Syria, Iraq and Libya, where recently
a large part of the migrants have come from.

Lastly, with respect to the scale of the migration
crisis, it is crucial that Europe combines its efforts
with all of its partners, namely the countries of origin
and transit of the migrants and refugees, as well as
regional organizations, such as the African Union and
the League of Arab States, with a view to meeting the
challenge through dynamic and effective cooperation.

The use of military force against smugglers on the
high seas alone will not be enough to put an end to the
flow of migrants and refugees towards Europe.

