Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): There continues to be a great need for
consolidated work on the Yemeni settlement with
the active involvement of the United Nations. It
demonstrates the advantages of a comprehensive
engagement model in which outside players pursue a
coordinated policy and send identical signals to the
parties to the conflict, preventing them from worsening
the confrontation, while at the same time not imposing
recipes for solutions. As a result, the settlement ofmany
issues on the domestic political agenda is considerably
less painful.

In analysing the situation in Yemen, we welcome
the policy of the country's leadership of implementing
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
Riyadh transition agreement of 23 November 2011 on
the peaceful transition of power.

We note the efforts of Sana'a to move the political
transition process forward, with the primary provision
in the short term being the convening of the National
Dialogue Conference. Russia is ready to continue
to provide the necessary assistance to the Yemeni
authorities in carrying out that task, in the context of ten
observer countries monitoring the National Dialogue
and ensuring the implementation of the intra-Yemeni
agreement on the peaceful transition of power.

We are actively strengthening contacts with the
leaders of the main political forces in the country, in
particular in the south, and urging them to be more
flexible and cooperative. It is critical that the fragile
balance of political forces in Yemen not be interrupted
on the eve of the conference. To avoid that scenario, we
must strengthen external political and moral support for
the political process in the Republic of Yemen in order
to make it irreversible. We welcome the resolution,
with the assistance of Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General for Yemen, Mr. Benomar, of the quota issue
regarding participants in that key exercise.

At this critical juncture, the Yemenis must unite
around President Mansour in order to successfully
implement the necessary political and socioeconomic
changes and, above all, to draw up and adopt a new
constitution and to hold presidential and parliamentary
elections in 2014 in line with that constitution. In that
connection, we welcome the news of the signing late
last month of the presidential decree establishing the
Supreme Commission for Election and Referendum.
Political differences in Yemen must be replaced by the
careful and coordinated work of all actors to address all
urgent issues in the country.

Ensuring security continues to be an urgent matter.
We firmly condemn the terrorist act by unknown
persons in Sana'a on 28 November, which caused
the death of the military attache of the Embassy of
Saudi Arabia and his bodyguard. The perpetrators
and masterminds of that attack by bandits against
the staff of a foreign diplomatic mission must be
duly held to account and the immunity of diplomatic
and consular staff guaranteed, in strict compliance
with the provisions of the 1961 Vienna Convention
on Diplomatic Relations. The tragedy in Sana'a again
clearly demonstrates the essential fact that there are
no good or bad terrorists. Irrespective of the grounds,
such crimes must be robustly and wholly condemned.
Double standards cannot be applied as justification.

The Yemeni Government faces challenges,
including the ongoing fighting against Al-Qaida in the
Arabian Peninsula, overcoming the tragic humanitarian
crisis, eradicating poverty and unemployment, ensuring
the provision of basic services for the population and
assisting refugees and internally displaced persons. At
the same time, the Government must rapidly implement
an entire range of socioeconomic reforms. That is now
critical.

Regional organizations and the international
community must play a significant role in these efforts.
The third and fourth ministerial meetings of the Friends
of Yemen, held in Riyadh and New York in May and
September, respectively, were fruitful. The outcomes of
such events must be strengthened and increased.

We believe that the efforts of Special Adviser
Mr. Benomar to work with the Yemeni political forces
are significant. We look forward to such ongoing
effective work in order to address the urgent tasks
continuing to face Yemen.
