Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
for his briefing. I, too, have listened carefully to the
statements made by the Permanent Observer of
Palestine and the representative of Israel. China has
always advocated for the settlement of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict by political diplomatic means on
the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Middle East Road Map for peace. The ultimate
goal is to establish an independent Palestinian State,
with full sovereignty and living side by side with Israel
in peace.

At present, the Israeli-Palestinian talks are at a
standstill. China opposes Israel's settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories, which are not
conducive to breaking the deadlock or to establishing
mutual political trust. We hope that Israel will exercise
restraint and caution, and adopt practical measures to
create conditions conducive to the early resumption of
the talks between the two sides.

China is deeply concerned about the escalating
tension in the Gaza Strip. China hopes that the parties
will effectively honour the ceasefire commitments they
made recently, exercise restraint, refrain from
unilateral and provocative actions and avoid
unnecessary innocent civilian casualties so as to
stabilize the situation and restore calm on the ground.

Without progress, the Middle East peace process
will suffer setbacks. In the face of increasing
difficulties, the international community should be
more coordinated and united as it steps up its efforts to
promote peace talks and spare no effort to promote the
resumption of talks between Israel and Palestine as
soon as possible and to secure the advancement of the
peace process.

We hope that the Quartet will play an active role
in finding a solution that can break the impasse in the
Middle East. At this critical juncture, China supports a
greater role for the Security Council in finding a
solution to the question of the Middle East.

Peace talks on other tracks, including the
Lebanon-Israel and Syria-Israel tracks, should also be
promoted in parallel. All of the parties concerned
should seek to create conditions conducive to a
resumption of dialogue and negotiations and to
bringing the prolonged confrontation and tension in the
region to an end.

China has always supported the just cause of the
Palestinian people to restore their legitimate national
rights and has provided assistance, within its abilities,
to help ease the suffering of the Palestinian people and
assist them in their State-building efforts. China
supports all efforts aimed at facilitating the Middle
East peace process and will continue to play a positive
and constructive role in promoting the achievement of
a comprehensive, lasting and just peace in the Middle
East.

