Ms. Lisson (Australia): Australia is a strong
supporter of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
and its Executive Directorate (CTED). The CTC and
CTED are central to the international community's
response to the threat of international terrorism and are
key components of the United Nations architecture
constructed to help Member States deal with that
challenge.

We thank the Executive Director of CTED,
Mr. Mike Smith, for his informative briefing this
morning and for his efforts to date in reviewing the
Directorate's organization and methods of work.
The revised organizational plan for CTED, which
was endorsed by the CTC last month, will serve to
strengthen CTED, improve its operations and place it
at the centre of the United Nations counter-terrorism
effort. Australia welcomes the CTC's recognition of the
need for CTED to participate actively in the work of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force that
has been established to assist Member States in their
implementation of the Global Strategy.

The unanimous adoption by the General
Assembly of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy is an important achievement for the
international community. The challenge now lies in
translating the Strategy's commitments into concrete
action to prevent, prosecute and punish terrorist acts,
wherever they may occur.

Through engagement with the Task Force, CTED
should play a constructive role in coordinating the
counterterrorism activities of various United Nations
agencies. Australia looks forward to working with a
more effective, dynamic and responsive CTED.
Australia strongly welcomes CTED's focus on
improving Member States' capacity to implement all
United Nations counter-terrorism resolutions. Counter-
terrorism legislation serves no purpose without the
capacity to put it into practice.

Australia's counter-terrorism capacity-building
assistance, in our own region, focuses on providing
practical assistance to achieve counter-terrorism
successes on the ground. CTED's commitment to
pursuing practical measures aimed at increasing the
capabilities of Member States in the fight against
terrorism is highly welcome.

In this context, Australia also welcomes CTED's
renewed focus on engaging with donors who are active
in the counter-terrorism field and on matching donor
capabilities with recipients' needs. Constructive
relations with donor and recipient countries and a
practical focus on capabilities and needs are critical to
the success of the work of the CTC and CTED.

The nature of the terrorist threat varies from State
to State and region to region, as do State counter-
terrorism capabilities and needs. Regional and
subregional bodies have an important role to play in
providing the United Nations counter-terrorism actors,
including the CTC and CTED, with a better
understanding of the local conditions and challenges.
Australia supports CTED in its efforts to strengthen its
relations with regional and subregional organizations
in this area, as recognized in its revised organizational
plan.

Australia also welcomes CTED's focus on the
human rights aspects of counter-terrorism. We cannot
effectively counter the threat of terrorism by using the
same methods as terrorists. Counter-terrorism measures
must respect human rights and the rule of law and
strike the right balance between the protection of the
public from the terrorist threat and protection of civil
liberties. CTED has a vital role to play in advising the
CTC and Member States on ways to counter terrorism
consistent with their obligations under international
law, in particular international human rights, refugee
and humanitarian law.

Finally, Australia remains ready to work with the
CTC and CTED to further their objectives and improve
their engagement with the United Nations membership.
Australia is confident that with its revised
organizational plan in place, CTED will be in a
position to contribute fully and centrally to global
efforts to combat terrorism.

