Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
expresses its deep condolences for the victims on board
Indonesia's Lion Air and expresses its sympathy to
their families.

China thanks Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
for his briefing. We have taken note of the Secretary-
General's recent report on humanitarian relief efforts in
Syria (S/2018/947).

At present, the overall situation in Syria remains
calm. The memorandum of understanding between
Russia and Turkey on stabilizing the de-escalation zone
in Idlib is being implemented. The situation in Idlib
has been eased, the conflicts across the entire territory
of Syria are on the decline, and a more favourable
environment for improving the humanitarian situation
in Syria has therefore been created. At the same time,
years of conflict have resulted in massive humanitarian
demand in the country, featuring a large population in
need of assistance and severely damaged infrastructure.

The international community should continue to
assist the Syrian people in cash and in kind, with the
current focus on preparation for winter. We have noticed
the gradual reopening of Nasib and other major crossing
points along the Syrian-Jordanian border. Major road,
power grid, water supply and other infrastructure
are gradually being restored, thus creating a more
favourable environment for the reconstruction of the
country and the return of refugees. Only by steadily
advancing the reconstruction efforts can expectations
of the Syrian people be met and normal life be resumed.
The international community should actively support
the reconstruction efforts of the Government and the
people of Syria, including enhanced efforts aimed at
clearing explosive remnants of war.

All parties in Syria should bear in mind the
future of the country and the well-being of its people,
follow the relevant Council resolutions, maintain the
ceasefire, halt all hostilities, settle differences through
dialogue and consultations and expeditiously improve
the humanitarian situation. The United Nations
and the international community should strengthen
communication with the Syrian Government and
provide assistance to all areas in need in Syria. At
the same time, humanitarian relief efforts in Syria
should be guided by the principles of neutrality,
impartiality and non-politicization and be based on
respect for Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity.

Terrorist groups continue to threaten Syria's
security and hinder humanitarian-relief efforts. The
international community should be firm in combating
all terrorist organizations listed by the Council,
consolidate the results of counter-terrorism efforts and
restore stability in Syria.

China has been making tireless efforts to alleviate
the humanitarian situation in Syria. Last July,
President Xi Jinping announced new initiatives at the
eighth ministerial meeting of the China-Arab States
Cooperation Forum to provide humanitarian assistance
to Syria and its affected neighbours, which we will
actively implement. Not long ago, China delivered
power equipment, such as cables and transformers,
to Syria, which we believe will play a positive role in
improving Syria's power infrastructure and ensuring
people's basic livelihoods. China remains committed to
helping the Syrian people.
