Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): Pakistan welcomes this
opportunity to have a frank discussion on the subject.
We thank all the briefers for their presentations.
We welcome the appointment of the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, who brings
with her a wealth of experience for carrying out that
mandate. We are confident that she will favour positive
and constructive engagement over the approach that led
to the unfortunate divergence and controversy related
to implementation of the mandate. We stand ready to
extend our full support and cooperation to her.

Allow me to begin by explaining Pakistan's vote
on resolution 2068 (2012), adopted earlier this morning
without consensus. Our delegation constructively
engaged in the negotiations and made various proposals,
supported by several delegations, to improve the draft
text and to reinforce the true spirit of the mandate.
Regrettably, those proposals were not accommodated.
Contrary to claims by one Council member, the
process of consultations also was bereft of openness
and a willingness to achieve consensus. In the end,
a non-consensual text was presented as a virtual fait
accompli. I would like to highlight some of the critical
aspects that should have helped in building the needed
political consensus on the resolution.

The issue of full observance of or working strictly
within the mandate is at the heart of the problem. Pakistan
and other delegations had proposed several options to
the Chair to address that. However, as referred to in
paragraph 1 of the resolution, the issue of the mandate
remains vague and inadequately addressed. The
unwarranted references in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2012/26l) to non-mandated situations
reflect the extent of the misuse of such a mandate. A
report that deviates from the given mandate cannot
be accorded legitimacy. We clearly articulated our
position on the reference to the report in the resolution.
Discrimination and double standards in the exercise of
different mandates is a reality. In order to address that,
we proposed a paragraph. However, the proposal was
distorted by the sponsors and the Permanent Five as
comprehensively protecting children in all situations.
That does not reflect the selectivity that exists on the
ground in approaching different situations of armed
conflict.

We also made proposals expressing concern at the
inclusion in the Secretary-General's report of situations
that are not in the mandate. We reiterated the need to
fully respect the mandate in future reports. Regrettably,
those proposals were not accepted.

Separately, the sponsors arbitrarily introduced the
element of automaticity as regards annual reports, thus
impacting the desired transparency and accountability
in the process. Our constructive engagement and
compromise proposals were disregarded and the text
was pushed through in haste. While we would have
voted against the draft resolution owing to our serious
concerns over the text, we decided only to abstain to
underline our commitment to the mandate and our
willingness to work constructively with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

I would like to take this opportunity to express our
deep appreciation for those members of the Council who
shared and showed an understanding of our principle
concerns on the issue, as also expresses through their
votes on the resolution.

Love for children is a natural phenomenon that cuts
across all geographical divisions and transcends any
social, cultural or developmental factors. All children
are entitled to equal attention and care, as the future
of humankind rests on ensuring their well-being. The
United Nations Charter therefore rightly starts with
the noble objective to save succeeding generations.
That aims at ensuring due protection of and the proper
investment in the cause of children. Pakistan is fully
committed to that objective.

The rights of children need to be protected in all
circumstances. However, being a part of vulnerable
groups, their rights are adversely affected, particularly
during situations of armed conflict. The Security
Council created the mandate of children and armed
conflict precisely to ensure that the rights of children
are also protected in such situations. Pakistan supports
the mandate, including its reporting and monitoring
procedures on the specific trigger mechanisms.

The reports of the Secretary-General on the subject
are an important medium of monitoring and reporting
on such situations. Unfortunately, however, recent
reports of the Secretary-General have blundered into
situations that are outside the scope of the mandate
authorized by the Security Council. Such overreach has
not only diluted the focus on the core challenges, but
also created undue divisiveness, thus undermining the
consensus that exists on this important mandate.

In addition, such adventurism creates legal, political
and practical difficulties for both the Secretary-
General and the United Nations system as a whole.
Most regrettably, the latest report once again contains
references to non-mandated situations, in particular,
an unwarranted and completely misleading section on
Pakistan.

That not only misrepresents the context of Pakistan's
law enforcement and counterterrorism measures, but also
serves to accord undeserved respectability to terrorists
and criminals. That disturbing trend is bringing into
disrepute both the intergovernmental body that created
the mandate, namely, the Security Council, and the
esteemed Secretary-General. Despite acknowledging
that specific acts of terrorism mentioned in the report
were carried out by the Taliban and Al-Qaida elements,
the former Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflicts refused
even to label them as terrorists in the report.

Similarly, the practice followed by the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflicts on condemning specific
acts of violations of child rights is selective. While they
did not lose time in issuing statements regarding acts
of terrorism involving children in specific countries,
even when those were not situations of armed conflict,
the Office is known to have turned a blind eye to the
killing of children in actual armed conflict situations.
Such selectivity has only led to the strengthening
of the belief of Member States that United Nations
special procedures need to work more independently
and strictly within the carefully crafted and common
meaning of their mandate.

It is important to recall here that there is no
provision whatsoever in the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflicts to report on situations other
than those involving armed conflicts. Resolution 1882
(2009) unmistakably links the situations of concern
under that resolution to paragraph 16 of resolution
1379 (2001), which asks the Secretary-General to use
the trigger mechanisms in the relevant resolutions
to list parties in annexes to his reports in situations
of armed conflict that are on the Security Council's
agenda or others that, in his opinion and in accordance
with article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations,
threaten the maintenance of international peace and
security. Indeed, the tendency of the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflicts make her own rules and veer
away from her mandate led the Security Council in
2011 to ask the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to brief and report to the Security Council on
the criteria and procedures used in listing and delisting
parties to armed conflict in the annexes of the periodic
reports in the Secretary-General's 2012 report.

Despite a very useful discussion on the subject
in the Security Council in February of this year, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflicts failed to reflect that
discussion in the 2012 report, yet another manifestation
of failing to give due respect to the views of Member
States and the intergovernmental process. Nevertheless,
we stand ready to engage in a constructive discussion
on the need to respect the legal parameters of that
mandate and support the activities associated with it.
Pakistan wants to strengthen the political consensus
around that mandate to ensure better protection of
the rights of children in situations of armed conflict
by all stakeholders. It is our sincere hope that the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflicts will interact closely
with all Member States in order to better understand
their concerns and restore the needed respect for that
mandate. Pakistan has also been constructively engaged
in the work of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, under the leadership of Germany, and
has contributed to expediting its work in a consensual
manner.

Let me also make the following additional points.
The primary role of States in child protection should
be emphasized. Relevant United Nations agencies and
mandate holders can support such efforts within their
respective mandates. Reinterpretation of the mandate or
any expansion of its scope beyond what is authorized by
the Security Council is illegitimate and unacceptable.

As reflected in paragraph 2 (b) of resolution
1612 (2005), cooperation with and the participation
of national Governments are indispensible to the
implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. Information collected through that
mechanism must be accurate, objective, reliable
and verifiable. Any dialogue established within that
framework by the United Nations with non-State
actors must be conducted within the framework of
peace processes where they exist and with the explicit
permission of the Governments concerned. Listing and
delisting criteria should be objective and balanced. The
criteria must be finalized as a priority matter by the
Secretary-General in full consultation with Member
States.

The issue of persistent perpetrators is of concern
to all. Concerned Member States must bring to justice
those responsible for such violations through national
justice systems and, where applicable, through the use
of international justice mechanisms. We stand ready to
discuss possible further measures to be taken by the
Council to address that genuine concern.

To conclude, let there be no doubt that Pakistan
condemns in the strongest possible terms any use of
children by extremists or any other group to promote
their nihilistic agenda and is taking appropriate action
to stop such practices. At the same time, we sincerely
hope that future reports of the Secretary-General will
be high on objectivity and squarely correspond to the
given mandate.

