Mr. Steiner: It is my privilege this morning to
address the Security Council from the perspective of
the knowledge, the science and the expertise we have
acquired over a period of roughly 30 years in terms of
understanding the significant and profound
implications of climate change. What do we know
today and what do we not know yet about the
implications and impacts of climate change and how
the world needs to prepare for changes that are now on
the horizon and which, perhaps, to modern civilization
are of an unprecedented nature in terms of the time, the
scale and the implications across the planet?

For the international community, the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
remains the first point of reference in terms of
determining what it is that science can tell us today and
what it is that science cannot yet tell us. I want to
reassure the Council once again that, despite some of
the discussions that occurred around some of the IPCC
reports, what remains without contest is that the
IPCC's Fourth Assessment Report is a document that is
uncontested in terms of the international peer review,
and that it speaks very clearly, first, to the fact that
climate change is happening. Not only is it happening;
it is also accelerating. Not only is it accelerating, but
indeed the latest science being published by scientific
institutions across the planet is in many respects
overtaking the rather conservative scenarios,
predictions and models that the IPCC brought to our
attention four years ago.
3

Whether we look at the linear warming trend over
the past 50 years - on average, 0.l3°C warming per
decade, which is nearly twice the temperature increase
we have seen over the past 100 years; whether we look
at the increase in terms of extreme weather events,
such as storms and cyclones; whether we look at the
thermal expansion of oceans; or whether we look at the
melting of the Arctic summer ice, none of these are
speculative data about the fact that a changing climate
is a reality today. These are proven trends.

The limitations of our knowledge still lie today in
interpreting, first of all, the implications of these
changes for our weather systems, ecosystems and,
indeed, atmospheric response mechanisms. Science
cannot yet tell us everything about these factors.
Indeed, where the IPCC found itself in more
challenging territory - as all science does, because
perfect knowledge has rarely been the foundation of
human understanding - is in trying to understand the
future. Clearly, here science is far from being able to
capture the complexity of how our climate systems
work, how the atmosphere and the biosphere interact,
or how ocean, marine and terrestrial ecosystems will
respond to these different trends.

But as we have seen, and as almost every day that
passes brings new consolidation of our science, there is
no question in the minds of those who have studied this
subject with great intensity - across institutions north
and south, east and west; whether from a natural
science perspective, an economic science perspective
or a social science perspective - the nature and scale
of these changes are of such a degree that we cannot
simply View them as a challenge of changing our
energy systems or adjusting our transport economy. It
is in fact a series of developments that are triggering
responses and impacts far beyond any single sector of
our economies and societies.

Let me just point out that, while we are still
struggling with finding a way in which we can stay
within the 2°C realm - which was an emerging
consensus in the international community around the
climate change negotiations - the latest projections
that we are receiving from scientists for certain parts of
the world are talking about 3°C and 4°C scenarios this
century. This means that the world is confronting a
global warming scenario that is already well beyond
where we believe we might be able to manage these
changes and trends if we are able to conclude our
negotiations under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change.

The Arctic Monitoring and Assessment
Programme has also predicted that sea-level rise is
likely to reach 1 metre by the end of this century. The
IPCC erred on the conservative side in its Fourth
Assessment Report when it spoke about 0.18 to
0.59 metres fl roughly half a metre maximum - in
sea-level rise. We are now talking about a l-metre sea-
level rise possibly occurring this century.

If we look at a world map and we realize how
many tens of thousands of kilometres of coastline will
be affected by this, and how in a sense we will redraw
the world map not only in geographical terms but also
in terms of exclusive economic zones and many other
implications, we begin to realize that we are now truly
confronted with a level of scientific knowledge that is
sufficient for us to begin to realize that we are talking
about major implications, not only in a territorial
sense, but also from a geopolitical perspective. Indeed,
not long ago the Royal Society of the United Kingdom
published another report that stated that the worst-case
scenario under current conditions could be a 4°C
warming by 2060.

I do not want to delve further into the science; I
have cited many other examples in my written
statement. I simply wanted to tell the Council that
when we talk about the changing climate today, it is
already a fact. We know enough about what is
happening, but we do not yet know enough about how
fast and in how many different domains it will manifest
itself. Perhaps most important, we have not yet well
understood the implications of these changes for our
societies, our economies and the Earth's life-support
systems.

That is why I believe that the term "threat
multiplier", which perhaps has a strong connotation for
defence establishments and analyses, is not irrelevant
to a review of the implications of a changing climate
upon the international peace and security context. As
the Secretary-General just said, as we in the
international community and as nation States seek to
move forward on the path towards sustainable
development, what we are confronted with today is the
fact that there are a number of threats that are
beginning to undermine the tenuous gains we have
made in terms of sustainable development. As a global
economy and a global community, we are confronted
with scenarios of natural resource scarcities, droughts
and floods, and corresponding instabilities in global
markets for food and other commodities that are
putting into question some of the gains that we have
achieved in sustainable development in recent decades.

In fact, natural disasters are fundamentally
disruptive events, and if some of the scenarios that the
IPCC and many scientists have drawn up hold true,
then the scale, number and nature of these natural
disasters will increase exponentially. If we go back to
Hurricane Mitch in Honduras, the President of that
country at that time called it the biggest disaster in the
history of the nation, with 50 years of development lost
literally in a matter of hours. Some 70 per cent of the
country's infrastructure was destroyed, and therefore
the maps that the country used for settlements, towns
and roads had to be basically redrawn.

We are all familiar with the natural disasters that
are occurring across the planet - be they floods in
Pakistan or the drought to which the Secretary-General
just referred - and that are occurring in ever-faster
patterns in regions such as the Horn of Africa. We can
see that their impact in terms of the number of people
affected and the ability of societies to cope with these
natural disasters is increasing every day. The
Norwegian Refugee Council has estimated that, in the
year 2010, 42 million people were displaced by natural
disasters and that 90 per cent of those disasters were in
fact related to weather-related extremes, such as floods
and droughts. These are just the officially captured
numbers. They do not give even a sense of the human
tragedy or the rebuilding efforts that are required in
that context.

I would also like to refer to the notion of food
security as not just being a matter of having food
available. We know today that an extreme weather
event in one part of the world can change the global
commodity markets overnight and literally price tens
of millions of people out of the market for food. This is
how interconnected our global economy is today. Food
insecurity is predicted to increase in prevalence and
magnitude in the coming decades. Clearly, if we are
unable to feed ourselves and to have food available
where it is needed at an affordable price, the result will
be major social instability and disruption.

Climate science is advancing by the day.
Recently, a report was published that analysed 20,000
African maize trials from recent decades. The results

were that in a 1°C warming scenario, roughly 65 per
cent of Africa's existing growing areas would suffer
yield losses within this century. Viewing the
ramifications and implications from any angle, we have
to recognize that such trends are disruptive to the
sustainable development paths of nations and to the
economic, social and environmental stability of our
societies, our economies and our planet. Moreover,
they are disruptive in part because we cannot predict
their magnitude.

On that subject, I want to recall two very
important concepts in the science emerging in climate
change: the notions of tipping points and feedback
mechanisms. One of the most unsettling aspects of
trying to understand these planetary systems is that we
cannot assume linear developments. We cannot assume
that with a certain number of years passing with a
certain degree of global warming certain things will
occur.

In our Earth's natural systems, there are tipping
points. Brazil's environmental protection agency
published a study about two years ago that looked at
the implications of 2°C, 3°C and 4°C warming
scenarios for the Amazon. Ecologically speaking, what
emerged from that research is that, at a certain point of
warming, an entire ecosystem ceases functioning in the
way that is functions today, not only in terms of the
biodiversity of the ecosystem itself. In the case of the
Amazon, it is the world's largest water pump. The
entire hydrological cycles of significant parts of South
America depend on how the systems of the Amazon
function.

The second concept I want to recall is feedback
mechanisms. If indeed Arctic melt continues to occur
and if permafrost continues to melt in the tundra, old
carbon will be released that is currently stored in those
soils. According to one report, there is evidence that an
amount of carbon equivalent to 270 years of emissions
at today's level could be released by the end the
century - a secondary effect of the increase in
temperatures leading to the melting of the permafrost.

Another example is glacial melt. Across the
globe, whether it is in the Hindu Kush, the Andes or
Central Asia, glacial melt occurring as a result of
climate change and global warming has the effect of
disrupting the hydrological cycles and the flows around
which societies have developed their agriculture,
infrastructure and settlements. It also calls into
question the arrangements that nations have developed
about how to share water resources. There are 145
countries with more that one trans-boundary river that
they share. Scarcity of access to water resources is
already beginning to be an issue of tension between
communities within nations and internationally
between nations. The research on glacial melt done at
Beijing University and other institutions in China
indicates that, in the headwaters of the Yangtze basin,
there is a significant reduction in the area covered by
glaciers, which will determine future water flows and
availability.

The implications of what I am describing are so
profound that the recognition of climate change as a
factor in the future stability, cooperation and security
of our planet is not an academic matter. I say this fully
aware of the debate that Member States have had on
the role of the Security Council. I do not wish to
pronounce myself on that issue because it is not my
place to do so. I do, however, want to speak today for
an entity within the international system and the United
Nations.

I hope that historians in 50 years looking back at
the decisions we are making today will see an
international community using the knowledge available -
including unavoidable uncertainties - to address
cooperatively a phenomenon that, as I said earlier, is
unprecedented in its implications for civilization. The
simultaneous nature and the degree and scale of the
changes that we will have to accommodate, adapt to
and deal with represent a great threat on many fronts.
However, if addressed by the international community
with appropriate measures, they also represent an
opportunity to transition not only towards a low-carbon
economy, but also towards a more stable mechanism
for international cooperation.

The sustainable development paths of individual
nations are today predicated on the ability of the
international community to act collectively. Many of
the sustainable development objectives, ambitions and
pathways that nations have pursued are under threat
beyond what traditionally have been the means of a
national sovereign State to determine policies within its
territory. If we take into account food insecurity,
natural disasters and the potential for conflict and
tensions over ever more scarce resources, together with
displacement and the potential disappearance of entire
nation States from our world map - including their
culture, identity and sovereignty - within a time span

of 50 to 100 years, we have to recognize that climate
change is an issue that needs to be viewed not just from
a scientific and technological perspective of managing
carbon emissions, but truly from a geopolitical and
security perspective. Our response will either unite us
in cooperative action or divide us and lead us into
chaos, tension and potential conflict.

