Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing, and
I reiterate once again the total support of Uruguay for
his management.

Uruguay, as a firm promoter ofpeace, reaffirms, as
it has since 1947, its unwavering support for the right of
Israel and Palestine to coexist peacefully within secure
and recognized frontiers, in an environment ofrenewed
cooperation and free of any threat or act that may
breach the peace. To that end, it is absolutely necessary
for the Israeli and Palestinian authorities to comply in
good faith with their obligations under international
law and with the resolutions of the Council, send clear
political signs of their intention to break the vicious
circle of violent disagreement and conflict, and refrain
from adopting unilateral decisions that undermine
dialogue. Nevertheless, we are far from witnessing any
such signals. We therefore urge the parties to carefully
consider the next steps to be taken and to avert a
situation in which the most radical sectors of their
respective Governments would prevail over those that
are truly committed to peace.

General Assembly resolution 181 (II), which
established the partition ofPalestine and thereby created
an Arab and a Jewish State, must remain the focus of
our actions. Uruguay voted in favour of that resolution
in the conviction that the decision would allow for the
establishment of two States, Israel and Palestine, living
in peace and within secure borders. Uruguay's position
remains exactly the same as it was seven decades ago.

However, over these past 70 years, while Israel
has strengthened itself as a full and modern State,
Palestine continues to face serious difficulties in terms
of its development, its integration into the international
community and the consolidation of its territory, which
has led to grave consequences for its population and
increased tensions throughout the region.

Uruguay, together with virtually all of the
international community, strongly supports the two-
State solution, which, and allow me to be very clear
here, remains the only possible solution, as affirmed
yesterday by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, so
that Israel and Palestine can live in peace and security.

It is not possible to dissociate these two ideas: there
can be no just and lasting peace without a two-State
solution, and the two-State solution will never become
reality unless the parties create conditions conducive
to reaching a peaceful, negotiated outcome that is
mutually satisfactory and puts an end to all pending
issues in the context of this lengthy conflict. We urge
the parties to resume direct bilateral negotiations as
soon as possible, without preconditions, as an essential
step towards achieving that goal. But in order to
achieve that objective, current trends on the ground
must be reversed, failing which it will be very difficult
for Palestine to strengthen its State.

The adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), in
December, and the peace conference organized by
France in January were two clear signs of the urgency
that the international community feels with respect to
the need to reach a peaceful and successful conclusion
to this long delayed process. However, since the most
recent open debate on the Middle East, just one month
ago (see S/PV.7863), the news has frankly not been
very encouraging.

The announcement by Israel that it will build
thousands of new settlements in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem, as well as the retroactive legalization

of settlements built on private Palestinian land, violate
the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016) and resolution
242 (1967), which affirms the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force. These measures
do not help in any way to move towards peace, and
they jeopardize the possibility of achieving a two-
State solution.
We reiterate once again our strong condemnation of
the cowardly terrorist attacks that continue to occur in
the area. We deplore the fact that the Security Council
has not been able to make its views known on the attack
carried out in Petah Tivka on 9 February. Uruguay
repudiates those acts and rejects any incitement to or
glorification of violence. We reiterate that in this regard
there is no room for tacit complicity.

Finally, we reiterate to the key actors in this process
that moderation is vital in order to avoid any statements
that could seriously undermine the future of the peace
talks and the two-State solution.

