Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay voted in favour of resolution 2371 (2017)
and welcomes its unanimous adoption by the Security
Council. The fact that Council members are united
on the issue is crucial to our response to the serious
threat that North Korea's defiant attitude in continuing
its nuclear and ballistic-missile programme poses
to international peace and security, with two - not
one but two - launches of intercontinental ballistic
missiles in the month of July alone. That is a clear and
flagrant violation of every relevant Security Council
resolution. As if that was not enough of an abuse, it
also undermines the impulse for the common good
and the spirit of peaceful coexistence that govern
our Organization. Once again, Uruguay reiterates
how important it is to ensure that the Government of
North Korea respects all the Council's resolutions and
abandons its nuclear ambitions.

As my delegation said recently at the briefing session
on general issues pertaining to sanctions, if we are to
improve the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions,
the sanction regimes must do their job - effectiveness
being understood as the ability to ultimately achieve
the goals that the sanctions are aimed at. Sanctions
regimes should be designed to be a tool that enables
the Security Council to achieve a goal. To be effective,
that tool should complement others, such as mediation
and dialogue. The goal ofthe sanctions regime imposed
on North Korea should be to achieve the peaceful
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

In that regard, I am referring to what my delegation
has already said about the importance of working to
reduce tensions on the Korean peninsula and making
every effort to return to the path ofdialogue so as to reach
a definitive settlement of this very serious situation. It
is also important to ensure a greater commitment and
willingness on the part of Member States to comply
with international obligations and Security Council
sanctions, while at the same time, in this case, avoiding
any adverse humanitarian consequences for the civilian
population of North Korea.

Lastly, I would like to reaffirm that Uruguay is
committed and determined to continue working for
a peaceful diplomatic and political solution for the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
