Mr. Motoc (Romania): In this impressive
atmosphere of consensus, I can afford to be very brief.
Most of the features making up the thrust of the
resolution the Council has just adopted have been the
object of extensive and useful exchanges in the
interactions both within the Security Council
membership and among the general membership of the
Organization. The outcome of this is the powerful
unanimity displayed today by the Council and the good
understanding by all of us of the purposes this
resolution serves. This optimizes the chances that the
implementation of its provisions will meet the
expectations of world opinion.

The Council is filling in an important gap in
international efforts to deal with non-proliferation.
With the adoption of this resolution, the Council lives
up to its responsibilities, addressing one of today's
most ominous challenges to international peace and
security. The objective of this resolution is indeed an
essential component of overall efforts to address
contemporary threats to international peace and
security, specifically those posed by non-State actors
seeking to acquire and use weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery. The unity of
action demonstrated today by the members of the
Council is a clear indication that this particular issue is
indeed a matter of great urgency.

A lot of work remains to be done if the resolution
is to attain its objectives - both within the United
Nations and in nations' daily implementation of the
guidelines set forth in it. Additional efforts are going to
be needed now from all of us, indeed from the entire
United Nations membership, and we must implement
the provisions of the resolution in good faith. Romania,
which is connected to all existing international non-
proliferation regimes, is certainly going to live up to
the commitments proceeding from the important
resolution just adopted by the Security Council. I fully
trust that we did the right thing in taking, as the
Security Council, an important step towards making
our world a safer place.

