The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Italy, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kasljagic'
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the
Council table; Mr. Spatafora (Italy) took the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Lord Paddy Ashdown, High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Lord Ashdown to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Judge Meron to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to a letter dated 25 September 2003
from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council, transmitting the twenty-fourth
report of the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, document S/2003/918.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina and by the President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. At the end of those
briefings, I will give the floor to Council members who
wish to make comments or ask questions.

I now give the floor to Lord Paddy Ashdown,
High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.


