Mr. Satoh (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's meeting on this
important subject. I welcome Secretary-General Kofi
Annan's report of 17 January, submitted to the Security
Council, on the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). I would also
like to express my appreciation for today's briefings by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, and by East Timor's Senior
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta.

At the outset, I would like once again to express,
on behalf of the Government of Japan, our high regard
for the contributions that UNTAET has made to efforts
aimed at achieving East Timor's independence and for
the leadership that Mr. Vieira de Mello has
demonstrated in the process. Naturally, the Government
of Japan supports the extension of UNTAET's mandate,
as recommended in the Secretary-General's report,
until 20 May this year - the date on which East Timor
is to become independent.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
reiterate our admiration for the people of East Timor,
who, in cooperation with UNTAET, have been making
strenuous efforts to achieve their own independence.
We would encourage them to tackle, with a sense of
ownership, the remaining tasks leading up to
independence, including the adoption of the new
Constitution and the holding of the presidential
election.

For its part, the Government of Japan will
continue to extend to the people of East Timor and to
UNTAET its utmost cooperation and assistance in
order to ensure the stability and prosperity of East
Timor. The comprehensive resolution of the issue of
East Timorese refugees will be vitally important for the
stability of East Timor. Recognizing that fact, Prime
Minister Junichiro Koizumi recently announced, in
response to the Joint Appeal made by the United
Nations and the Government of Indonesia, that Japan
would extend assistance amounting to $5.39 million to
support East Timor refugees in West Timor. Prime
Minister Koizumi also told Mr. Xanana Gusmao, the
former President of the National Council of Timorese
Resistance, who is now visiting Japan, that the
Japanese Government will consider extending
assistance amounting to $1 million for the activities of
the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation.

Furthermore, the Government of Japan is now
preparing to dispatch an engineering group of
approximately 700 members of its Self-Defence Forces
to the peacekeeping operation in East Timor. The
engineering group plans to begin its deployment on the
ground in the course of March and April, engaging in
the construction and repair of roads and bridges, thus
making a contribution to the reconstruction and
development of East Timor.

We are pleased to note in the Secretary-General's
report the progress being made in planning the
functions and structure of the post-UNTAET follow-on
mission. The Government of Japan is of the view that a
United Nations presence is necessary in order to ensure
the stability of East Timor after it achieves
independence. We therefore hope that the work of
preparing the Secretary-General's recommendations on
the follow-on mission will be completed as soon as
possible and that the Security Council will promptly
decide on the establishment of the mission.

I would like to make it clear in this context that
the Japanese Government supports the idea of funding
a minimum and indispensable civilian component,
including 100 key functions, with peacekeeping
assessed contributions.

The independence of East Timor, which will soon
be achieved, will be a success story for a world in
which conflict and instability are widespread. But as I
have stated several times in this Council, many
difficulties lie ahead for East Timor, before and after
independence, and it is the responsibility of the
international community to continue to extend its
support and cooperation to the people of East Timor.
Recognizing this, the Government of Japan is
determined to continue to play an important role in the
international community's efforts to support East
Timor.

