Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): As I take the floor in
the Security Council for the first time as the new
Permanent Representative of Japan, I would like to say
how pleased I am to participate in the deliberations of
the Council and express my readiness to work with you,
Mr. President, and the members of the Council in the
coming years.

Today, I wish to touch upon two issues - first on
the Middle East peace process, and secondly on the
situation in Syria. First, let me start with the Middle
East peace process.

Japan welcomes the resumption of direct
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians
realized through the mediation efforts of the United
States. We remain committed to assisting Palestinian
State-building efforts in order to create a proper
environment for achieving peace through a two-
State solution. Sustainable economic development is
indispensable to establishing a viable Palestinian State.
Allow me to introduce two concrete initiatives of Japan
in this regard.

The first is a project called the Corridor for
Peace and Prosperity. In our View, agriculture and
agro-industry are a driving force for the Palestinian
economy. The Corridor project is thus designed to
transform an area of the Jordan Valley into productive
and fertile land, thereby allowing Palestinians to export
agricultural products. The project is also expected
to create employment in the West Bank. Regional
cooperation is key to that end, as the project involves
not only Palestine but also Israel and Jordan.

Prime Minister Koizumi of Japan launched this
initiative in July 2006 when he visited Israel, Palestine
and Jordan. I was given the task to design the project
in my capacity as Director-General for the Middle East
and Africa at our Foreign Ministry. Although there was
some skepticism in the beginning, steady progress has
been made since 2006. One Palestinian company has
already decided to participate in its flagship project, the
Jericho Agro-Industrial Park, and several companies
have expressed interest injoining. The park's beneficial
economic effects are estimated at more than $40 million
per year. About 7,000 jobs can also be created.

A ministerial-level meeting was held in Jericho
in July this year under the chairmanship of Foreign
Minister Kishida of Japan. Ministers from Israel,
Palestine and Jordan participated. The meeting served
as an important opportunity of confidence-building
among the participants and reaffirmed the importance
of moving forward the Corridor for Peace and Prosperity
project. We look forward to welcoming private
companies from the Middle East and other regions of
the world joining the project. The plan for business
expansion in the West Bank and Gaza announced by
United States Secretary of State, Mr. Kerry, in May
also aims at promoting local entrepreneurs, which we
strongly support.

The second Japanese initiative is the Conference
on Cooperation among East Asian Countries for
Palestinian Development. The Conference, launched
in February this year in Tokyo, is a process aimed at
mobilizing and sharing East Asian experiences and
resources deriving from their economic development for
the sake of Palestinian development. A second meeting
of Conference will take place under the Indonesian
chairmanship early next year.

I very much hope that the Security Council will
take into account not only the political aspects, but also
the economic incentives to the peace process, when it
discusses this very important subject.

Turning to the situation in Syria, Japan, like
others, welcomes the adoption of resolution 2118
(2013), as well as the establishment of the Joint Mission
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations. 1 also join
others in extending wholehearted congratulations to
the OPCW on being awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.
Since the inception of the OPCW in 1997, Japan has
made significant contributions to the activities of
the organization in its capacity as the second-largest
financial contributor and as a member of the Executive
Council. The first Director ofthe Inspectorate at OPCW
was Major General Ichiro Akiyama of Japan.

As my Prime Minister, Mr. Abe, expressed at
the general debate in September (see A/68/PV.12),
Japan will provide the greatest possible cooperation
towards the disposal of Syria's chemical weapons. My
Government will consider concrete cooperation based
on relevant information with respect to global needs
and the implementation scheme for destroying Syrian
chemical weapons.

Despite progress in the field of chemical weapons,
we must not turn our eyes away from the appalling
humanitarian situation in Syria and the lack of progress
in the peace process. Faced with this deplorable situation,
Japan will continue to proactively provide humanitarian
assistance - now totaling $155 million - to refugees
and neighbouring countries. With the $60 million
pledged by Prime Minister Abe last month, Japan
will support various international organizations in
caring for internally displaced persons and refugees
in and around Syria. Japan will also provide bilateral
assistance to Jordan and Lebanon. Furthermore, we
will extend a helping hand to areas under the control
of opposition groups where it is difficult for assistance
from international organizations to reach.

Let me recall, however, that humanitarian
assistance cannot be an end in itself. Now is the time
for the international community to seize the window
of opportunity with a view to stopping the violence
and bringing about a political solution. The successful
convening of the "Geneva II" conference is of utmost
importance in this regard. Japan is always ready to
participate in the Geneva 11 conference and to make
further contributions to resolving the Syrian crisis.

