Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): Like most of the other
intra-State conflicts that have erupted in the wake of the
cold war, the current situation in Abkhazia, Georgia,
involves an interplay of political, humanitarian and military
factors. We believe that the political process is the
fundamental determining factor in this conflict and should
thus be accorded the highest priority in the quest for a
resolution.

In this context, we appreciate and support the efforts
made by the Secretary-General, the group of "Friends of
Georgia" and, in particular, the Russian Federation as
facilitator to promote a comprehensive political settlement
of the conflict.

We must agree with the Secretary-General, however,
that the international community can only help the parties
reach a solution if they are willing to resolve their
differences in a spirit of compromise. In this regard, my
delegation is of the view that the Georgian Government's
proposal to grant Abkhazia far-reaching autonomy within
the framework of a unified Georgian State, as outlined in
President Shevardnadze's letter dated 6 July 1996, presents
a solid foundation upon which to build a comprehensive
political settlement.

We also join the other members of the Council in
calling upon the Abkhaz side in particular to end the
current standstill in the political process and to embrace a
more pragmatic and flexible approach to reaching a solution
based on the principle of respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized boundaries.

Paralysis in the political process has also been
accompanied by serious humanitarian conditions.
Regrettably, the return of refugees and displaced persons to
their homes in Abkhazia continues to be obstructed by the
Abkhaz side. A reduction is needed in the ongoing
criminality and violence that are also deterring the return of
refugees and displaced persons, especially in the Gali
region. In this regard, we must emphasize that any attempt
to tie the return of refugees to the question of Abkhazia's
political status is wholly unacceptable.

On the other hand, we are pleased to support the
programme for the protection and promotion of human
rights in Abkhazia to be implemented by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in
cooperation with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We hope to receive the
Secretary-General's detailed and timely report on
arrangements for the establishment of a human rights
office in Sukhumi so that the office can be opened as
soon as possible.

On another important matter, land mines appear to
pose the greatest obstacle, especially in the sense that they
constrain the free movement of the personnel of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG).
In this vein, as a troop contributor to this peace-keeping
operation, my delegation is especially pleased to note that
UNOMIG personnel will be provided with both mine-
protected vehicles and some engineering support for road-
clearing. We also hope that the close and continued
cooperation between UNOMIG and the Commonwealth
of Independent States peace-keeping force will serve to
enhance the safety of UNOMIG personnel.

In the light of all these considerations, my delegation
will be pleased to support the Secretary-General's
recommendation to extend the mandate of UNOMIG until
31 January 1997 by voting in favour of the draft
resolution before us.

Finally, we would also like to express our sincere
gratitude to Ambassador Brunner, the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy, and to Mr. Bota, his resident Deputy, as
well as to all the personnel under their command for their
determined efforts under trying conditions.

