Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): The subject of today's open
debate is well chosen and we wish to express our
particular appreciation to you, Sir, for the choice. The
Security Council is increasingly involved in issues of
post-conflict peace-building and also of transition from
peacekeeping to post-conflict peace-building. In some
cases, these situations also involve intense cooperation
with regional organizations and a variety of non-
governmental groups.

The link between post-conflict peace-building and
the maintenance of international peace and security is
obvious. International peace and security are not fully
ensured without the establishment of conditions for the
durability of peace after a military conflict. Precarious
situations which are fraught with the dangers of a

 

recurrence of war are not peace. Peace is more than an
absence of an active military conflict. It requires the
necessary minimum of political stability and security, which
can be achieved through post-conflict peace-building
activities. The success of such activities is by no means
automatically ensured.

The Ambassador of Brazil spoke before me about the
interplay between international and internal conflicts. Let
me go a step further in this matter by referring to a
particular conflict, which is an internal conflict, but one
with international ramifications.

In recent days, the situation in Angola has been
rapidly deteriorating into yet another phase of widespread
military conflict. This is very unfortunate for several
reasons. The most basic reason is, clearly, that the people
of Angola will be deprived of the benefits of peace for yet
another uncertain and possibly long period of time. Equally
disconcerting, however, is the fact that the current
deterioration has occurred after a period of progress
towards peace and after some post-conflict peace-building
activities had been started.

I wish to recall that, at the beginning of this year, on
9 January 1998, the Government of Angola and UNITA
agreed on a lO-point final timetable for the implementation
of the Lusaka Protocol. That timetable contained such steps
as the demobilization of UNITA, the disarmament of the
civilian population, the consolidation of the Government's
administration throughout the entire territory of the country
and other measures of transition towards post-conflict
peace-building.

The objectives of that timetable were not fulfilled,
mainly due to the subsequent change of mind and
obstruction by UNITA. As a result, general deterioration
took place and the situation degenerated into a new armed
conflict which adds to the prevailing crisis in that part of
Africa. This example shows how a failure in the transition
from the stage of peacekeeping to the stage of post-conflict
peace-building can seriously undermine peace and security
in a larger region.

Therefore, the importance of efforts to succeed cannot
be overestimated, and the United Nations must do its
utmost to help in the process of post-conflict peace-
building. The experience of past years has shown that such
efforts are no less difficult than those to contain and stop
the war. As a matter of fact, they are difficult in a different
way, given the inherent complexity of demands in the
process of transition from military conflict to durable peace.

While addressing this notion of complexity, I wish
to say that the complexity of the tasks in question was
duly recognized by the Secretary-General in his seminal
report entitled "An Agenda for Peace" in 1992 (S/24111)
and in the "Supplement to an Agenda for Peace" in 1995
(S/1995/1). A more recent and more specific set of
proposals by the Secretary-General is contained in his
report entitled "The causes of conflict and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa"
(S/1998/318), published earlier this year and extensively
discussed by the Security Council in recent months.

In the 1992 report, "An Agenda for Peace", the
Secretary-General emphasized the importance of
cooperative projects involving two or more countries in
mutually beneficial undertakings intended to stabilize
peace and ensure development. More generally, the
Secretary-General emphasized:

"When conflict breaks out, mutually reinforcing
efforts at peacemaking and peacekeeping come into
play. Once these have achieved their objectives, only
sustained, cooperative work to deal with underlying
economic, social, cultural and humanitarian problems
can place an achieved peace on a durable
foundation." (S/24IIZ, para. 57)

Slovenia has expressed its agreement with this
general approach of the Secretary-General and has
promised support. The question before the Governments
of the United Nations Member States has been and will
continue to be: what specifically can they contribute to
the inherently cooperative nature of efforts for post-
conflict peace-building? Which projects require practical
contributions by Governments in the region concerned
and beyond, and which require sustained political
support? When such questions are asked, the issue of
post-conflict peace-building becomes very specific, and
therefore permit me to make a few specific observations
on two areas of post-conflict peace-building.

One of the first priorities of any process towards
post-conflict peace-building is mine action, which consists
of demining, assistance to mine victims and the creation
of mine awareness in the public at large.

The implementation of provisions of international
instruments regarding demining and destruction of
landmines must be the first priority. This is necessary not
only to thwart the recurrence of a conflict, but also to
minimize the land whose use is restricted by infestation
and to expedite the return of refugees and internally

 

displaced persons to both their zones and their livelihoods.
Rehabilitation of mine victims is an important condition of
normalization after a conflict and, perhaps most
importantly, the way to restore both the productivity and
the human dignity of those most severely affected. Mine
awareness needs to be created and supported as part of the
effort to mobilize the population for post-conflict activities.
Peace cannot be sustained and development cannot thrive
in an atmosphere where an explosion could wound any one
at any time. Successful mine action, namely an action
successful in all three main areas, strengthens both peace
and development.

For all these reasons mine action must be considered
as early as possible in the peace settlement process. Short-
term priorities should therefore be carefully designed so as
to reinforce the process of long-term mine action. It is
important that mine action be integrated into the negotiation
of peace agreements and that mine action take place as
soon as possible. Ideally, humanitarian concerns on mine
action should be part of the peacekeeping function itself.
Close coordination between peacekeeping and humanitarian
activities is needed so that mine action can start as an
immediate priority of post-conflict peace-building.

At later stages, it may become necessary that the
number of those involved in the mine action increases and
that the cooperation projects of post-conflict peace-building
called for in "An Agenda for Peace" are taken seriously.
Slovenia is aware of these needs in all post-conflict
situations, including, for example, those in Croatia and in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and is actively involved in mine
action, especially through its international trust fund for
demining and mine victims assistance in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Demining, rehabilitation of mine Victims and
mine awareness become parts of a longer-term effort for
stabilization of the situation after the conflict and for
promotion of durable peace.

Another set of priorities relates to the need to stabilize
peace through justice and protection of human rights. Often
the credibility of justice demands that past violations be
properly addressed. This may require that retributive justice
be accepted as an essential ingredient of peace-building.
Justice is a value in itself. Additionally, it is a basic
condition for durability of peace.

The international community has gained important
experience in pursuit of these tasks in the preceding years.
The situations concerned range from those in Central
America to South-East Asia and from Europe to the Great
Lakes region in Africa. Earlier this year some of the main
experiences in this regard were systematically analysed
and presented in a book published by the Aspen Institute,
entitled Honoring Human Rights: From Peace to Justice.
That book showed that while the facts of each situation
varied, in each there has been a need to give a proper
meaning to peace through the efforts to strengthen human
rights and to address the violations and war crimes of the
recent past. The International Criminal Tribunals for
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia are of vital
importance for building real and durable peace. Various
truth commissions established in recent years in some
countries have also had beneficial effects.

A particularly important task relates to institution-
building, which characterized several operations recently
authorized by the Security Council. While most post-
conflict missions start with monitoring the situation of
human rights, monitoring is often not enough and has to
be complemented by international support for institution-
building. The projects of reforming or establishing
national and local police forces should include human
rights training and education, emphasize the relations
between the police and the local community and focus on
long-term sustainability of the police function. Judicial
systems often require reforms intended to ensure their
adequacy and their compatibility with generally accepted
international standards. A particularly important task is to
address the issue of impunity and to ensure that amnesty
laws are in accordance with international law.

The experience of the United Nations and other
international organizations over the past few years has
confirmed the validity of the views expressed in "An
Agenda for Peace" in 1992. Most importantly, perhaps, it
has demonstrated that the complexity of the tasks requires
a genuinely cooperative attitude of a variety of
international agencies and organizations - global and
regional, governmental and non-governmental - and the
active involvement of United Nations Member States.

The experience of past years has also confirmed the
need for all the relevant United Nations organs and
agencies to take part in a cooperative manner. Several
speakers before me referred to the role of the Economic
and Social Council, and I agree with those opinions. I
wish to add a point on the General Assembly, which, in
my opinion, also has a role. The value of the Assembly's
role in providing the broadest political framework for
international efforts to consolidate peace and post-conflict
peace-building has been reaffirmed in recent practice. The
annual consideration by the General Assembly of the

 

situations in Central America and in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are cases in point.

The open debate in the Security Council today is part
of a broader cooperative scheme of international efforts in
situations of post-conflict peace-building. We hope that the
views expressed in this debate will help in advancing the
effectiveness of post-conflict peace-building and thus the
maintenance of international peace and security.

