Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Kenzo Oshima for his very thorough briefing.

Sometimes in the Security Council, and indeed
outside the Council, people ask about the relevance of
these thematic debates. I think we need not ask that
question today. This debate is entirely justified. I shall
give just one figure to illustrate that fact. During the
First World War, between 1914 and 1918, 95 per cent
of the victims were soldiers. Today, 95 per cent of the
victims of conflict are civilians. There has therefore
been a radical change in the situation, which has rightly
prompted the Council to discuss the question of how it
should react to these new circumstances. Under the
Charter, of course, the Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Whenever it can, it responds
through its first method of acting, namely, intervening
directly in conflicts.

But the fact is that there are currently about 50
conflicts throughout the world, both between and
within States, and more than half of them are taking
place in Africa. Therefore, in addition to our action -
diplomatic or on the ground - we must ask ourselves
how, given the conflicts taking place, we can protect
civilian populations, which are now the primary
victims of those conflicts.

The Council is increasingly concerned about
acting on the causes of those conflicts and the elements
employed in pursuing them. In terms of the elements, I
am thinking in particular of small arms. I think we
have reason to embark on the huge task of combating
the proliferation of small arms, which cause by far the
largest number of victims. We are also concerned about
cutting off the sources that feed those conflicts - I am
thinking here of conflict diamonds and the plunder of
natural resources. In that connection, Mr. Oshima
mentioned the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It is said that there have been 3 million
victims in three years in that conflict, mostly civilians;
they were not direct victims of the armed conflict, but
of the consequences of the conflict, primarily forced
labour.

As I am on the subject of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, I should point out that the most
recent information available to us about fighting in the

Moliro region is particularly serious. It appears that
seven battalions of Rwandese troops - about at least
10,000 people - are engaged in an offensive in the
area of the Great Lakes and surrounding land routes.
This is a major assault and marks a resumption of the
war. It is unacceptable that the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo cannot shed light on what is now taking
place in Moliro. We are facing a resumption of war,
and MONUC must give us information about it.

Of course, apart from Africa there is also the
conflict in the Middle East. How can we fail to say that
the Fourth Geneva Convention is being seriously
violated on a regular basis in the Middle East?

There is one subject on which we must continue
our work. I am talking about the question of sanctions.
This is a tool that is available to the Council. Its
legitimacy would be more accepted if sanctions did not
have secondary effects on civilian populations. We
have started working on this aspect of the issue through
better targeted and time-bound sanctions. I think we
need to continue to work on this through, among other
things, the idea of humanitarian exemptions, which
deserves further discussion.

As a whole, a look at the long list of resolutions
mentioned in the annex to the aide-memoire might lead
us to wonder whether we should be making an
admission of powerlessness today. I do not think so. I
think that the aide-memoire shows both what remains
to be done and the progress the Council has made to
equip itself with a tool - a toolbox, if you like - that
is helping us, and that will continue to help us, to act
more effectively and in a more targeted fashion. We
will need to continue to enrich the aide-memoire and to
adapt it as we go further in our discussion. We must
also see to it that the Council, with the assistance of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
establishes better coordination with the various
international stakeholders - Mr. Oshima mentioned
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and other agencies - so that the victims
of conflict increasingly include fewer women and
children.

In conclusion, I would like to pay a threefold
tribute. First of all to the Secretary-General, who in his
1999 and 2001 reports rightly alerted us and mobilized
us regarding this topic. Secondly, I would like to pay
tribute to Mr. Kenzo Oshima, who has methodically
and dynamically continued his work with the Council
to assess situations and to develop a useful tool for us.
Lastly, I would like to pay tribute to you,
Mr. President. You have lent your support to this issue
with your well-known talent, and you have also
provided Norway's energy, which has mobilized itself
on behalf of this good cause.

