Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): In taking the floor on behalf ofthe Republic of
Equatorial Guinea at this meeting on the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
allow me to address through you, Mr. President, our
most sincere congratulations to Peru on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of April. In wishing you resounding success, I affirm
the unfailing support of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea in the execution of your work.

We also congratulate the Kingdom of the Netherlands
on its excellent stewardship of the Council during the
month of March. Its presidency was characterized by
exceptional drive and welcome results.

We have followed with great attention the
presentation by Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, who,
as usual, provided us with a clear, detailed and complete
briefing on MINUJUSTH, which not only highlighted
the political and economic aspects of the country but
also described the current humanitarian and security
situation in that brotherly country.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea follows closely
and regrets the various setbacks that the friendly
and brotherly people of Haiti have suffered, from the
blows of repeated natural disasters to the political
challenges have undermined the efforts of both the
Haitian Government and people and the development
partners for the country to set out on the path towards
sustainable development. We express our appreciation,
recognition and congratulations for the various
appropriate actions taken by the United Nations in Haiti,
including establishing the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti in June 2004, replacing the provisional
multinational force, and helping to establish a safe and
stable environment in Haiti, which involved its support
in many areas of the political and security spheres, as
recalled in the relevant Council resolutions, until its
replacement by the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti last year.

As a result of the aforementioned actions and of
the review by the Secretary-General, as requested in
resolution 2350 (2017), the Government, the legislature,
the judiciary and the Haitian National Police have
actively worked with the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti to develop a strategy that sets
out 11 benchmarks that need to be met in Haiti by
the last quarter of 2019. We would like to express our
appreciation and congratulations to the Government
of Haiti for the strong political will and leadership
it demonstrated during that exercise, which at the
end of next year should lead to a transition whereby
the United Nations country team can fully assume
its role of supporting the development of Haiti. The
11 benchmarks to be met are very ambitious but
achievable if both the Mission and the international
community resolutely support the Government of Haiti
to attain them by making it possible at all times for the
Government to lead the process with the active support
and advice of the Mission.

In a process such as that on which Haiti has
embarked, it is necessary to take into consideration any
limitations that may impede such an undertaking. In
that regard, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea draws
the attention of the United Nations and the international
community to the cholera situation that persists in Haiti,
which is finally being controlled. The fight against the
pandemic to ensure that it does not recur must be a high
priority, since that situation affects not only health and
water resources but also the development and stability
of Haiti.

Iwould like to conclude this statement by supporting
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support and
by calling on all State institutions of Haiti - the
Government, Parliament, the judicial bodies and the
National Police - and civil society to work closely
together in cooperation with and support of President
Juvenal Moise in his reform agenda to promote the
sustainable development of Haiti, for which respect
for the rule of law and human rights, good governance,
respect for State authority and the strengthening of the
legal and judicial institutions of Haiti are essential.

