Mr. Lamamra: First, Sir, allow me to
congratulate you, and the Croatian delegation, for your
leadership and to thank all members of this Council,
particularly those whose terms will be ending soon, for
their service to the cause of peace and security in the
world, and more specifically in Africa.

Let me also, Sir, thank you for giving me yet
another opportunity to address the Council on the
situation in Somalia. This opportunity comes at a
critical moment in the peace process, chiefly because
Somalia has witnessed, in the past months, significant
developments with regard to the expansion of the scope
of peace and reconciliation through meaningful
dialogue among Somali stakeholders, sponsored by the
United Nations. It also comes at a time of great need to
prop up shared resolve in the face of a positive
evolution that is hardly matched by the much-needed
capability to deliver at the operational level.

It is well known that Africa responded to the call
of duty towards the Somali people under adverse
circumstances; it deployed the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) with very little experience in
institutional and managerial control of peace support
operations, in the absence of a peace to keep and
relying heavily on external support. It is gratifying to
note that AMISOM. has been resiliently representing
the international community on the ground in Somalia
for the past two years and is today capable of providing
a modicum of support to the ongoing efforts resulting
from the Djibouti process. Indeed, we believe that, if
faithfully implemented, the agreements reached in
Djibouti can constitute building blocks for establishing
the foundation upon which the process of lasting peace
and reconciliation can be predicated.

The recent announcement of the withdrawal of
the Ethiopian national defence force from Somalia,
following ample notice of the Ethiopian Government's
intention, is fully consistent with the provisions of the
Djibouti Agreement. The announcement is to be taken
and welcomed as one of the main contributions to the
resolution of the conflict. This development should
therefore be seen in that light and not construed as a
problem in itself. It is in this context that the
international community ought to translate whatever
challenges such a withdrawal indeed poses into
opportunities to be taken advantage of by responding
to the demands of the new situation.

The deployment of a robust mission capable of
stabilizing the theatre and delivering on its mandate
remains the primary challenge, among the myriad of
issues facing the African Union since the inception of
its engagement in Somalia. This has not been possible
owing to several factors, which included the inability
to reach the Mission's authorized strength and the lack
of sufficient financial and logistical resources to
sustain and maintain troops on the ground, including
adequate and appropriate equipment to enhance the
operational capability of AMISOM.

Our efforts aimed at enhancing AMISOM
continue. This reflects the readiness of the African
Union to cooperate and be part of any arrangement that
will result in the creation of the peacekeeping force
foreseen in the Djibouti Agreement. In this respect, I
would like to call upon all friends of Somalia to pledge
troops, logistics and equipment for the establishment of
a United Nations-authorized force, which will stabilize
the country and be an integral part of a full-fledged
United Nations peacekeeping operation, leading to
post-conflict reconstruction and development. This
needs a well-articulated Security Council mandate, and
I sincerely hope that it will happen sooner rather than
later.

I wish now to refer to the twin problems of piracy
and armed robbery at high seas and terrorism. The
Somali waters, including the Gulf of Aden, now
constitute perhaps the most dangerous waterway on the
globe. Vessels are now extremely vulnerable when
transiting through the area. It is noteworthy to observe
that the collapse of the structures of governance in
Somalia, beginning in the 1990s, fuelled conditions for
the widespread growth of piracy in the region. This
first manifested itself in illegal fishing off the coast of
Somalia and provided the rationale for attacks on ships
by Somali fishermen. The situation further deteriorated
into acts of piracy in this vital strategic waterway, with
the involvement of "businessmen" underwriting a war
economy, including the trafficking of weapons of all
types on the mainland and the infiltration of terrorists
that supported the insurgency in South-Central
Somalia.

Piracy is, therefore, clearly a symptom of a larger
problem - that of lawlessness in Somalia. There is an
obvious need to address both the symptom and the root
problem. Having said this, I should like to applaud the
efforts of the Security Council, the European Union,
the Russian Federation, India, Pakistan and others and
appreciate the declared readiness of Saudi Arabia,
Egypt and others to join their respective forces in
combating this international criminal phenomenon.

For its part, the African Union is in the process of
complementing these efforts by setting the tone to
address maritime security and safety, including
situational awareness in the maritime domain of the
African continent, by thoroughly addressing the issue
in the Commission's new strategic plan for the period
2009 to 2012.

The developments in and around Somalia
underscore the need for the international community to
renew its commitment to address the very complex and
multidimensional problem that currently besets
Somalia. At a time when partners in the international
community are mobilizing to assemble extraordinary
assets to combat piracy, Somalia should not be allowed
to sink. Our shared values and principles and the
indivisible peace and security of the world would be
seriously undermined if that were to happen.

We are aware of the challenges that the Secretary-
General faces in bringing his plans of establishing a
multinational force to immediate fruition, and fully
support and welcome plans to avail AMISOM. of the
financial and logistical resources, including equipment,
that may have been pledged. This would assist
AMISOM. in the short term to sustain its operations
and expand current troop levels for greater robustness
of the Mission. Indeed, AMISOM. requires, more than
ever, significant financial, logistical and technical
assistance to enhance its efficiency and enable it
deliver on its mandate. Above all, AMISOM. still
requires renewed political support and a clear vision of
the international framework in which it will be
developing in the near future.

Allow me at this stage to make it very clear that
the African Union's position is and has always been
that an effective, well-equipped and properly funded
United Nations peacekeeping operation should be
deployed in Somalia. I welcome and highly value the
strong support extended to the African Union position
by the Secretary of State of the United States of
America at this meeting and by other delegations. The
African Union will certainly applaud the immediate
establishment of such a force if at all possible, and the
African Union is also prepared for the rehatting of
AMISOM. troops.

I would like also to take note, with appreciation,
of the important comments and recommendations made
at this meeting by the Secretary-General on what he
sees as bridging security arrangements, which could
result in enhancing the effectiveness of AMISOM. and
would lead to the deployment of a full-fledged United
Nations peacekeeping mission in Somalia as soon as
possible. Allow me also to stress in this context that
time is of the essence and that the status quo is just not
sustainable.

At this critical juncture, let me be more specific
on what the African Union sees as the pressing
requirements.

The first requirement is to send a strong political
signal expressing the continued commitment of the
international community to the peace and
reconciliation process in Somalia through the renewed
engagement of the Council in favour of the full
implementation of the Djibouti Agreement.

The second is the authorization of the deployment
of a United Nations peace support force in Somalia that
would include and complement an enhanced AMISOM.

The third is to build on an enhanced AMISOM, in
particular by providing the urgent support needed to
beef up the force to reach the authorized level of
8,000 troops, as well as to further enable AMISOM
with air and naval capabilities.
0865219

The fourth is to fully support the Djibouti process

by helping to put in place a broad-based Government

of national unity, an expanded Parliament and a

10,000-strong police force, to be trained by AMISOM
and the international community.

Somalia deserves a resolute commitment by all to
actively pursue every measure necessary to ensure a
lasting solution to the conflict that has engulfed that
country for nearly two decades. I therefore urge the
Security Council to vigorously consider its options.
The Council should take firm and decisive steps to
avoid a security vacuum that would have the potential
of endangering the whole peace process in Somalia and
more dramatically threatening regional and global
peace and security.

We at the African Union are ready to make
additional sacrifices and to pursue our undertaking in
Somalia within the context of greater United Nations
involvement and more effective international support.
The leaders of AMISOM. troop-contributing
countries - Burundi and Uganda - have pledged to
us their renewed commitment in that respect. We need
the Council's strong leadership at this critical turning
point for Somalia. Its decision on the United Nations
taking more responsibility in Somalia will have a direct
bearing on the decisions of the forthcoming ministerial
meeting of the African Union's Peace and Security
Council on the issue of the renewal of the mandate of
AMISOM.

