Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Togo for arranging this thematic debate of the
Council on the question of piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe;
the Director of Political Affairs of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
Mr. Musah; and the Deputy Executive Secretary of the
Gulf of Guinea Commission, Mrs. Ukonga, for their
briefings.

In recent years, frequent acts of piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea have seriously threatened the normal trade
and navigation security in the Gulf and negatively
affected regional peace and security. They have also
had an impact on the economic activities of coastal
States and the neighbouring hinterland countries. China
expresses its grave concern over this situation. The
countries of the Gulf of Guinea, the relevant regional
organizations and the international community should
fully recognize the serious nature of the problem, take
timely, effective, preventive and comprehensive
actions, and duly solve the problem by strengthening
international cooperation and preparing integrated
strategies.

The Gulf of Guinea countries bear the primary
responsibility for dealing with piracy. China welcomes
the positive initiatives taken by the countries
concerned, including the formulation and enhancement
of national strategies, the strengthening of governance,
naval capacities, judicial systems and law enforcement,
and the deployment of joint maritime patrols. We hope
that the countries concerned will continue to increase
inputs, strengthen coordination and do better in
shouldering the responsibility for maintaining regional
peace and security.

Recently, the relevant regional organizations -
ECOWAS, the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission - actively formulated an integrated
regional anti-piracy strategy and established regional
coordination centres that have already achieved notable
results. China expresses its appreciation for the work
of those organizations. We hope that the relevant
regional organizations will continue to play a
leadership and coordination role, convene a regional
summit on preventing and combating piracy as soon as
possible, and strengthen and improve their
coordination mechanisms so that they can act in

synergy.

The support and assistance of the international
community are indispensable to addressing the
question of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. China
supports the relevant recommendations in the report of
the assessment mission (see S/2012/45). We support

the United Nations in playing a coordinating role in
international cooperation to combat piracy and in
providing more financial and technical support to the
relevant countries and regional organizations. We call
on countries with the capacities to do so to effectively
address the question and, on the basis of respect for the
sovereignty of the relevant countries, to provide timely
and necessary assistance. The Chinese Government
will continue to provide assistance within our
capabilities.

The issue of piracy has a profound economic and
social background. Piracy occurs at sea but its root
causes are on land. Poverty and stalled economic and
social development provide fertile ground for piracy. If
the problem of piracy is to be solved, an integrated
strategy to address the symptoms and root causes is
required. We call on the international community to
redouble its efforts and play a more active role in
helping the countries concerned to eradicate poverty
and achieve sustained economic and social
development.

