Mr. Egeland (spoke in French): I should like to
thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to inform the
Council regarding the humanitarian situation in West
Africa.

The humanitarian situation is not desperate.
Progress achieved in other crises has shown us the
proper way to proceed. In Sierra Leone, for example,
all displaced persons were rehoused and ex-combatants
reintegrated by the end of last year and emergency
humanitarian interventions have given way to
development programmes. In Liberia, the
unprecedented improvement in the security situation
has given humanitarian workers access to populations
that had been deprived of assistance. Allow me,
however, to focus on the cross-border issues in West
Africa that are currently of concern to the international
community.

(spoke in English)

Too many communities in the subregion remain
in a crisis of protection. While open conflict has now
been contained, the violation and direct targeting of
civilians continues. Brutal killings, rape and sexual
abuses, as well as harassment of civilians by State and
non-State actors, have too often become the norm.
Those acts affect women and children in particular.
Moreover, the general deterioration of infrastructure
and basic social services in the subregion has increased
the vulnerability of affected populations and the level
of investment needed to resettle displaced persons and
returnees when conditions permit.

In Cote d'Ivoire, civil strife is continuing, as
today's violent demonstrations bear witness to. The
humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate due to
the cumulative effects of massive displacements,
depletion of food stocks, lack of access to land and the
collapse of social services. Protection issues range
from inter-ethnic conflicts to rampant sexual abuse.

Even in Liberia, where the United Nations
Mission has improved overall security, more than
300,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) are still
displaced to urban areas. Due to continued insecurity in
some parts of the country and the onset of the rainy
season, the majority of IDPs will not be able to return
to their places of origin before the end of the year.

Guinea, which has had a long tradition of offering
asylum to refugees in the subregion, is also faced with
considerable humanitarian challenges. Guinea currently

hosts over 100,000 refugees, while over 100,000
Guineans have returned from C6te d'Ivoire.

Other countries in the subregion, such as Mali
and Burkina Faso, are also directly affected by these
conflicts. For example, over 340,000 people have
returned to Burkina Faso from strife-stricken Cote
d'Ivoire over this past year alone. The capacity of the
local communities to receive these massive population
movements is extremely limited.

The Council has already been briefed on the
establishment of the Joint Humanitarian Review for
West Africa, a process led by my Deputy and the
Secretary-General's Humanitarian Envoy for the Cote
d'Ivoire crisis, Ms. Carolyn McAskie. As the Mano
River Union and Cote d'Ivoire were suffering from a
protection crisis and inadequate humanitarian response,
a regional strategy and plan of action were devised in
July 2003, together with all regional stakeholders.

Since then, inclusive regional coordination
meetings that include political partners and donor
representatives have taken place regularly. A regional
contingency plan is close to finalization. A regional
protection network has been established. Moreover, the
co-location of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs Regional Office and the United
Nations Office for West Africa has been instrumental
in strengthening partnerships with regional political
actors. Several United Nations agencies have signed a
memorandum of understanding with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to build
a strong partnership with its newly formed department
of humanitarian affairs.

Let me conclude with the following four points.

First, humanitarian and human rights efforts alone
will, as we have seen, often be insufficient in providing
protection to vulnerable groups in armed conflict.
While all opportunities need to be seized to remind
parties to armed conflicts of their responsibility to
uphold international humanitarian and human rights
law, it is a welcome fact that the Security Council is
willing and able to take additional measures to stop the
abuse and protect civilians.

Secondly, there is a need to forge closer links at
the regional level between humanitarian, political and
economic actors in order better to coordinate and
implement disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes. Continued small-
arms proliferation among unemployed youth will mean
continued instability in the whole region. Thus it is
critical that DDR programmes have a solid and
completely financed reintegration component. The
efforts made by ECOWAS to enforce its moratorium on
small-arms transfers, as just outlined by the Foreign
Minister of Ghana and the Executive Secretary of
ECOWAS, are most welcome.

Thirdly, unequal and insufficient assistance
among countries and humanitarian sectors hampers a
meaningful response to those most in need. In West
Africa, such critical sectors as protection, health and
education remain seriously underfunded. For instance,
Cote d'Ivoire received no funding for projects in any of
those sectors under the Consolidated Appeal last year,
and Guinea did not receive significant funding for any
sector last year.

Fourthly and lastly, the efforts of the
humanitarian community in West Africa should not be
quick fixes to crises that require a much more
comprehensive approach. Their underlying root causes
must be fully addressed. Other areas that need to be
considered are governance, the rule of law, the
proliferation of small arms, and poverty. The
implementation of the main recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report which is
before the Council today would contribute significantly
to addressing our primary humanitarian concerns. I
urge the Council to support those recommendations.

