Judge Joensen: I would like to begin by extending
my congratulations to the representative of Chad, which
is presiding over the Security Council in December, as
well as the representatives of Angola, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Spain and Venezuela on their nations' election
to the Security Council for the term beginning in
January 2015. I wish them all the best for a successful
tour of duty.

I would also like to express the gratitude of the entire
Tribunal to the representatives of Argentina, Australia,
Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and Rwanda for
their nations' service to the Security Council as they
near the completion of their terms, and thank all of
the Governments represented on the Council for the
support they have provided as we near the completion
of our mandate and the closure of the Tribunal.

Please allow me this opportunity to also commend
and renew my sincere appreciation to the Legal Counsel,
Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares; the Assistant Secretary-
General for Legal Affairs, Mr. Stephen Mathias; and
the staff of the Office of the Legal Counsel for their
continued efforts to act as a liaison between the Tribunal
and the Security Council and for all of the support they
have provided to the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) in organizing its twentieth-anniversary
commemoration event here in New York, which will
take place later today.

It remains an immense honour for me to provide the
members of the Security Council with an update on the
progress made towards the completion of our mandate,
especially as we mark the twentieth anniversary of
the establishment of the ICTR by the Council. In that
regard, I am happy to report that the Appeals Chamber
rendered one judgement in the Bizimungu appeal in
June and three additional judgements concerning four
persons in September in the Karemera & Ngirumpatse,
Nizeyimana and Nzabonimana cases. As of today,
appellate proceedings have now been concluded with
respect to 55 persons.

That means that the ICTR Appeals Chamber has
now completed all of its work with the exception of
one case, the Nyiramasuhuko et al. or "Butare" case
concerning six persons. Last week the Presiding
Judge in that case, Judge Pocar, informed the parties
that the appeals were scheduled to be heard in April
2015. As previously reported, the scope and complexity
of the appeals in the Butare case, combined with the
continued departures of experienced staff and the need
to rule on voluminous pro-appeal litigation prior to
the oral hearings, has led to the scheduling of those
hearings later than previously planned. Nonetheless,
the projection that the appeal judgement will not be
delivered before August 2015 remains unchanged. I
commend the judges and staff working on the Butare
appeal for the tremendous work they are doing to
complete this very large, complex appeal.

In the light of the current projected timeline for
the completion of the Butare appeal, and considering
the current Judges' involvement in cases before the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), I have recently submitted a request to the
Secretary-General for the extension of the terms of
office of the ICTR judges. These extensions take into
account the most recent projections in all of the cases
and, as such, I have requested extensions until July or
December 2015, or until the completion of the cases to
which each individual judge is assigned, if sooner.

President Meron has simultaneously made a request
for the extension of the terms of office of several ICTY
judges in line with the same projections. It is my
sincere hope that we will have Member States' support
for these extensions, as they are crucial to the ability of
both Tribunals to complete their remaining work, and,
for the ICTR, to our ability to continue towards closure
in 2015, in line with current projections.

Considering the significant work that the Appeals
Chamber has completed since my previous report and
considering their commitment to finalizing our sole
remaining appeals case without delay, I feel that it is
important for me and for the Council to acknowledge
and commend all of the Judges and staff of the Tribunal
in The Hague and in Arusha, who work under extremely
tight deadlines to ensure that we meet our completion
strategy goals. I would also like to particularly thank
and commend President Meron for his leadership of
the ICTR Appeals Chamber, as well as Prosecutor
Jallow and Registrar Majola for their leadership of the
other organs of the Tribunal, all of which have been
instrumental to our completion strategy.

As I have done in the past, I would now like to briefly
update the Council on the progress being made with
respect to the issue of reparations for the victims of the
1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, during which
Hutu and others who opposed the genocide were also
killed. I am pleased to announce that the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) has completed and
submitted a draft assessment study to the Government
of Rwanda. The assessment study identifies options for
reparations for victims and survivors and describes in
concrete and operational terms how those options can
be developed and implemented in Rwanda as well as
how these programmes may be funded. The final report
of the study should be issued in the coming months;
once it is issued it will be transmitted to the relevant
stakeholders, and follow-up activities will be planned.

I would like to take this opportunity to once again
thank the Government of Finland for its generous
contribution, without which the assessment study would
not have been able to be conducted, and to commend the
Government of Rwanda and the IOM. for their efforts to
ensure that this project continues to move forward.

I now return to the very troubling issue of relocating
the acquitted and convicted released persons still
residing in Arusha. I am pleased to inform the Council
today that there have been some developments since the
last time I briefed members on this issue. There has
been a decrease in the number of acquitted persons
from nine to eight, resulting from the acceptance of the
relocation request that the Registrar had submitted to the
Kingdom of Belgium in July 2014 on behalf of General
Augustin Ndindiliyimana. On 10 September 2014, the
Kingdom of Belgium informed the ICTR that General
Ndindiliyimana's application for a family reunification
visa had been approved. Having satisfied certain
requirements, General Ndindiliyimana ultimately left
the United Republic of Tanzania in September 2014 and
is now resettled in Belgium. The ICTR is grateful to the
Kingdom of Belgium for that assistance.

The issue of relocation, however, remains a
daunting one and has been brought to the Council's
attention on numerous occasions. It is an issue that I
firmly believe represents a serious challenge to the
credibility of the enforcement of international criminal
justice. Despite numerous Security Council resolutions
calling upon Member States to assist the ICTR in
relocating these individuals, apart from the support
the ICTR recently received from Belgium regarding
General Ndindiliyimana, for which we are extremely
grateful, for a number of years all efforts made by
the ICTR to relocate the remaining individuals have
proved unsuccessful. The Mechanism for International
Criminal Tribunals will assume responsibility for
the relocation and care of the acquitted and released
persons in Arusha from 1 January 2015, and, as such, we
once again call for urgent assistance from the Security
Council to find a sustainable solution to this issue.

I next turn to the transition to the Mechanism. I
am proud to report that the Mechanism's reliance on
the ICTR for administrative and other services has
been significantly reduced and that it continues to
assume responsibilities pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1966 (2010) and in line with the transitional
arrangements. The monitoring ofall ICTR cases referred
to national jurisdictions is fully the responsibility of
the Mechanism; however, the ICTR continues to assist
the Mechanism by providing an interim monitor, as
required.

With respect to the Tribunal's archives, the ICTR
continues to cooperate to ensure that records are
prepared in a manner that will facilitate their effective
management after being transferred to the Mechanism.
I am happy to report that, as of 4 December, the Tribunal
had transferred to the Mechanism more than 1,100
linear metres of records, comprising more than 50 per
cent of physical records anticipated for transfer. Judicial
records relating to the Butare case have been separated
for transfer following the appeal judgement, while all
other records have been transferred, or are scheduled
for transfer, before the Tribunal closes. Despite vast
challenges presented by the volume and nature of the
records and the downsizing of human resources, the
Tribunal remains hopeful that the preparation and
transfer of its records will be completed on time.

As I address the Council today, almost one
month after the Tribunal commemorated its twentieth
anniversary and one day after the anniversary of the
General Assembly's signing of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, it
is hard not to fully appreciate the gravity of the decision
that the Council made two decades ago to establish the
ICTR - a decision that, together with the establishment
of the ICTY the previous year, would forever alter the
landscape of international criminal law. To pay homage
to those who lost their lives during those 100 dark days
in 1994 and to once again remind the international
community of what happens when cries for help go
unanswered, the Tribunal held events to commemorate
the twentieth anniversary of its creation.

On 6 and 7 November, representatives from various
international and domestic courts, civil society members
and academics came from across the globe to attend the
International Symposium on the Legacy of the ICTR
in Arusha, Tanzania, which focused on the ICTR's
accomplishments and lessons learnt during its two-
decade fight against impunity. During the Symposium,
panels of experts in the field of international law and
court administration discussed the ICTR's significant
contributions to international criminal justice, as well
as the outreach and capacity-building programmes that
it created throughout its existence.

On 8 November, exactly 20 years after the adoption
of resolution 955 (1994), which created the Tribunal,
an event was held in Arusha to mark the occasion and
to launch the new ICTR website. A similar event will
be held today at 1.15 pm. in the Economic and Social
Council Chamber. We look forward to welcoming
Council representatives and many other guests from the
international community here in New York.

It is, as always, a distinct honour to address the
Council. On behalf of the Tribunal, I wish to express
our gratitude for the support that the Governments
represented here have shown us throughout the past
two decades. As we make arrangements for closure,
the continued assistance of those Governments remains
crucial to our efforts to ensure that the Tribunal closes
its doors with its mandate completed and its legacy
secured.

