Ms. Al-Khalifa (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I
would like to thank the President of the Security
Council, the Foreign Minister of the Slovak Republic,
for inviting me to address the Security Council on the
important issue of security sector reform.

The Security Council, as the Charter body mainly
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security, has an essential role to play in addressing
security sector reform. I warmly congratulate you,
Mr. President, on this timely initiative.

I welcome today's important meeting, which
follows recent debates in the General Assembly and the
Security Council on the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission. In many resolutions, the General
Assembly has reaffirmed the United Nations leading
role in helping countries emerging from conflict to
build and strengthen institutional capacities, which
promote coexistence and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. The General Assembly has also stressed the
importance of strengthening the role of the
international community and all its institutions and
programmes in dealing with countries emerging from
conflict, in order to prevent them from sliding back
into conflict. The role that security sector reform can
play to promote that agenda must not be
underestimated.

We should recognize that the United Nations has
a comparative multilateral advantage over other
organizations in that area. Due to its universal
legitimacy, it is uniquely positioned to play a leading
role in policy formulation and capacity building. No
other Organization is as inclusive and as
comprehensive as the United Nations.

Security sector reform in countries emerging
from conflict is a very complex issue. The security
apparatus of every country lies at the heart of its
sovereignty and national identity. The core institutions
of State - the police, army and judiciary - are crucial
to internal stability and justice, good governance and
the rule of law. The impartiality of those institutions
reflects the strength and depth of a country's
democratic values. Without the effective functioning of
those institutions and the confidence of the people in
them, economic development and democratic values
will be undermined. A competent, law-abiding and
well-governed security sector - with effective civilian
oversight - is vital for overall peacebuilding and
reconstruction efforts and sustainable development that
can benefit the poor. That is why national ownership of
any process of security sector reform is extremely
important. The consolidation of peace and stability in
post-conflict situations is dependent upon a nationally-
owned process of socio-economic and political
development, including security sector reform that is
swift and effective.

The United Nations can play an important
capacity-building role, in particular in the aftermath of
a conflict. Security sector reform, beginning with
peacekeeping operations, is an integral part of the
transition from conflict situations to long-term stability
and economic development.

Better coordination of our collective efforts at the
international level and within this Organization is
necessary to ensure that much-needed assistance to
countries emerging from conflict has a greater impact.
We need to adopt a common policy within the
framework of the General Assembly to define such
concepts and coordinate the efforts throughout the
Organization and its departments and agencies in the
field. In that connection, the Peacebuilding
Commission can play a very important coordinating
and substantive role, given the increasing demand for
the support of the United Nations, especially now that
most evident conflicts tend to be within States and not
between States.

I would like to emphasize the important
contribution that the General Assembly, as the chief
deliberative and policy-making organ of the United
Nations, can make to this emerging debate. Working
together with the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council, we can all contribute to the
development of a general policy framework, in an open
and transparent debate involving all Member States. I
therefore welcome the opportunity for the General
Assembly to discuss the Secretary-General's
forthcoming report on security sector reform.

