Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for agreeing to hold this meeting at our
request. I also thank Mr. Feltman and Mr. O'Brien for
their highly effective briefings today.

I would like to begin with the harrowing words
of Stefan Heunis, a photographer working for Agence
France-Presse who visited a camp for internally
displaced people near Maiduguri in Nigeria. Stefan
wrote this in his blog earlier today:

"The camp is now home to nearly 16,000 people
and is growing by the day. You can practically taste
the despair - there is no food, few opportunities
and no shade. Flies looking for moisture in the
dry heat pester the eyes and mouths of women
and children too weak to swat them away. What
strikes me most about severe acute malnutrition is
the deformation it causes. The head becomes much
bigger in proportion to the body, and the angular
changes of the skeleton. Bones start protruding
from under the skin, almost piercing it."

This humanitarian nightmare is the direct
consequence of Boko Haram. They are a group that we
are all familiar with. We all called out in unison for
the return of those young women from Chibok. We all
demanded: "Bring back our girls!". But now, over two
years on, can we say that we have really maintained our
focus? Today is our chance to bring overdue attention
back to this crisis.

The plight of the people of the Lake Chad Basin
is almost beyond comprehension. Because of Boko
Haram's anarchy, millions across the region now require
urgent humanitarian assistance. Around 800,000
people are living on the verge of famine, and for many,
I fear that we are simply too late. So many of those in
need are children. As Stephen said, UNICEF estimates
that as many as a quarter of a million children are now
suffering from severe acute malnutrition in Borno state.
Around one in five will die if they do not receive urgent
treatment. So, we must act fast, and I thank you again,

Mr. President, for convening this meeting so speedily. I
see three priorities ahead.
First, strong clear leadership from the United
Nations is needed to coordinate the international
effort, particularly given the challenging conditions on
the ground and the continued instability. We strongly
support the work already done by the United Nations,
including to raise the international profile of the plight
of these communities, but it is also imperative that
the international community and the Governments of
the region redouble their efforts to support the United
Nations, so that together we can significantly scale up
the delivery of urgently needed support. That means
putting our hands in our pockets.

The United Kingdom was one of the first donors
to respond to this crisis, and I thank Stephen for
acknowledging that fact. In 2015, we provided
$32 million in humanitarian assistance in the Niger,
Chad and northern Cameroon, and this year we have
already provided an additional $34 million. In Nigeria,
we have provided nearly $11 million to support conflict-
affected people in the north-east and will provide an
additional $42 million over the next three years. We
are currently considering where we could do more, and
I hope that others around this table will do the same.
We look to the United Nations for further details on
the priority needs in the region and how we can best
support their plans for their response. But we know that
this is not just about money, so we strongly support the
deployment of additional United Nations staff to the
region, particularly those with relevant experience in
dealing with such complex ongoing humanitarian crises.

My second point is about protection, which must
be at the centre of our response to this crisis. So many
people in the Lake Chad Basin have suffered at the
hands of Boko Haram and fled their towns and villages
in response, so it is vital that the displaced be returned to
their homes only when it is safe to do so. We encourage
all actors to work together to report, mitigate and
address protection violations against displaced people,
refugees and other vulnerable groups. We support the
work being done by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and Governments of
the region on this issue.

My third and final point is that while it is vital that
we treat the symptoms ofthis crisis and quickly, we also
need to address the root causes. That means stopping the
conflict. Defeating Boko Haram across the region will

require a comprehensive approach that builds stability,
tackles extremist narratives and addresses the root
causes of instability, including economic and political
development. It is a comprehensive approach that needs
to put the protection and empowerment of women at its
centre, combatting the misogyny and oppression that
are so ingrained in violent extremism. It is an approach
that needs to offer something that the extremists can
never provide - the rule of law. For that reason, it
is vital that any action against Boko Haram be fully
compliant with human rights standards. Ultimately, it is
a comprehensive approach that we all need to support.

As Jeff kindly highlighted, the United Kingdom has
provided $6.5 million to the Multinational Joint Task
Force, and we are also providing military intelligence
and humanitarian and development support to Nigeria.
I hope that all members of the Council will play their
part to tackle both the humanitarian crisis and the
scourge that has created it. I look forward to hearing
from all gathered here about how, between us, we can
step up.

