Ms. Bensouda: I am grateful to the presidency
of Argentina for inviting me to join this open debate
before the Council and for preparing the extremely
helpful concept paper (S/20l4/725, annex) to help steer
our discussions this morning. I always welcome the
opportunity to brief the Council in its public meetings.
Indeed, my Office, and the Court as a whole, see the
importance in engaging on various issues, including on
how to advance dialogue on specific situations under
investigation and prosecution by the International
Criminal Court (ICC), as well as on thematic issues of
mutual concern to both our organizations. We believe
that the rights of women and children - indeed, the
rights of all civilians in times of conflict, the protection
of peacekeeping missions and the rule of law - are
topics of common importance to both our institutions,
as is the crucial role justice plays in relation to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

This open debate takes place almost exactly
two years after a similar meeting was organized by
Guatemala on 17 October 2012 (see S/PV.6849). Since
then, I have been pleased to see increasing interaction
between my Office and the Council on both the formal
and informal levels. I would like to thank in particular
States parties to the Rome Statute that have served
on the Council for their commitment to bringing the
International Criminal Court into the discussions. It
is important that States parties within and outside the
Council work together and with one voice to make the
most of the opportunities afforded by the Council for
the promotion of justice and the international rule of
law, and to think proactively about how the Council,
the Assembly of States Parties and the International
Criminal Court can work in concert, within their
respective mandates, to advance these crucially
important goals.

My Office has taken note of the concept notc's
recommendation that the mandate of the Ombudsperson
created by resolution 1904 (2009) be extended to all
sanctions committees, bearing on the experience of
the Office of the Ombudsperson within the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime. I agree with this recommendation. As
it currently stands, almost all of the Security Council's
sanctions regimes that overlap with situations under
investigation by the ICC have included individuals
against whom warrants of arrests have been issued by
the ICC on their lists. This is true in particular for the
situations of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Cote d'Ivoire and the Central African Republic.

The biggest exception to this rule has been the
Darfur situation. None of the four individuals under
ICC warrants of arrest have been successfully included
in the Darfur sanctions list established under resolution
1590 (2005). The individuals included have been subject
to travel bans and assets freezes. There are important
areas of convergence between the sanctions regimes
and the work of the ICC as a whole that would benefit
from a single focal point to address them. A pertinent
example is the urgent need to confidentially lift travel
bans for persons who have to be transferred to ICC.
I have full confidence in the current Ombudsperson,
Ms. Kimberly Prost, and my Office and I look forward
to the opportunity to work with her in the future.

As for the concept note's second subject - the
follow-up of Security Council referrals to the ICC - our
work together could similarly benefit from a focal point.
That focal point could take the form of the Working
Group on International Tribunals, although I am open
to discussions about the advantages and disadvantages
of different approaches. It may make sense to identify a
mechanism similar to the Office of the Ombudsperson
for sanctions regimes, with someone who could help to
secure the necessary resources of the Secretariat, States
and other actors to address follow-up challenges on a
case-by-case basis. Such a mechanism could also ensure
that these efforts are properly documented for purposes
of lessons learned and further refining our approach.
With the help of my Office and other relevant actors,
such a focal point could organize situation-specific
activities, not just on referral situations but on situations
of common interest, such as Central African Republic or
Mali, bringing together all the relevant actors from the
United Nations, States and elsewhere. Those activities
would help to assess the progress achieved, identify
challenges and areas in need of improvement and to
facilitate enhanced coordination among the actors, with
the goal of greater follow-up to the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

As I have highlighted in previous briefings,
follow-up on referrals is a concern for my Office,
and I know it is one that we share with the Council.
As with the Darfur situation, failure to implement
aspects of resolutions referring situations to the ICC
can reflect a much deeper problem. For example, by
my Office's count, as of last June the Council had
adopted 55 resolutions on the Sudan, with very few
of them implemented. That suggests that resolutions
requiring follow-up for each relevant situation should
be reviewed collectively as well as individually. If the
Council's repeated resolutions calling for disarmament
of the Janjaweed had been respected, for example,
it would have almost certainly had an impact on the
implementation of resolution 1593 (2005) and on my
Office's investigations. We must look at situations in
their totality to understand how to contribute to ending
impunity therein.

I respectfully call on the Council to consider
using stronger language in its referrals, similar to the
language used in past Council resolutions requiring
cooperation from all States with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. The
language of the Darfur and Libya resolutions leaves a
fair amount of ambiguity as to whether all States are
obliged to cooperate. Similarly, stronger language on
State obligations regarding privileges and immunities
afforded to ICC staff, as well as external counsel
and their respective team members, involved in ICC
proceedings when operating in situation countries
referred to the Court by the Council could also be
helpful.

There are many instances in which the ICC needs
to call upon non-States parties to the Rome Statute
for their assistance. While many have responded
positively, those that have not have effectively provided
a safe haven for individuals against whom warrants of
arrests have been issued by the ICC. I believe stronger
language from the Council on this matter would be
helpful to reiterate the need to fully cooperate with the
Court and to uphold its judicial rulings.

I also hope that our deliberations will include
serious discussions and commitment about designing
effective arrest strategies. It is my sincere hope that the
Council can definitively call on all Member States to
provide the necessary assistance. The Council assumes
a crucial role in the emerging system of international
criminal justice and must embrace that role with all
the opportunities for constructive engagement that it
provides.

Again, a focal point for interaction between the
Council and the ICC could be of practical assistance.
If a focal point could take the lead in coordinating
United Nations, ICC, Assembly of States Parties
and individual State efforts to proactively track and
document the whereabouts, activities and travel agenda
of accused persons wanted by the ICC, and could
survey and monitor obligations and responses of States
vis-a-vis the arrest of those individuals, such detailed
information could help to better inform Security
Council discussions about how to promote follow-up.
That could also include whether to add elements of
arrest strategy in peacekeeping mandates. A designated
focal point for interaction between the Security Council
and the ICC could also help to document specific
problems and progress achieved in securing bilateral
cooperation. The focal point could make constructive
recommendations to the Council about how to
facilitate effective investigations and thereby ensure
fuller follow-up to the Council's resolutions referring
situations to my Office.

Finally, a designated focal point could address the
question of the outstanding response of the Security
Council to the ICC's findings of non-cooperation, and
subsequent correspondence with the Council. It is not
only a question of focusing on non-cooperation on the
part of specific States, but of looking more positively
and proactively at how to encourage cooperation as
specific challenges arise.

Lastly, given that my Office is currently in the
process of discussing its proposed 2015 budget with
the Court's States parties, this is an opportune moment
to equally inform the Council that the lack of State or
United Nations financing for Security Council referrals
has a real impact on the ability of my Office to conduct
full and effective investigations in the Darfur and
Libya situations. I encourage the Council to take this
fact into consideration in the light of the urgent need to
revitalize both of those investigations.

Let me conclude by thanking the Council for this
opportunity to speak candidly about the needs of the
International Criminal Court to effectively execute
its mandate. I look forward to further interaction on
specific challenges, and to seeking the intersections
and synergies between the ICC's and the Council's
separate and independent mandates that will move us
forward in terms of our effectiveness in the pursuit of
humankind's yearning to end impunity for mass crimes
that shock our collective conscience and threaten the
peace, security and well-being of the world.

The time for general discussions is coming to
fruition. Let us delve into the details and find concrete
solutions to face the specific challenges that will make

the greatest difference to the Victims of mass atrocities,
and for the benefit of the maintenance of international
peace and security.

