Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Prosecutor Bensouda
for her briefing and for her twentieth report to the
Security Council. We recall that in the Prosecutor's
briefing of June (see S/PV.7199), the Secretary-General
had been asked to investigate the alleged manipulation of
reporting by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and of the cover-up of
crimes committed against civilians and peacekeepers.
We commend the Secretary-General for his urgent
action in launching a review into the allegations. We
note that after examining relevant material, the review
team found no evidence to support the allegations.

Concerning the allegations of mass rape in the
village of Thabit, North Darfur, we have carefully
studied the report ofthe Sudan's Office ofthe Prosecutor
General for Darfur Crimes and we have no reason to
doubt its credibility. We also note that UNAMID issued
a press release on 10 November indicating that the
Mission's team that went to Thabit found no evidence to
support allegations of mass rape. We nevertheless urge
the Sudanese authorities to continue to cooperate with
UNAMID and to grant the Mission access to Thabit for
further investigations.

Nigeria commends the Office of the Prosecutor
for its continuous monitoring of a number of trends in
Darfur that could constitute crimes under the Rome
Statute. We unequivocally condemn acts by any party
to the Darfur conflict that target civilians. We also
condemn acts on aid workers and peacekeepers.

The violence in Darfur has had a negative impact
on the well-being of the people living in the region.
Millions have been displaced and are facing crisis
levels of food insecurity. We are deeply disturbed by
the difficulties that humanitarian actors, including the
United Nations, are facing in terms of gaining access to
those in need. We urge all concerned to lift restrictions
on humanitarian agencies in order to facilitate the
delivery of aid to those in dire need.

Finally, we stress that there can be no military
solution to the conflict in Darfur. We therefore call on
all parties to lay down their arms and embrace dialogue
as the path to lasting peace and stability in the region.

