Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I, too, should like to welcome the Executive
Director of the World Food Programme and to thank
him for today's briefing.

We fully agree with the idea set out by President
Obasanjo of Nigeria and used by Mr. Morris when he
began his briefing today, that (spoke in English) "A
hungry person is an angry person". That is true, and we
all understand it. That is why Russia, as a responsible
member of the international community, believes that
the challenge of strengthening peace and security is
intrinsically linked to the socio-economic development
of Africa and other unsettled areas of the world. For
that reason, we undertake efforts in various areas to
assist African countries.

I should like to cite two or three statistics. Russia
has written off, or pledged to write off, debt of African
countries amounting to more than $16 billion,
including more than $2 billion in the context of the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative.
Our Government has taken additional risk by deciding
to give additional contributions to the Initiative's Trust
Fund and to participate in the next replenishment of the
International Development Association, for the period
2006-2014. Sub-Saharan Africa will receive
approximately half - 49 per cent - of that sum. We
are trying to continue to help Africa to train its own
nationals in the area of public health. In addition, we
regularly provide emergency humanitarian assistance
on a bilateral basis.

However, we understand that that is not enough.
We are therefore working to develop partnerships with
multilateral donors, primarily with the World Food
Programme. Mr. Morris mentioned that fact in his
statement. This year, we will be making regular
contributions to the Programme's humanitarian
activities.

We fully agree with the idea that only coordinated
action by the international community to provide
assistance to African countries, primarily in the
humanitarian area, will help those countries make
progress in implementing the Millennium Development
Goals.

