Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to convey to you, Sir, my
delegation's gratitude for having organized this open
wrap-up meeting of the work of the Security Council
for April 2003. I also wish to thank our Secretary-
General, who has taken time out from his heavy
schedule to address the Council, reflecting the
importance of today's meeting.

The presence in this Chamber of the Presidents of
the General Assembly and of the Economic and Social
Council, as well as representatives of regional groups,
is a sure sign that we will have a constructive exchange
of views.

More than a mere recapitulation of our activities
during your presidency, the theme we are addressing
this morning - the role of the United Nations in post-
conflict situations - is part of the larger context of the
basic mission of our Council: the maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security.

Before I tackle the crux of this subject, my
delegation wishes to recall that conflicts throughout the
world are caused by a variety of complex phenomena,
which I shall not go into at this point. These problems,
which must necessarily be addressed, cannot be
overcome so long as conflicts have not been identified
and resolved once and for all.

My delegation is convinced that the consolidation
of peace and security is closely linked to development
and the establishment of true democracy. There can be
no development without peace, since peace is a
constituent element of development.

The restoration of State authority, the creation of
a viable judicial system and of national security forces,
and the establishment of an inclusive dialogue and a
policy of national reconciliation are also guarantees for
the definitive return of stability.

Along the same lines, due attention should be
given to the establishment of effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes for ex-
combatants, including child soldiers. Unless there is
adequate funding to that end, their beneficiaries may
swiftly return to their former way of life and thus
imperil the fragile balance that had been so difficult to
obtain. The civic education of populations, particularly
young people, is part of that picture. Young people are
the living spirit of a country who will go on to assume
responsibility for its well-being.

The promotion and consolidation of peace
necessarily involves combating the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, for we must
acknowledge that war is most conducive to the illicit
trade in and proliferation of those weapons. The use of
mercenaries, which we must combat with all our
strength, finds a highly favourable terrain in this
respect.

The return of peace, particularly in African
countries, is always accompanied by an intense
movement of displaced persons and refugees who wish
to return home. Every effort must be made to ensure
the proper management of that return process by
providing funds sufficient to meet the essential needs
of those people.

My delegation believes that the elimination of
conflicts must be accompanied by the preparation and
implementation of a comprehensive and integrated
programme for economic recovery, including job
creation and quick-impact projects. The situation in
which Guinea-Bissau and Afghanistan now find
themselves reinforces that truth.

Peacekeeping operations throughout the world
teach us that the withdrawal of troops has to be carried
out gradually and must go hand in hand with the
progressive restoration of a climate of security. The
examples of Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste are
instructive in that regard.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to point out
that partnership and complementarity between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations remain essential because from that
interaction can be born a real synergy capable of
ensuring that restored peace endures.

In addition to that synergy, we must all engage to
promote internal cooperation between the Security
Council, on the one hand, and, on the other, the
Economic and Social Council, the General Assembly
and the funds and programmes of the United Nations
for the success of post-conflict management.

