Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Yesterday, after the letter from the British
Prime Minister (S/2018/218, annex) was circulated to
the Security Council, the United Kingdom asked that
closed consultations be held. It was we who asked the
President ofthe Security Council to change the meeting
format from closed consultations to an open briefing.
We did that for a reason, because we wanted everyone to
see what is going on here. In the letter, which contains
totally irresponsible assertions and which I actually
find it difficult to comment on in diplomatic terms,
there are threats to a sovereign State and permanent
member of the Security Council that are contrary to
international law and Article 2, paragraph 4, of the
Charter of the United Nations. I would like to try to
understand whether our British colleagues understand
that, at least.

The first question we want to ask is why the
representatives of the United Kingdom have dragged
this issue into the Security Council, thereby ignoring
the established procedure that London is obliged
to follow, in accordance with its international
commitments - that is, going through the specialized
bodies, assuming we are talking about the use of
toxic chemicals on United Kingdom territory. The
response to that question is obvious to us. Our partners
have dragged the issue into the forum of the Security
Council because they know that the their arguments
will not pass muster with the real experts on chemical
weapons in The Hague. In reality, in other words, they
are afraid of a genuine professional discussion of the
subject, and this shows that the initiators of the meeting
have entirely different motives for it.

The Russian Federation considers the unfounded
accusations in British Prime Minister Theresa May's
appeal of 13 March to the Secretary-General - to the
effect that our country was allegedly involved in the
use of poisonous substances in Salisbury - totally
unacceptable. In what amounts to an ultimatum, it asks
us to respond within 24 hours essentially to admit to
committing a crime and to confess our guilt. We do
not speak in the language of ultimatums with anyone.
Nor do we let ourselves be spoken to in that kind of
tone. But we are polite, and on 13 March we sent a note
to the British Foreign Office affirming that Russia
was not party to the incident and requesting samples
of the substance involved and a joint investigation,
particularly considering that one of the victims is a
citizen of the Russian Federation. That was refused.
In other words, while drumming up hysteria, London
is acting in a wholly untransparent way. Today we
heard reports of Russian diplomats being expelled and
bilateral relations being frozen. Incidentally, I would
like to ask my British colleague if that applies to the
United Nations as well. There were also reports of
a forthcoming cyberattack on Russia. Let this be a
warning that this will not go unanswered.
We have been compelled to conclude that
establishing the truth is the last thing the British
authorities are interested in and that they have quite
other motives. Their methods are those of the war by
propaganda that have been refined in recent years,
designed to produce a powerful information impact on
an unenlightened and impressionable public. But there
are no facts backing them up except their unfounded
assertions about Russian tracks. Incidentally, this is far
from being the first case of an attempt in the United
Kingdom on the lives of Russian citizens or immigrants
from Russia in extremely fishy circumstances, attempts
that either still have not been investigated or about
which we were refused any information. London should
start by dealing with what is going on at home. Before
blaming others, civilized people usually put their own
house in order.

We suggested that the United Kingdom immediately
launch the procedures provided for in paragraph 2
of article IX of the Chemical Weapons Convention,
whereby a State party that receives a request from
another State party for clarification shall provide the
requesting State party with information as soon as
possible, but in any case not later than 10 days after
the request. Our British colleagues are aware of that,
but have been in no hurry to invoke the Convention
to which they are a party. We demand material proof
of the alleged Russian tracks discovered in this high-
profile affair. Without that, the allegedly irrefutable
data carry no weight. So far we have seen nothing,
except claims that this is "highly likely". In the
circumstances, the right thing to do would be to ask
the technical secretariat of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to carry out
an independent laboratory analysis of the samples in
the possession of the British authorities. I would now
like to say a few words about chemistry.

There has been no scientific research and
development conducted in the Russian Federation
on what has been dubbed Novichok. Starting in the
early 19705, a large number of countries established
programmes for creating new types of nerve and
paralytic agents, known as VX, in particular in the
United States and the Soviet Union. Russia terminated
Soviet development efforts in the area of chemical
weapons, in accordance with a decree issued by the
President of the Russian Federation in 1992. In 2017,
the Russian Federation completed the destruction
of all of its existing stocks of chemical weapons, as
verified by the OPCW, the relevant international entity.
Incidentally, the United States has still not destroyed its
chemical-weapon capacities.

In the mid-19905, Western secret services brought
a number of our specialists to the West, whose names
are well known, as well as a certain amount of
documentation. Research in this area has continued in
both the United Kingdom and the United States. The
positive achieved by these two countries in creating
new toxic substances that for some reason are classified
in the West under the general name Novichok are
confirmed and reflected in more than 200 NATO-
country open sources. We have the references for them
and are ready to provide them to the Council. The actual
identification of the toxic substance alleged to have
been used in the incident was done at Porton Down, the
British Ministry of Defence's research facility where
the development and production of chemical weapons,
including of this kind, is conducted. The most likely
sources of this particular chemical are the countries that
have been doing intensive research on such substances
since the end of the 1990s, which include Great Britain.

We are not chemists here, so let me cite the opinion
ofa professional one. For the British specialists to state
with complete confidence that this gas is Novichok and
not something else, it would be essential for them to
have a so-called control standard. In order to prove that
it is the exact same compound, it has to be compared
to that standard. Of necessity, if they state that this
is a Novichok gas, they must have a standard for that
substance. That means they have both a sample and a
formula, and that is the most important piece of this
whole story. In other words, if Great Britain is so dead
certain that this is a Novichok gas, it has the formula
and samples, and is itself capable of manufacturing it.

We are living in unusual times, and shocking things
are happening before our very eyes. The presumption
of innocence is in the process of being replaced by the
presumption of guilt, and that principle of criminal
law is now being transferred to international relations.
Today Ambassador Haley, as if she were an experienced
chemist and expert in that area, opined about Russia's
crimes. We have long been familiar with the fact that
she needs no investigations to identify the guilty parties.
In her letter the British Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom says that her scenario is "highly likely", but
Mrs. Haley surpasses her trusty ally even in this.

If for the Soviet prosecutor Andrey Vyshinsky,
confession was the queen of evidence, then today, in
our Foreign Minister Lavrov's apposite words, it is
suspicion that now plays that role. There is no longer
any need even to show the Council test tubes containing
an unknown white substance; it is sufficient to write a
letter making egregious accusations about a sovereign
State. We have already seen that with respect to Syria,
and now they are trying to add Russia to the list of
violators of the Convention. I would like to remind the
Council about the United Kingdom's record of service
in participating in illegal attacks on independent States,
including on a basis of fake evidence. That led to
immeasurable suffering among civilians in Yugoslavia,
Iraq and Libya. Has the Council forgotten that Great
Britain is notorious for being a State that has embraced
the practice of targeted drone assassinations? In the
context, hearing it heap invective on us is strange, and
particularly so when it is based on no evidence.

There is a well-known principle in
jurisprudence - and in life in general - "cui bono, or
cui prodest", meaning, who benefits? What do members
think? Does this incident benefit Russia on the eve of
its presidential elections and the World Cup football
championship? I can think of several countries right

away - although, in accordance with the principle
of the presumption of innocence, I will not name
them - for which this incident, and blaming Russia

for it, would be extraordinarily beneficial and timely.
What motive could the British Prime Minister possibly
ascribe to Russia for liquidating Sergei Skripal, who,
after his prosecution, sentencing, prison term, pardon
and handover to the British authorities, no longer posed
any kind of threat to my country? But he is perfect
for the role of victim, who can be used to justify all
sorts of unthinkable lies, smears and derogatory public
relations aimed at blackening Russia's reputation.
We have been repeatedly warning that some kind of
provocation along these lines could happen on the eve
of major events. Today we are witnesses to the fact that
the Government of the United Kingdom will stop at
nothing to deliberately tarnish Russia.

In his stories about Sherlock Holmes, the classic
British writer Arthur Conan Doyle, famed in his
own country and very popular in Russia, features a
somewhat incompetent and comic character, Inspector
Lestrade of Scotland Yard. He is not terribly intelligent
and deduction is not his forte. His role is to serve as
a foil for Sherlock Holmes's extraordinary detective
powers. He instantly seizes on the superficial clues
to a crime and rushes to draw obvious conclusions so
that he can then be refuted by Holmes, who always
discovers the real motive and clues behind the crime.
God forbid I should suspect the current incumbents
of Scotland Yard of unprofessionalism, although I do
think that it would not hurt to have a Sherlock Holmes
around today. Today, however, the people playing the
role of the collective Inspector Lestrade are high-
level members of the British Government, spouting
irresponsible, unfounded, superficial, monstrous
accusations that have far-reaching consequences.
Russia calls on Britain's Government officials to
renounce these practices of their nineteenth-century
imperial past - the language of ultimatums, unproven
accusations and threats - give up their neocolonialist
ways and to return to life under the law. In situations
such as those described in Theresa May's claims, the
standard thing to do is to turn to instruments of legal
assistance. To sum up, we would once again like to state
the following.

Russia had nothing to do with this incident. We
consider London's ultimatums null and void. We expect
the United Kingdom to act in strict compliance with
the Chemical Weapons Convention and other relevant
international instruments, including the European
Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters,
as well as to provide samples of the substance that the
British investigation refers to for joint investigation,
since it says that it is of Russian origin. That is a
mandatory requirement under the Convention, not an
optional one. We are ready for an investigation. We
have nothing to fear and nothing to hide. We have
already spoken about the procedure in paragraph 2
of article IX of the Chemical Weapons Convention. If
the clarifications provided are considered inadequate,
we can turn to the OPCW's governing bodies. That
is the only civilized way to settle the issue. As long
as we are being accused of violating the Convention
with absolutely no proof, there is no other way to
proceed. Until we can have a productive dialogue with
specialists in this area we will not get anywhere. We are
ready to cooperate openly and constructively within the
framework of the OPCW.

In conclusion, we would like to circulate a draft
press statement that sums up my statement and
emphasizes the importance of activating the procedure
in article IX of the Chemical Weapons Convention. We
hope that all Council members will support it.

