Mr. Kouchner (France) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank Mr. Lavrov, as well as
the Secretary-General for his encouraging words, and
to tell members that we are not satisfied by the
progress made. That progress has been insufficient,
despite the efforts of many of the countries represented
around this table.

Almost four months ago to the day, our countries
met here to adopt an appeal for a lasting ceasefire in
Gaza. Since then, the most difficult phase of the
conflict has ended. I believe that our appeal and our
efforts in New York contributed to that. However, most
of the objectives set out in resolution 1860 (2009), to
which all preceding speakers have referred, have not
yet been attained, and we are far from attaining them.

First, the situation on the ground in Gaza remains
extremely worrisome; that is a euphemism.
Humanitarian workers and aid have barely entered the
Gaza Strip. For the most part, the blockade is still in
place. Reconstruction is impossible, or nearly
impossible. Checkpoints should be opened in a lasting
way for all goods; we have all requested that. There is
also no lasting ceasefire, and rocket launches, though
episodic, continue. Our compatriot Gilad Shalit and the
Palestinian prisoners have not yet been released.

It is essential that Palestinians speak with a single
voice. Inter-Palestinian reconciliation efforts under the
authority of President Abbas, in compliance with the
principles that guide the peace process, must be
successful. My country wishes once again to back the
work of Egypt on this issue.

Finally - and this is the main objective of our
meeting and the aspect that I would like to develop
today - we have to again be in a position to turn to the
future in order to achieve peace. The year 2008 started
with hope, with a return to inter-Palestinian
negotiations on the final status. Ultimately, it was not
possible to keep to the timeline for the completion of
those negotiations agreed upon in Annapolis, but
resolution 1850 (2008) very clearly recalled the
irreversibility of this process. We do not have to refer
to it by the name of Annapolis.

The military operations in Gaza brutally
interrupted the thread of negotiations. Must we
therefore conclude that the time is not right to relaunch
the peace process? No, no and no. If there is a message
that France intends to share with the Council today, it
is, on the contrary, the sense of urgency that should
drive us - urgency because of the veritable ticking
bomb that is the situation in Gaza Strip, urgency
because of the critical financial situation of the
Palestinian Authority, urgency because of the growing
weariness of both the people of Palestine and the
people of Israel, and finally, urgency because we must
not lose track of the Palestinian elections planned for
January 2010.

For us, the window of opportunity, as we say, is
now one that is calculated in terms of months, not in
years. Thus, we must step up our efforts to facilitate
resumption of political negotiations that would lead to
a comprehensive peace. For us, the existence and the
security of Israel are not negotiable. However, we are
just as firmly committed to achieving the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people, and in our View,
only the creation of a sovereign Palestinian State will
make it possible to combine these two objectives.

To be successful, peace must be moved forward
by the leaders. Our friends have said that. However, the
greatest attention must be paid to the second element.
It is just as necessary that the peoples believe in the
possibility of peace. They now no longer believe in it.
Immediate measures in the field are necessary to create
the right conditions for negotiations.

The continuation of Israeli settlement undermines
on a daily basis the credibility of efforts aimed at a

lasting solution by creating fait accomplis on the
ground and insisting on splitting the West Bank into
two parts and totally isolating East Jerusalem. As
President Sarkozy stated when he spoke before the
Knesset in June 2008, "There can be no peace without
the immediate and complete cessation of settlement
activities". The Government of Israel must hear this
message - this friendly message: continuing
settlement is one of the main obstacles in the field to
peace and eventually poses a threat to the security of
Israel. The presidential statement to be adopted at the
end of our meeting would be stronger, in my View, if it
took into account this essential issue.

France, of course, calls upon the Palestinian
Authority to continue its efforts to combat terrorism.
The actions of Salam Fayyad, former Prime Minister,
in this area deserve tribute. Terrorism and attacks in all
their forms, as well as the trafficking of weapons into
Gaza, are all unacceptable and must come to an end.

A comprehensive regional approach is also
needed through work, inter alia, on the Lebanese and
Syrian tracks of the peace process. We cherish the hope
that indirect negotiations between Syria and Israel may
resume and that the question of the village of Gashar
and Sheba'a Farms may be settled between Israel and
the Government of Lebanon, under the aegis of the
United Nations.

Beyond that, the whole region that must become
involved in seeking peace. That is why we so greatly
value the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative -2002! We are so
far from that now - which takes into account seven
interdependencies. We must think about the measures
of trust and the acts necessary by one party or another
to achieve the objectives set by that initiative.

To prepare for the future and for peace is also to
accept working on the past, without fear. We cannot
ignore today allegations of violations of international
humanitarian law noted since the Gaza crisis. France
backed the establishment by the Secretary-General of
the Board of Inquiry on attacks against United Nations
premises in Gaza. I have also indicated that France
would back any investigation as long as it is impartial,
independent and covers all Violations of international
humanitarian law regardless of who the victims are, be
they Palestinian or Israeli civilians. In the light of the
conclusions of the Board of Inquiry which have just
been communicated to us, we will have to consider this
issue in the next few days.

My final message is that stronger commitment by
the international community is needed. Only such a
commitment can guarantee that serious peace
negotiations will resume and rapidly succeed. Only
such a commitment provides the parties with assurance
that the terms of an agreement will effectively be
complied with, thanks to the direct contributions of
third countries in the form of manpower, financial
resources and guarantees. I know that meetings will be
completed at the end of this month, which completion
we await with impatience.

France and the European Union have on
numerous occasions voiced their readiness to support
and facilitate and, as necessary, to participate in
negotiations and ponder the guarantees that a possible
agreement might require. I note with much hope the
intentions declared by the new American
Administration. I wish to say to it here that we will be
ready to work with the United States for a new
dynamic, but it can wait no longer.

I said at the start that the matter is urgent need
and, in that context, with all the arguments that I tried
to emphasize, we bring our full support to the plan to
organize a new international conference on the Middle
East this year, as proposed by the Russian Federation.

