Mr. Dacic' (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): Allow me once again to
thank the members of the Security Council for the
attention they accord to the question of Kosovo and
Metohija, as well as for the understanding they show
by convening regular meetings under resolution 1244
(1999) to discuss this matter every three months. Such
meetings continue to be necessary in spite the fact that
more than 10 years have elapsed since the first meeting.
I would also like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, who continues
to work with dedication to address questions upon which
normal life in the province depend, notwithstanding the
calls from Pristina to end the Mission.

Significant political breakthroughs were made
last year. The first agreement on principles governing
the normalization of relations was reached - but
it does not mean much unless it is followed up with
consistent implementation of what has been agreed. As
acknowledged by many international officials and stated
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/63l),
the Republic of Serbia has demonstrated a high level
of flexibility in the dialogue and invested significant
efforts, in the belief that the negotiating process may
lead to a long-term and generally acceptable solution.

The Brussels agreement is the result of the political
dialogue; it determined the framework for local elections
and provided for the establishment of the community of
Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo and Metohija.
Under the agreement, the community will have
competencies in the areas of economic development,
education, health and urban and rural planning. The
community will have an assembly, president and
executive organ. In addition, the community has had
certain security guarantees and guarantees in the field
of the judiciary confirmed, such as the appointment of a
regional commander for northern Kosovo and Metohija
from the ranks of Kosovo and Metohija Serbs and the
establishment of a chamber of the Court of Appeals in
Pristina, to be comprised of Kosovo and Metohija Serb
majority judges, with jurisdiction in all municipalities
with a Serb majority.

Guided by the desire to make their everyday lives
easier, the Government of the Republic of Serbia has
called on Serbs from Kosovo and Metohija to delegate,
at the local elections, their representatives to the
community of Serbian municipalities, who would be
their legitimate representative in talks with Belgrade
and Pristina. We consider that this is the only way to a
lasting and sustainable solution, and that the legalization
of the status of the Kosovo and Metohija Serbs before
the international community strengthens their position.

Whereas Serbia invested maximum efforts to
encourage the Kosovo and Metohija Serbs to participate
in the elections in great numbers, the Provisional
Institutions in Pristina did not bother to create an
appropriate climate, and often not even the basic
conditions, to bring that about. It is therefore possible
to say that the community of Serbian municipalities
will be formed not thanks, among other things, to the
efforts of the Provisional Institutions in Pristina but in
spite of them.

Although we arrived at precise agreements
in Brussels on all the details of the pre-election
process, we found ourselves before the voting in a
situation of having to go to European Union (EU)
headquarters anew in order to establish once again
the list of conditions - already established long
before - because Pristina did not fulfil almost any
of the conditions in the intervening period. It did not
prepare status-neutral election materials, no member
of the Central Election Commission from the ranks
of the Serbian community was elected in time and the
majority of displaced persons were effectively made
unable to vote. Besides, no legal framework was set
up to facilitate the establishment of the community
of Serbian municipalities. But, 6,000 Albanians who
had never lived in northern Kosovska Mitrovica were
entered in its voters list, while a significant number of
Serbs who lived in the northern part of the town were
entered into the voters list of the southern part, with the
intent to influence elections results.

In addition, the candidates of the Serbian minority
were intimidated, in more ways than one. The mayoral
candidate for northern Mitrovica was physically
attacked, and four candidates from the Serbian list
were accused of war crimes. Assurances that secret
indictments against Serbs for alleged war crimes did
not exist were invalidated by the accusations made
on Kosovo television that four Serbs from the Civic
Initiative Srpska were under suspicion of having
committed war crimes. It is indicative that none of them
had been suspected before they became candidates for
local elections in Kosovo and Metohija.

The suspicion of a problematic war past, however,
was no obstacle for Albanian candidates. Thus, we have
found ourselves in a situation where elections in two
constituencies will most probably have to be repeated,
as the candidates who won in the first round have been
indicted of war crimes in the meantime. The group of 15
indicted by the EU Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) also
includes a number of other high-level representatives of
the Provisional Institutions in Pristina, including their
representative in Tirana.

In such an atmosphere it was not easy to canvass,
let alone vote in the elections. Nevertheless, the
Government of the Republic of Serbia is very satisfied
with the fact that more than 45,000 people turned out to
vote in the Serbian municipalities. Although our highest-
ranking officials were often banned from travelling to
Kosovo and Metohija, we did manage to motivate Serbs
to go out to vote. Just today, we received the news that
Mr. Aleksandar Vulin, a minister without portfolio
of the Government of Serbia, was again banned from
going to Kosovo and Metohija. At the same time, the
highest State representatives of other countries, such
as Albania and Turkey, were able to travel there and
participate in campaigns for local elections.

I would like to take this opportunity to call on
Pristina and international actors to ensure conditions
for the holding of the second round of local elections
in municipalities with Serb majorities, in order to avoid
a repetition of the gross Violations of the elections
procedure that we witnessed on 3 November, when
necessary security measures were not taken to ensure the
free expression of the will of the citizens. We condemn
once again the violence responsible for the repetition of
the first round of the elections in Kosovska Mitrovica.
I underscore the resolve of Belgrade to help, as much
as it can within its powers, to bring the perpetrators to
justice. I am pleased with the success of the repeated
first round of the elections in northern Kosovska
Mitrovica, which was completed without incident, even
though it is not clear why the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe requested the counting of
the votes to take place outside Kosovska Mitrovica, in a
locality in which Albanians live, as no reasons existed
for that.

It is very important for the Republic of Serbia that
agreements on the implementation of the Brussels
agreement take place in accordance with the will
and intentions of the negotiators who initialled the
agreement, so that the position of the Serbs in Kosovo
and Metohija is defined and presented in clear terms.

The agreements were not easy to arrive at for our
delegation, but we were determined from the very
beginning to fulfil what we put our signature to. We
therefore weighed each and every detail and assessed
its applicability carefully before we signed on the
dotted line. That is why we succeeded in fulfilling our
commitments, as stated in the report. I believe that this
statement would differ considerably from those I have
made previously in this Chamber if the other side had
also approached the implementation of the agreements
with equal seriousness, because at least some of the
problems would have been overcome. The climate
before the local elections would also have improved,
and the encouragement to minority communities to take
part in the elections would have been much stronger.

However, Pristina has not yet taken the necessary
steps in key areas, including the adoption of laws in
accordance with the agreements reached by the two
sides in Brussels, in particular the laws on amnesty,
the local Kosovo budget and local self-government, the
fulfilment of its obligations with regard to integrated
boundary management, the establishment of a new
network of judiciary organs, and the appointment of
members of the Regional Command Team North in
northern Kosovo and Metohija.

In the draft law amending the Law on Local Self-
Government, which was supposed to incorporate
the community of Serb-majority municipalities into
the legal framework of the provisional institutions of
self-government, the community of Serb-majority
municipalities is mentioned only in supplemental
paragraph 4 of article 32, which provides for the
abolition of the community by a two-thirds decision of
its members. The draft law makes no other reference to
the community, despite the provisions of the Brussels
agreements. We therefore conclude that Pristina is
interested only in regulating the procedure for abolishing
the community of Serb majority municipalities.

The report also states that the Law on Amnesty has
been adopted. Yet, in assessing the constitutionality of
that law, the Constitutional Court of Kosovo found some
of its articles to be unconstitutional. Acts that have not
been incorporated into the Law on Amnesty include
those for which the judiciary organs of the provisional
institutions of self-government may prosecute persons
of Serbian nationality in Kosovo and Metohija. Some
international judges of the Constitutional Court of
Kosovo, in particular Robert Carolan of the United
States and Almiro Rodrigues of Portugal, rendered
dissenting opinions in which, contrary to the Court's
decision, they argued that amnesty for such acts does
not contravene the Constitution.

Pristina has not fulfilled its obligation to establish
a new functional network of courts in the territory
of Kosovo and Metohija. Under the agreements that
have been reached, the courts in northern Kosovo and
Metohija that functioned within the judiciary system of
the Republic of Serbia ceased to try cases in anticipation
of the establishment of new courts that would take over
and continue to process those cases. The buildings
that will house the new courts and prosecutor's offices
have not yet been designated, and neither the number
of employees to work in the individual institutions nor
the concrete conditions they will have to fulfil has been
established. Besides, Pristina does not agree with the
establishment of a basic court but only of a court of
appeals, which is totally unacceptable to our side.

Likewise, the Deputy Regional Commander of the
Kosovo police for the north was appointed, without the
agreement of our side, from among members of the
Albanian community south of the Ibar River, namely,
from the municipality of Vucitrn, contrary to the
agreement on ethnic representation within the regional
command of the Kosovo police.

Once again, I have focused on problems that were
discussed at the last meeting, as they concern questions
of vital importance for the Serbian community in
Kosovo and Metohija. They concern its legal status,
its financing, and the physical, legal and economic
security of all those who belong to it. I consider it my
duty to warn of the lack of good will that exists on the
Pristina side.

The community of Serbian municipalities is
necessary as a mechanism for the protection of
minority interests in Kosovo and Metohija because
of the experiences those municipalities have had,
even after the arrival of international forces. Since
10 June 1999, when the international civil and military
presences in Kosovo and Metohija were established,
over 7,000 physical attacks have been registered, while
three-fourths of the localities in which Serbs lived
before the war have been ethnically cleansed.

In the Third Opinion of the Advisory Committee
on the Framework Convention for the Protection of
National Minorities, mentioned in paragraph 39 of
the report, concern is expressed over the increase in
the number of security incidents directed against
non-Albanian communities during the past several
years. Approximately 2,000 such attacks were
registered in the period between January and October
2012 alone, 70 per cent of which were directed against
the Serbian community.

The Government of the Republic of Serbia has also
condemned in the strongest terms the attacks on the
international forces in Kosovo and Metohija. Allow
me to express on this occasion our profound regret at
the death of Audrius Senavicius, a Lithuanian member
of EULEX. Belgrade is ready to participate in the
investigation of that case. I would also like to express
the hope that there will be no more victims in Kosovo
and Metohija.

This is the first time that the institutions of
Serbia, including its Government, its church and the
vast majority of the political parties represented in its
Parliament, have joined forces in calling on Serbs in
Kosovo and Metohija to come out and vote. However,
this is not the first time that they voted. In the 2001
elections, their coalition, Return, received almost
90,000 votes.

It cannot be said that Serbs did not try to participate
in organizing their life in the province or that they did
not attempt to protect their interests by creating fertile
conditions for the progress of society as a whole. They
did not boycott the sessions of the local Parliament,
although they had to travel to them in armoured vehicles
of the Kosovo Force (KFOR). They acquiesced to that
solution in the hope that it would be temporary and that,
in the end, it would lead to further solutions and make
life more normal.

Regrettably, there were no such results. The desired
changes failed to materialize. Over time, even the name
of their coalition and their main objective began to
sound bitterly ironic. Coalition Return could do nothing
to achieve the return of displaced Serbs, because,
instead of the assistance promised, it was met with
outright obstruction from Pristina and a lack of interest
on the part of the representatives of the international
community.

According to data from the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), in the almost
15 years since June 1999, out of the 230,000 people
who left their homes in Kosovo and Metohija, 18,000
have returned. In our assessment, no more than 4,000
of these are sustainable returnees. Only between 1 to
2 per cent of the internally displaced persons (IDPs) has
managed to stay for good. Of particular concern is the
drastic decrease in the number of returnees registered
in 2013 compared to the two previous years. According
to the UNHCR data, 122 displaced persons returned to
Kosovo and Metohija by the middle of August, whereas

442 returnees were registered in 2012. Meanwhile, in
the latest privatization round in September, the Kosovo
Privatization Agency, about whose unlawful operations
we have already warned - just as we warned of the
destructive effects of the sale of companies in Serbian
localities - put up for sale the Silovo refrigerator
complex, in which the collection centre for IDPs from
the Kosovo Morava river basin is situated.

The IDPs did try to effect legal regulation of at least
some of the issues. Slightly more than 30 per cent of the
displaced households sued to protest the usurpation of
their property, but as many as 70 per cent ofthose claims
remained unanswered by the provisional institutions in
Pristina. I would also like to draw attention to the large
number of decisions by the Kosovo courts throwing
out Serbian and non-Albanian claims for destroyed
property against UNMIK, KFOR and the provisional
institutions, with the boilerplate explanation that there
is no legal responsibility. Moreover, plaintiffs who lose
their cases are asked to pay high legal fees, even though
they are IDPs and the request runs counter to the so-
called Pinheiro Principles on the rights of displaced
persons.

All of this indicates that the rule of law has not
yet been established in Kosovo and Metohija and that
human rights are not properly protected, especially the
rights of minorities. The case of Fatmir Limaj, former
Minister for Transport and Telecommunications in
the Government of Kosovo, and his co-defendants,
indicted for the killing, torture and threats to the health
of Serbian and Albanian civilians and prisoners of
war in the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) base in the
village of Klecka is a textbook example of the weakness
of the Kosovo and Metohija judiciary and the influence
of the politically powerful, most of them recruited from
the ranks of the erstwhile KLA, on the political, legal
and social system in Kosovo and Metohija as a whole,
including the international judiciary component. All
developments in connection with the Klecka case,
beginning with the disallowing of the testimony of key
witness owing to the change in the Kosovo criminal
law and the acquittal, all over again, of Limaj and
his associates, mentioned in the report, cast a long
shadow of doubt over the functioning, independence
and impartiality of the judiciary system in Kosovo and
Metohija. Serbia is disappointed with the decision, but
it hopes that the EULEX prosecutor will appeal it.

We once again call attention to the importance of
a full and efficient investigation of the allegations of
trafficking in human organs, contained in the report of
Mr. Dick Marty. To that end, Serbia is ready to continue
to cooperate with the EULEX investigation team and
hopes that the investigation will yield results soon.

Regarding our activities, the report fails to mention
the readiness of the institutions of the Republic of Serbia
to cooperate with UNMIK with regard to documents on
unpaid pensions to persons from Kosovo and Metohija.
The activities of UNMIK are mentioned in paragraph
26, but no reference is made of the request on the part
of the Office for Kosovo and Metohija to UNMIK,
on two occasions, to provide data that would make it
possible for the Office to implement the decision of
the European Court for Human Rights in Strasbourg
under which the Republic of Serbia is required to take
measures to regulate those pensions.
The Republic of Serbia is strongly committed to
pursuing active and constructive negotiations with
Pristina at all levels, as well as to implementing the
agreements reached so far. We expect that Pristina
will make additional efforts to ensure that mutually
acceptable solutions can be reached and agreements
implemented. It is particularly important that Pristina
refrains from unilateral moves in the forthcoming
period that could threaten the future of the dialogue and
destabilize the security situation in the province.

What we all want, once the community of Serb-
majority municipalities is established, is to set out
together along the road to building a society that will
head towards the future while addressing, not forgetting,
the problems of the past. IfI may, I would like to cite
a definition of reconciliation that I came across while
reading about transional justice, according to which
reconciliation implies a society that has rediscovered
the capacity to manage conflicts in a non-violent way;
a society that can live with a multitude of opinions,
races, cultures and religions and that sees in them the
basis for its identity; a society whose structures create
the conditions for development that includes rather
than excludes individuals and that is based on ethics
accepted by all. The Government of the Republic
of Serbia is doing its utmost to build such a society,
and we would be very happy to see the same efforts
made in Pristina, too. We have made difficult decisions
this year, and the stable support we enjoy among our
voters is indicative of the support of the majority of our
citizens for our policy.

I would like to reiterate once again that the dialogue
in Brussels is status-neutral, and that the desire to
normalize relations between Belgrade and Pristina
does not mean that our position has changed regarding
non-acceptance of Kosovo's unilateral declaration of
independence.

We expect that all the issues I have mentioned will
be the subject of the resumed dialogue in Brussels on
5 December. We have achieved very important results
in strengthening peace and stability in the region and
in addressing many problems in the relations between
Belgrade and Pristina. The Republic of Serbia continues
to be committed to continuing the Brussels process in
the best interests of all, in good faith and with a good
will.

