Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zouev, the Police
Commissioners and Ms. Reitano for their briefings.

The United States welcomes this opportunity to
commend United Nations police personnel for their
commitment to implementing peacekeeping mandates.
United Nations police are making critical contributions
to peacekeeping across the globe, and our Government
is committed to strengthening United Nations police,
as evidenced by our extensive capacity-building efforts
to empower police-contributing countries to deploy
well-led, well-trained police to a range of United
Nations missions.

When the United States talks about
institutionalizing a culture of performance in United
Nations peacekeeping, we are not just talking about
troops; we are talking about police as well. To that
end, we believe that resolution 2436 (2018), which
was adopted unanimously on 21 September and is
aimed at enhancing the performance of peacekeepers,
is a big step forward. The resolution calls for timely,
transparent reporting of performance failures to the
Security Council and to Member States concerned.
It also calls for accountability measures for failures
of performance and concrete incentives for stronger
performance. Finally, it recognizes the role of data
in improving performance by matching the right
troops and police with the right roles. We encourage
applying those considerations to peacekeeping police
components and urge the Secretary-General to employ
performance data to inform decision-making related to
police deployments and to provide that data to donor
countries that provide training and equipment in order
to better channel their assistance.

We share the Secretary-General's commitment
to peacekeeping performance across the board. We
welcome efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General
through his Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
including by developing an integrated performance
policy framework based on clear standards for all
personnel. We urge the Secretary-General to include
police more deliberately in this process.

United Nations police components often operate
in complex environments and make an important
contribution to the protection of civilians. We commend
the work of the more than 1,350 police serving with the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
With elections in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo
just over a month away, MONUSCO's police face the
considerable challenge of preparing to provide security
support for the elections.

We are also pleased to see the success of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
in training the Haitian National Police, despite a
challenging environment.

One of the key principles that has guided our efforts
to make United Nations peacekeeping more effective
and efficient is that peacekeeping missions must have
an exit strategy. That requires building an integrated
security architecture that seeks to ensure the safety of
civilians. Police have a critical role to play in making
that vision a reality, as evidenced in places like Haiti
and Liberia.

To that end, we support better integration of the
police into all aspects of mission planning and ensuring
the United Nations Police Division is empowered to
properly assess, plan, deploy, manage and support
peacekeeping missions. Police expertise should
be consistently considered and integrated into the
mandates and decision-making structures of United
Nations peace operations.

