Mr. Ruzieka (Slovakia): I would like to thank
Lithuania for organizing this very timely and important
debate on small arms and light weapons.

Just as the spread of small arms and light weapons
tends to promote conflict, any effort to curb their
proliferation can significantly contribute to stability and
peacebuilding. I would like to recognize the important
contribution of the Security Council to international
efforts on this matter, including the adoption of the
crucial resolution 2117 (2013). We also hope for the
successful outcome of the Council's deliberations
concerning a new draft resolution under the Lithuanian
presidency.

Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union, but allow
me to share a few remarks in my national capacity.

As mentioned earlier, small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition remain a phenomenon
that both ignites and sustains violent conflicts and
organized crime within communities. Their excessive
accumulation has a wide range of humanitarian and
socioeconomic consequences in many countries and
regions of the world. More than ever before, it is the
civilian population that bears the brunt of armed
conflict and organized crime in which the majority
of the human cost is caused by the use of small arms.
Small arms also facilitate a vast spectrum of human
rights abuses, including gender-based violence.

The problem of small arms and light weapons
remains a very complex issue as the international
community continues to develop appropriate policy
responses at the global level. The 2001 United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects laid the foundation for action countering
the illicit trade and uncontrolled circulation of small
arms and light weapons at the national, regional and
global levels. I would like to emphasize the importance
that Slovakia attaches to the continued and full
implementation of the United Nations Programme
of Action and to the outcome document of the fifth
Biennial Meeting of States.
All States should enhance their efforts to build
national capacity for their effective implementation of
the Programme of Action. International cooperation
and assistance remain essential and complementary to
national implementation efforts, as well as to those at
the regional and subregional levels. I would also like to
highlight the importance of improving the management
of stockpiles of small arms and light weapons,
particularly in conflict and post-conflict areas, and the
need to look further into the impact of new technologies
on the manufacture, design and storage of weapons.
We call upon all States to implement the International
Tracing Instrument.

Upon its entry into force on 24 December 2014, the
Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) became a very significant
addition that complements and bolsters the existing
arsenal of international and regional efforts to address
the problems associated with irresponsible and illegal
small arms transfer and small arms proliferation.
Slovakia ratified the Treaty in April 2014, and we are
happy to see the growing number of ATT signatures and
ratifications. We strongly advocate universal adherence
to and full implementation of the ATT.

Key aspects of efforts to prevent the outbreak or
resumption ofviolent conflict fueled by the uncontrolled
spread of small arms include enhancing border control
to prevent illicit trafficking, placing control of armed
forces in the hands of legitimate State authorities, and
establishing an inclusive, democratic, political, fair and
transparent judicial mechanism. To be effective, such
measures must go hand in hand with enhancing general
security, and that requires reforming the police and
armed forces and introducing mechanisms to promote
reconciliation and accountability for human rights
abuses.

This brings me to security sector reform. Security
sector reform has become central to the work of the
United Nations in reducing violence, addressing
transnational organized crime, promoting human rights
and contributing to overall stability. By unanimously
adopting resolution 2151 (2014), the Security Council
underscored the importance of security sector reform
in stabilizing countries recovering from conflict. In
order to implement resolution 2151 (2014), it will be
important to ensure the integration of security sector
reform into peace processes, national reconciliation
frameworks and other political platforms.

It is imperative to ensure that such efforts are linked
to political engagement that fosters national ownership
and commitment to the inclusiveness, responsiveness
and accountability of security forces. Furthermore,
mandates for security sector reform support have
increased dramatically in number and complexity
over the past seven years. The ongoing reviews of
peace operations and of the peacebuilding architecture
are critical in addressing the identified challenges
and laying the foundations for the implementation of
resolution 2151 (2014).

Slovakia will remain committed to that goal
and, as co-chair of the Group of Friends of Security
Sector Reform, it will pursue the implementation of
the resolution. Last but not least, as part of the overall
effort to strengthen the links between peace and
security, development and human rights, I would like to
highlight the importance of adequately promoting and
strengthening the aspects of the rule of law within the
post-2015 development agenda.

