Mr. Lamba (Malawi): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to join
this debate about an important matter, namely, the Iraq
crisis, which is currently exercising almost everybody's
mind worldwide as clouds of war loom over us. I will
speak on behalf of the African Group, which associates
itself with the statement already made by Malaysia on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. First, however,
all allow me to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council. You deserve the honour.
I also wish to pay tribute to Germany for its
distinguished service as the President of the Council
last month.

We are meeting here at a time of crisis, when the
Security Council is at a crossroads in its quest to
disarm Iraq on behalf of the whole international
community. We are engaged in this debate following
the presentation of progress reports to the Council on 7
March 2003 by Mr. Hans Blix and Mr. Mohamed
ElBaradei on the disarmament of Iraq. This issue is
being discussed in this Chamber today because it is a
Security Council matter, and therefore a United
Nations concern. The inspectors are operating in Iraq,
empowered by Council resolutions, the latest one being
resolution 1441 (2002), of November 2002. All this
points to the primacy of the United Nations as the
guiding beacon in our international relations.

The world today is in a state of crisis created by
anxieties about an imminent war in Iraq. Unfortunately,
the Security Council is now sharing in the crisis, as
evidenced by the deep divisions over the necessity and
timing - or lack of timing - of a military strike on
Iraq. The situation is compounded by the resounding
question from the public at large as to the necessity for
war in the light of the current global scenario in its
totality. Millions the world over have asked that
question.

No single person or organization has failed to
support the call on Iraq to cooperate fully with the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and to fully comply with the
requirements of Security Council resolution 1441
(2002), which demanded total, complete and
unconditional disarmament. Even Iraq recognizes its
obligation to abide by that resolution, which must be
conscientiously discharged to avert war. The bottom
line is that war is not inevitable and that our efforts
should be geared towards doing everything possible to
achieve the peaceful disarmament of Iraq.

In all sincerity, the inspectors' reports of 7 March
have reduced the original anxieties about possible total
non-compliance by Iraq. The African Group was
pleased to note the progress made thus far on process
and substance, as reported by the inspectors. An
important start has been made, one which has,
however, been subjected to varying interpretations in
relation to resolution 1441 (2002). The African Group
firmly believes that the peaceful disarmament of Iraq in
line with resolution 1441 (2002) is possible with a little
measure of extended patience and with perseverance in
the search for peace through this important global
Organization, the United Nations. History should not
judge our options and actions harshly, as if peace were
beyond the reach of humanity.

If the UNMOVIC report of 7 March 2003 is
something to go by - and indeed it is - the important
task remaining before the international community is to
suggest practical refinements for the completion of the
remaining tasks - but within resolution 1441 (2002).
The imminent war on Iraq is not ajihad, but a rational
undertaking as a last resort in the promotion of peace.
As other speakers have already emphasized, peace
must be given a chance, even at the eleventh hour.

Resolution 1441 (2002) is not necessarily a
blueprint for war, and that explains the reluctance of
some countries to go for a second resolution that
further diminishes the chances for peaceful
disarmament. Glitches have been observed during the
performance of the inspections - which, however, Iraq
sounds committed to rectify in order to create the
necessary enabling environment.

It is regrettable that the issue of war against Iraq
has become a subject of glee in some media circles.
War represents devastation to the calendar of human
development, regardless of region or the protagonists.
That explains why millions of citizens in America,
Europe and throughout the continents have registered
their anti-war sentiments.

In the present situation, while Iraq is being
pressed hard to fulfil its obligations under resolution
1441 (2002), the heavy consequences of war in Iraq
will be felt very acutely, even in Africa. This is not a
war of the Middle Ages, but of a modern war using the
most lethal weapons - even worse than those in the
Second World War. Thousands, if not millions, of
innocent lives will be lost in Iraq. The fragmentation of
Iraq is not inconceivable. The spillover of the war
could conceivably create a regional conflagration as
the conflict transcends the borders of Iraq. In our
global village today a backlash in various forms would
destablize the world even more, and New York or
London would not be assured of any safety when the
uncertainty of life leads to desperation.

Africa considers the war against terrorism as a
bigger threat to global peace. The economic
consequences of the war will impact negatively on the
Millennium Development Goals of the anti-poverty
war at a time when the world is struggling to ensure
that no person lives on less than one dollar a day.
Africa - home of the majority of the least developed
countries, and already experiencing negative
development, with its reliance on fossil energy - will
witness an almost total collapse of its nascent industrial
base and economic development for lack of capacity to
accommodate the pressures resulting from war. But
even in the developed economies life will not be the
same in the event of war. The common citizen will
have to somehow absorb the heavy war expenditure
incurred. That will in some cases lead to social
destabilization and the deterioration of life.

Our resolve for war must therefore go beyond a
military engagement to delve into consideration of its
broad and serious consequences. The two world wars
left indelible lessons for humanity, which laid the
foundations of the United Nations to symbolize the
renunciation of war as a tool for peace. Those wars
were fought mainly outside Africa, but the continent
was not spared its scars. As we exercise our greatest
sense of responsibility over the Iraq issue in this
Chamber, a more humane approach will enrich the
history of the United Nations, whose primary function
remains the promotion of peace. Wars begin in the
minds of men and women, and it is in the minds of the
same architects of war that the defences of peace must
start.

The African position, which emphasizes
multilateralism and the peaceful resolution of conflicts
through the United Nations, does not endorse war at
this point. The inspections require more time than the
unrealistic deadline of 17 March suggested in the
revised draft resolution on which the Security Council
is still to vote. Indeed, the inspections cannot continue
ad infinitum; that is true. But a realistic time frame will
enhance the credibility of our intentions, which must
not be seen as resting on a predetermined timetable of
events.

The international community, through the
inspectors, must subject to some rigorous test the
sincerity of Iraq's promise of full cooperation and
compliance in the implementation of resolution 1441
(2002) and other resolutions, such as resolution 1284
(1999). It is the hope of the African Group that any war
against Iraq will be sanctioned by a resolution of the
Security Council, if indeed war becomes inevitable.

