Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique): We congratulate
you, Sir, and your country, Singapore, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May in such a committed manner.
Your presence and the dedicated work of your
Permanent Representative, Ambassador Kishore
Mahbubani, and his able team merit our recognition
and appreciation. Allow me, on behalf of the
Government of the Republic of Mozambique, to
warmly welcome your initiative to hold this public and
interactive debate on the prevention and resolution of
conflicts in Africa.

I wish to make a few general remarks on the issue
before the Council today and then to address some of
the specific issues you, Sir, have asked us to discuss.
When the Security Council met on 29 and 30 January
2002, it had an extensive and fruitful debate on the
situation in Africa that was blessed by the presence of a
number of ministers and the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU). As a result of
that meeting, the President of the Security Council
issued a statement (S/2002/2) on behalf of the Council
in which he summed up the debate and enunciated a set
of recommendations on future United Nations work to
address the situation in Africa. To monitor the
implementation of those recommendations the setting
up of an ad hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution in Africa was proposed. Today's
meeting is therefore timely and important in terms of
assessing the work done by the Working Group so far.

At this juncture, allow me to sincerely thank
Ambassador Jagdish Koonjul, Chairman of the ad hoc
Working Group, for the comprehensive briefing he
presented today on the work carried out so far. We fully
commend his remarkable leadership of the Group and
pledge our full support to his endeavours.

As we have indicated in previous statements in
the Security Council and elsewhere, our analysis of
conflicts in Africa must be comprehensive, pragmatic
and result-oriented; it should encompass a clear
understanding of their root causes, the actors involved
and the issues at stake.

Success in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts in Africa can be achieved only through a
proactive approach based primarily on prevention - a
strategy that is effective, forward-looking and less
costly.

Prevention requires addressing the root causes of
conflict, which in Africa are synonymous with the
pressing needs and concerns of the people, which
include poverty, underdevelopment, poor governance,
endemic diseases, exclusion, State legitimacy, ethnic
divisions and the proliferation of arms. With regard to
arms, I would like here to support the statement made
by the Assistant Secretary-General, Ibrahima Fall, and
his proposals. I would like to add that we need to
implement the United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
which we all adopted in July last year, and which the
Council welcomed.

Prevention entails a strong nexus between peace
and development. The Secretary-General's report on
the causes of conflict and promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa (S/1998/318)
rightly highlights that nexus and advances a
comprehensive and integrated approach to conflict
prevention, poverty eradication and development. We
are hopeful that this approach will help to meet the
special needs of many African countries, and it is in
that connection that we see closer and enhanced
coordination among the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council and other United Nations
bodies and agencies.

The United Nations must also increase its support
to Africa's own peace and development initiatives.
African countries have continued their efforts to build
African capacity for the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts and for development.

African countries, individually or through their
regional and subregional organizations such as the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) and
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), are becoming more active and important
players in these endeavours, as has been already
suggested this morning and this afternoon. The creation
of the OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution bears testimony to the
continent's determination to settle conflicts in Africa.

At the subregional level, the Heads of State or
Government of the Southern African Development
Community, at their ordinary summit in August 2001,
in Blantyre, Malawi, signed a protocol for the
operationalizing the SADC Organ on Politics, Defence
and Security Cooperation, and, more recently,
established an inter-State politics and diplomacy
committee to enhance the effectiveness ofthe Organ.

All these initiatives attest to the strong
commitment of Africans to solving their problems and
to the reversal of the appalling situation of conflicts in
Africa. These confidence-building measures need to be
nurtured with the support of the international
community to ensure their success.

Failure of preventive measures brings us to
conflict resolution and management. For the success of
conflict resolution and management, we need to review
the mandates of peacekeeping operations and the
conventional approaches to them. Due to their
multidimensional nature, current conflicts require a
comprehensive approach and the involvement of all
stakeholders at the national, regional and international
levels.

Allow me now to briefly touch on some of the
specific issues of concern to our delegation. First, we
are happy to see that the Economic and Social Council
has also taken an important decision expressing a
commitment to support Africa by establishing an ad
hoc Working Group on African Countries Emerging
from Conflicts. We wish to see greater collaboration
and coordination of efforts among the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council and other
United Nations bodies and agencies in their work on
Africa, and we welcome the presence of the President
ofthe Economic and Social Council at this meeting.

Secondly, we believe that success in conflict
resolution is closely linked to the level of
understanding of the conflict itself. Those involved in
the mediation of conflicts should possess a profound
knowledge of the nature and dynamics of the conflict,
which can allow them to exercise the best judgement,
undertake effective action and provide critical
assurances to all parties to the conflict that they are
also parties to the solution. We therefore believe that
those tasked with mediation, including the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, should
possess all those attributes if they are to enjoy the
much needed trust of all parties, and to work with the
highest level of impartiality and commitment. In that
regard, we congratulate His Excellency Mr. Ibrahima
Fall on his appointment as head of the United Nations
Office in West Africa. He is the kind of representative
that we are talking about.

Thirdly, we also find the establishment of groups
of friends for specific conflict situations very useful.
We are of the View that these groups can be
fundamental in the solution of conflicts by providing
an excellent forum for debating the dynamics of the
conflict itself as well as for advancing peace initiatives.
Such groups should be more inclusive and
representative.

Fourthly, we further believe that every initiative
for conflict prevention and resolution can only benefit
from the involvement of civil society, including non-
governmental organizations, universities and academia:
actors that can bring added value to the process
through their deep knowledge of the relevant conflicts,
as well as their often easy access to the parties
involved.

Fifthly, we are concerned that our continent
continues to register conflicts related to the exercise of
democracy as candidates and their supporters often call
into question election results perceived to be unjust and
unfair, as was referred to earlier on in this meeting.
This situation is a clear demonstration of the need for
support for good governance and democratic
institutions in African countries. We thus find it critical
to increase international assistance in the fields of
governance and the strengthening of democratic
institutions, including those related to electoral
processes. It is clear that elections by themselves,
however successful, are not sufficient to ensure
stability and progress.

Finally, the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and movement towards peace, stability and
development in Africa can be crowned with success
only with the active involvement of the Africans
themselves. In Africa there is already an institutional
capacity, both at the continental and the regional levels,
for the prevention and resolution of conflicts.

If these issues are taken up seriously by the ad
hoc Working Group and by the Council, and if the
conclusions are followed up, then we believe that we
have a greater chance to succeed.

A lot has been said about the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD). I will not develop
additional ideas on this, except to mention the
importance that it has for Africa and for the
international community.

We encourage the United Nations to foster its
cooperation and collaboration with continental and
subregional institutions in the search for durable
solutions to the problems affecting our continent. The
level of human, material and financial resources
committed to assisting Africa will remain an essential
barometer in measuring the level of political will and
commitment to the continent.

We are fully aware of the efforts of the United
Nations, the Security Council and the Secretary-
General to promote peace, security and development in
our continent. We commend those efforts, and we wish
to express our gratitude and to stress once again our
strong determination to work together for the noble
cause of bringing about peace and development in
Africa.

