Mr. J enie (Indonesia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the member countries of the Association
of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), namely Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
the deep appreciation of my delegation to the Security
Council for convening this meeting on the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). Before I go
further, tribute is also due to Ambassador Arias for his
great sense of leadership, and to the Vice-Chairs, other
Committee members and all the experts involved for
their dedication and hard work.

ASEAN welcomes the ninth 90-day work
programme of the CTC, during which it will advance
its objectives. We are encouraged that the CTC plans to
prepare a follow-up programme with other
organizations in the field of international cooperation.
ASEAN shares the view that such contacts and
meetings are useful as a continuing avenue for the
exchange of views and coordination towards combating
terrorism. ASEAN also welcomes the enhanced
coordination between the CTC and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999).

Allow me to provide an update on ASEAN's
continuing efforts in combating international terrorism
since the last Council meeting on the CTC, held on 23
July 2003. First of all, at the ninth ASEAN summit,
held in Bali on 7 October 2003, ASEAN firmly agreed
to continue to undertake and build on the specific
measures outlined in the ASEAN Declaration on Joint
Action to Counter Terrorism, which was adopted in
November 2001 in Brunei Darussalam. By this,
ASEAN committed itself to intensifying its efforts,
collectively and individually, to prevent, counter and
suppress the activities of terrorist groups in the region.
ASEAN also underlined the need to maintain practical
cooperative measures among its member countries and
with the rest of the international community.

Furthermore, within the context of combating
global terrorism more effectively, ASEAN further
reaffirmed its determination to work together in
mitigating the adverse impact of terrorist attacks on
ASEAN countries, and urged the international
community to assist in these efforts. It pledged to
ensure the security and harmony of its societies and the
safety of its peoples, and also of others visiting or
residing in its countries and in the region.

At the meeting of heads of State or Government
of ASEAN member States and the Republic of India on
8 October 2003, the ASEAN-India Joint Declaration
for Cooperation to Combat International Terrorism was
adopted. In essence, both parties reaffirmed the
importance of a framework to prevent, disrupt and
combat international terrorism through the exchange
and flow of information, intelligence and capacity-
building. They also stressed their commitment to
implementing the principles laid out in the Declaration
in accordance with their respective domestic laws and
specific circumstances. They called on participants of
the ASEAN-India dialogue to become parties to all 12
United Nations conventions and protocols relating to
terrorism. The Declaration further called on the
participants to designate an agency to coordinate with
law enforcement agencies, authorities dealing with
counter-terrorism and financing and other concerned
Government agencies, and to act as the central point of
contact for the purpose of implementation of the
Declaration.

ASEAN continues to condemn terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations and emphasizes the need to
address the root causes of terrorism, and rejects any
attempt to associate terrorism with any religion, race,
nationality or ethnic group.

In addition, individual ASEAN members are
engaged in various initiatives related to combating
international terrorism, such as the Agreement on
Information Exchange and Establishment of
Communication Procedures, originally signed by
Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines on 7 May
2002. To date, the countries which have become parties
to the Agreement are Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia,
Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand. Under the
Agreement the parties would cooperate to combat
transnational crime, including terrorism.

Finally, ASEAN welcomes the opportunity to
participate in future CTC meetings in order to present
updates on the progress made in our region in the fight
against terrorism.

