Mr. Serry: The past month has been characterized
by several challenging events that have the potential
to destabilize the situation on the ground. Yet each has
been overcome for now, and we are possibly moving in
a more positive direction.

Following the Quartet meeting of 11 April, the
parties exchanged letters in which they outlined their
respective requirements for direct talks to continue.
The Palestinians delivered a letter on 17 April and the
Israelis responded on 12 May. The exchange was kept
confidential and led to quiet direct engagement, with
limited international involvement, which should be
welcomed and encouraged. The Quartet envoys will
further engage with both sides to encourage them to
seize this opportunity to take mutually reinforcing
confidence-building measures that support a continuation
of their quiet engagement.

In parallel, however, a series of developments
threatened to inflame tensions. The hunger strike by
more than 1,500 Palestinian prisoners in Israeli custody,
which started on 17 April to protest prisoner conditions
and the application of administrative detentions, was
resolved on 14 May. We are pleased that Israel has
taken steps to address the concerns of prisoners related
to the use of solitary confinement, family visits and the
practice of administrative detention, which should be
used only in the most limited number of cases and for as
short a period as possible. We understand that Israel is
also to deliver the remains of 100 Palestinians buried in
Israeli-controlled areas.

The agreement reflects the positive impact of
the quiet direct engagement between the Palestinian
Authority and Israel. The Secretary-General and I have
been engaged from the beginning and indicated our
concern for the health of the prisoners. We welcome
the foresight of both parties that enabled them to reach
the agreement, which we hope will continue to be
implemented in full. We also commend the important
role played by Egypt in brokering the deal. However,
we are still concerned by reports about a few prisoners
continuing their hunger strike, one of them in critical
condition, and hope for a speedy resolution of those
cases as well.

The prisoner agreement was reached on the eve
of 15 May, the day the Palestinians commemorate as
the beginning of the refugee experience, which last
year resulted in considerable violence and loss of life.
Instead, the events of the day were relatively contained,
with Palestinian and Israeli security forces heavily
deployed to prevent confrontation. The Lebanese Armed
Forces were also prepared to prevent demonstrations
from approaching the Blue Line. Clashes did occur,
however, between Palestinian protesters and Israeli
forces, resulting in injuries, mostly at checkpoints
around Jerusalem.

Some clashes and arrests also took place in East
Jerusalem on 20 May, on what the Israeli Government
regards as Jerusalem Day, marking what Israel considers
to be the unification of occupied East Jerusalem.
Israeli police arrested 10 Israeli demonstrators, as
well as five Palestinians. A Palestinian man was also
seriously injured after allegedly attempting to stab an
Israeli soldier near the Gush Etzion junction, south of
Bethlehem. On 15 and 20 May, the two sides acted in a
way that averted an escalation of tensions.

Simultaneously, significant internal political
changes occurred. On the Israeli side, Prime Minister
Netanyahu struck a deal with the opposition Kadima
Party to join his coalition Government on 8 May. The
new governing coalition now includes 94 of the 120
members of the Knesset. Prime Minister Netanyahu has
stated that the new coalition allows him to promote a
"responsible peace process." The Secretary-General
sees this as a new opportunity for the Government of
Israel to embark on a meaningful renewal of the peace
process with vision and determination and in the aim
of resolving all final status issues and realizing the
vision of two States living side by side in peace and
security, resulting in the long overdue establishment of
the Palestinian State.
On the Palestinian side, President Abbas reshuffled
the Cabinet and on 16 May swore in Prime Minister
Fayyad and 24 ministers. He immediately tasked them
with implementing his decree calling for long overdue
municipal elections. The Presidential decree establishing
the Government, as well as the Prime Minister's letter
of acceptance, made clear that the new Cabinet did not
prejudge the outcome of ongoing efforts at Palestinian
reconciliation.

Four days later, on 20 May, Palestinian leaders
announced a new formula for progress on reconciliation
achieved with the assistance of Egyptian mediation. As
part of the agreement and as we speak, the Palestinian
Central Election Commission is in Gaza to ascertain
whether it will be enabled to update the voter registration
lists in Gaza, which is expected to take six to eight
weeks. On 28 May, the head of the Election Commission
met with senior Hamas leaders in Gaza and announced
that the Committee will resume its operations in three
days. We expect the de facto authorities to extend their
full cooperation to enable voter registration in Gaza.
We understand that a 10-day period is expected to start
simultaneously for the formation of a new transitional
technocratic Government for the duration of six months.
A transitional Government, once established, will
then prepare for general elections and focus on the
reconstruction of Gaza.

Progress on reconciliation remains a fundamental
aspect of peace, as a unified Palestinian polity is central
to realizing a two-State solution. On 11 April, while
reaffirming its previous positions, the Quartet also
underscored that the situation in and around Gaza would
remain fragile and unsustainable as long as the West
Bank and Gaza are not reunited under the legitimate
Palestinian Authority adhering to the commitments
undertaken by the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO).

Bearing in mind resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860
(2009), the Secretary-General has continually supported
efforts for Palestinian unity and the work of Egypt in
this regard. The Secretary-General wishes to see unity
in the framework of the positions of the Quartet and the
commitments of the PLO and the Arab Peace Initiative.
As he reiterated in his phone call with President Abbas
after the Doha Declaration was adopted in February,
peace talks and reconciliation are not mutually exclusive.
Progress in one must not undermine the other.

During the reporting period, settlement activity
continued. On 24 April, the Government of Israel
announced the intention to retroactively legalize three
settlement outposts in the West Bank towns of Sansana,
Bruchin and Rechalim. On 30 April, Jerusalem City Hall
submitted plans to the Jerusalem Planning and Building
Committee for an additional 1,200 hotel rooms in Givat
Hamatos in East Jerusalem. On 10 May, plans for the
construction of 1,242 units in the Gilo neighbourhood
of East Jerusalem were announced, extending Gilo
into surrounding Palestinian areas. These actions are
contrary to international law and Israel's commitments
under the Road Map, and should stop. Demolitions also
continued during the reporting period, albeit at a slower
rate.

Clashes between Israeli settlers and Palestinians
have also continued in the West Bank. Settler attacks
resulted in 11 Palestinians, including four children,
being injured. On 19 and 26 May, two Palestinians from
different villages were reportedly injured by live fire
from inhabitants of Yitzhar settlement, south of Nablus.
Settler attacks on Palestinian property, including
agricultural land, resulted in over 1,300 trees being
damaged. Palestinian attacks on Israelis in the West
Bank, mostly consisting of stone throwing at Israeli
vehicles, also continued during the reporting period and
resulted in one Israeli injury. On 20 May, Israeli security
forces announced the arrest of Palestinians attempting
to kidnap Israelis in the West Bank in order to negotiate
the release of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails.

During the reporting period, citing security
concerns, Israel Defense Forces (IDF) conducted
306 operations in the West Bank, during which 725
Palestinians were injured, including 44 children, while
284 Palestinians were arrested. Nine IDF soldiers
were injured by Palestinians. The bulk of injuries
and detentions occurred during daily Palestinian
demonstrations in support of Palestinian prisoners on
hunger strike in Israeli jails until the prisoner agreement
was reached on 14 May. On 20 May, an Israeli military
court convicted Bassem Tamimi on charges of taking
part in illegal demonstrations and soliciting protesters
to throw stones. These charges related to demonstrations
against the barrier, which deviates from the Green
Line in contravention of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. I take this opportunity to
reiterate that the right of peaceful protest must be upheld
and that all protests should be kept strictly non-violent.
Palestinian security forces continued work to
maintain law and order in the West Bank within the
framework of Palestinian Authority obligations under
the first phase of the Road Map. On 27 April, Palestinian
security forces safely dismantled two unexploded
devices near Jenin. On 5 and 6 May, Palestinian forces
conducted a large security operation in J enin to restore
order, and arrested some 60 suspects following shots
fired against the residence of the Governor on 2 May
and his death from a heart attack the next day. To carry
out their important mission in an effective manner,
Palestinian security forces must be adequately equipped,
including by maintaining an appropriate type and
amount of weapons and ammunition under their control.

Further to our expressed concern regarding
transparent enforcement of the law, on 29 April the
Palestinian Attorney General confirmed that, for several
months and upon his instruction, the main Palestinian
Internet providers prevented clients from accessing
some Palestinian news websites. On 5 May, President
Abbas formally reversed this order and gave public
assurances that freedom of opinion and expression are
natural rights enshrined in the Palestinian Basic Law.

In Gaza, a relative calm prevailed during the
reporting period. A total of 11 rockets were fired
from Gaza into Israel, While Israel Defense Forces
conducted seven incursions and two airstrikes into
Gaza, resulting in the injury of 10 Palestinian civilians.
Six Palestinians were killed and six were injured in
tunnel-related activities. We condemn indiscriminate
rocket attacks from Gaza into Israel and continue to call
for their complete cessation. We also urge Israel to show
maximum restraint.

On 13 May, a Gaza court rejected an appeal against
the death penalty for a Palestinian convicted of murder
in April 2011, bringing the number of death sentences
confirmed in Gaza this year to five. The sentence has not
been approved by President Abbas, as required by the
Palestinian Basic Law. We call on Hamas to reconsider
its position, exhibit respect for the international
community's firm rejection of the death penalty, and
abolish its use in Gaza.

Reconstruction and economic growth in the Gaza
Strip remain fundamental objectives of the United
Nations. The total value of approved United Nations
works in the Gaza Strip involving potential dual-use
materials that require Israel's approval now exceeds
$365 million, with $96 million-worth of projects
still under Israeli review. This means that United
Nations agencies are now enabled to play a major
role in international efforts for priority recovery and
reconstruction in Gaza.

Much more needs to be done, however. The United
Nations continues to urge Israel to allow the unrestricted
import of key building materials and particularly
aggregate, iron bar and cement - the "ABC" of Gaza
reconstruction - which are now also substantially
and illegally imported through tunnels with Egypt. In
the absence of such a change, it will be important to
maintain a flow of approvals for further reconstruction
works in the Gaza Strip.

Gaza's recovery and long-term economic growth
remain a fundamental objective of the United Nations.
Transfers to the West Bank and exports to Israel are
essential in this regard. The recent export of a truckload
of shirts to the United Kingdom represents an important
broadening of the type of goods being exported from
the Gaza Strip. As of 19 May, a total of 150 truckloads
of goods have been exported from the Gaza Strip this
year. This is a positive step, and I hope that exports from
Gaza will continue to grow.

Gaza continues to suffer from a shortage of
electricity. While the situation has improved slightly
since the last briefing (see S/PV.6742), further
improvements are required to ensure that the energy
supply is both sufficient and reliable. The United Nations
remains engaged on this issue, including through the
replacement of four destroyed transformers, a measure
that will enhance the ability of the Gaza power plant to
feed the electricity grid.

In Lebanon, the situation in the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon area of operations has
remained generally quiet. On 30 April, the Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) commenced work on a wall to
replace the existing technical fence south of the Blue
Line in the sensitive area of Kafr Kela, as agreed by
the parties. Air violations by the IDF continued on an
almost daily basis.

The general situation in Lebanon has been volatile
over the past month. Despite the Government's efforts to
maintain its policy of disassociation from the situation in
Syria, a number of incidents have heightened concerns
over the impact of the Syrian crisis.

The security situation in the northern town of Tripoli
remains of concern following the clashes that erupted on
12 May between the predominantly Sunni and Allawite
neighbourhoods of Bab al-Tabbaneh and J ebel Mohsen.
The fighting continued for several days and left at least
10 people dead and several dozen injured.

On 20 May, two Sunni sheikhs were killed by
Lebanese Armed Forces soldiers at a checkpoint in the
northern Akkar region. The incident prompted protests
throughout the country. Clashes also erupted between
different Sunni groups in a Beirut neighbourhood in
which at least two people died and several were injured.
Two days later, as news spread of the abduction in Syria
of Lebanese pilgrims returning from Iran, protests also
began in the southern suburbs of Beirut. Leaders from
across the political spectrum appealed for calm and
engaged in efforts to secure the release of the hostages.
Although reports indicated that they were being set
free and returned to Lebanon on 25 May, efforts remain
under way at present to ensure their release.

Against that backdrop, there has been some
momentum towards a resumption of national dialogue in
Lebanon. President Sleiman has indicated that he intends
to reconvene political leaders for a renewed dialogue
early next month, which Speaker Berri, Prime Minister
Mikati and others have welcomed. The initiative also
has the active support of Saudi King Abdullah Bin
Abdulaziz Al-Saud. In addition, throughout the past
two weeks, the United Nations Special Coordinator for
Lebanon, Derek Plumbly, has been in continuous contact
with leaders across the political spectrum, encouraging
dialogue and restraint.

More than 26,000 Syrian refugees currently receive
assistance in Lebanon. The United Nations continues to
coordinate closely with the Government of Lebanon on
the provision of assistance to those refugees.

The violence and continued killing in Syria continue
to be of extreme concern to the Secretary-General, and
the peaceful resolution of the crisis is a priority focus
for the United Nations as a whole. The Council has
been extensively briefed in the past few days, through
two letters of the Secretary-General on 25 and 27 May
and a briefing by Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
and General Mood regarding the horrific events in
Al-Houla. I will therefore not address the situation
in Syria in my remarks today. Deputy Joint Special
Envoy Guehenno and Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations Ladsous will brief the Council
again tomorrow and provide further details on the latest
developments and on our efforts.

In conclusion, in this briefing I have drawn the
attention of the Council to a few positive trends that,
if sustained, will offer renewed hope for progress. On
the ground, the situation could have worsened, and the
parties' concerted efforts to avert this are encouraging.
The quiet, direct engagement within the framework of
the exchange of letters is positive as well. The outcome
of recent reconciliation efforts, on which I have reported,
is still uncertain, but in the end there can be no two-State
solution without Palestinian unity being restored
consistent with that goal. The parties must now also be
willing to take the much-needed steps to capitalize on
the potential for progress. This is important, because
while the potential for progress exists, the situation
remains fragile and uncertain.

From my vantage point in Jerusalem, where I closely
follow events on the ground and in the region, I disagree
with those who argue that the significant change and
uncertainty in the region brought about by the Arab
awakening means that this is not the time for progress.
On the contrary, the search for a lasting peace that ends
the Arab-Israeli conflict and resolves all claims is, in
my view, more urgent than ever, because after almost
20 years of failed peacemaking the very viability of
a two-State solution is at stake. If the parties do not
grasp the current opportunity, they should realize that
the implication is not merely the slowing of progress
towards a two-State solution. Instead, we could be
moving down a path towards a one-State reality, which
would also move us further away from regional peace in
the spirit of the Arab Peace Initiative.

I sincerely hope that the parties will find a way
forward in the coming months, and I pledge the
continued commitment of the United Nations to work for
a comprehensive resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict
on the basis of Security Council resolutions; the Madrid
principles, including land for peace; the road map; and
the agreements previously reached between the parties.

