I have the honour to submit the United Kingdom's combined explanation of vote following the adoption of resolution 2524 (2020), on the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), and resolution 2525 (2020), on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The United Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2524 (2020) and resolution 2525 (2020). The establishment of UNITAMS marks the opening of a new chapter in the Sudan's relationship with the United Nations, the Security Council and the broader international community. Through the adoption of resolution 2524 (2020), the Security Council has responded directly to the Government of the Sudan's request for support. UNITAMS will support the Sudan in a broad range of priorities for the transitional period, from the implementation of the Constitutional Document to the peace process, peacebuilding and the promotion and protection of human rights. In seeking this support from the United Nations, the Government of the Sudan has demonstrated its commitment to realizing the aspirations of the Sudanese people to amore stable, peaceful, democratic and prosperous future. The African Union's role will continue to be critical. We welcome its partnership and its strong commitment to providing continued support to the political transition in the Sudan. The United Kingdom calls upon the Government of the Sudan and all Sudanese stakeholders to seize the opportunity created by this new chapter in order to make the aspirations of the Sudanese people a reality. Success will ultimately be achieved through an unwavering commitment from the Government and all Sudanese stakeholders. The Security Council has made the responsible decision to extend the presence of UNAMID until 31 December 2020 through the adoption of resolution 2525 (2020). The extension of UNAMID was necessary in the light of the challenges faced by the Sudan, along with the wider international community, from the coronavirus disease pandemic. We commend the Government of the Sudan's commitment to assuming full responsibility for the protection of civilians. The ongoing peace process offers the best chance for sustainable peace in the history of the Darfur conflict. However, at present challenges remain in Darfur, and civilians remain particularly vulnerable. Therefore, while the Government builds its own capacity to protect civilians and while the peace process is ongoing, UNAMID will continue to be mandated to protect civilians in Darfur. The United Kingdom thanks our co-penholder for these two resolutions, Germany, for its tireless work and professionalism. The United Kingdom would also like to express its sincere thanks to the other members of the Security Council for their constructive engagement throughout these negotiations. Last year the people of the Sudan made their stand for freedom and for a better future. The United Kingdom stood with them then, and we stand with them now in partnership as we adopt this historic resolution and as a new chapter opens in the Sudan's relationship with the United Nations and the international community.
