Mr. Mohd Radzi (Malaysia): Let me first
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2004/117) and to Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno for his presentation on the situation in
Timor-Leste this morning. We also join others in
welcoming Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta in our midst
today.

We are pleased to note that the overall situation in
Timor-Leste continues to register encouraging
progress. We believe that the remarkable progress
recorded in Timor-Leste in the face of the numerous
constraints confronting the newly independent nation
could not have been achieved without the commitment,
determination and strong resolve of the country's
leadership and the support of the Timorese in general.

While we applaud that progress, at the same time
we must share and acknowledge the observations and
concerns expressed by the Secretary-General: despite
the achievements, the situation in many areas
nonetheless remains fragile. We should therefore by no
all means feel complacent about what has been
achieved thus far. The reality is that, at this stage,
Timor-Leste still needs the continuing support of the
United Nations and other external assistance.

It is clear from the Secretary-General's report to
the Council that Timor-Leste will not be ready for self-
sufficiency within the period of two years of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET). The progress achieved in
many fields under UNMISET's three programme areas
is still too fragile to be left on its own without the
continuing presence of UNMISET beyond 20 May
2004.

In the crucial area of public administration, for
example, it was highlighted in the report that the
administration continues to lack managerial skill and
has not yet acquired the skills to discharge a number of
essential tasks, including in the important area of
finance. It was also pointed out that the
administration's legislative and regulatory framework
too is at a very early stage of development. Attention
was also drawn to the justice system in Timor-Leste,
which remains particularly weak, with serious negative
implications for the proper functioning of the justice,
police and prison services.

Similarly, in the area of security, the National
Police of Timor-Leste, which is the central, core
institution of the country's security and stability, has
yet to be able effectively to fulfil its responsibilities.
While significant progress has been made in the
development of the national police force, it was noted
with concern that its capacity, experience and policy
framework remain limited.

It was also noted that the Timor-Leste defence
force will not be able to create before 20 May 2004 an
effective rapid deployment capability to deal with
armed groups in the border districts. That is attributed
mainly, among other things, to delays in the
recruitment, equipping and training processes.

The Secretary-General has highlighted many
more instances in many areas that point to the need for
the extension of UNMISET's mandate beyond 20 May
2004. He has stressed that further assistance will be
essential to consolidate and build upon the gains that
have been made in an atmosphere of peace and
stability. The Secretary-General concluded his report
by recommending to the Council the extension of
UNMISET's mandate for a further year, in a reduced
size and with a modified mandate.
Malaysia supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to extend UNMISET's mandate for a
further year, in a reduced size and with a modified
mandate, as contained in his report to the Council. We
believe that, given the relatively short period since
Timor-Leste gained its independence, it would be too
ambitious to expect that the various institutions that
were established with the assistance of the United
Nations and bilateral assistance could now become
fully operational and ready to ensure the full enjoyment
of security and stability in this very young nation.
Timor-Leste must be given the necessary support and
adequate time to ensure that the peace and stability and
the progress that have been built will not be wasted.

In supporting the recommendations of the
Secretary-General as contained in his report, we wish
to underline that, when determining the size of a
peacekeeping force, it is also necessary to give careful
consideration to the actual threat anticipated in the
country. The size of the force should be appropriate to
and commensurate with the actual threat. We wish to
emphasize that an oversized force might not bode well
for the confidence-building measures that are being
nurtured, and which are highly essential for peace and
security in the region. Maintaining it would also entail
unnecessarily high costs.

As a country of the region, Malaysia will
continue within its capacity and capability to extend
support and assistance to Timor-Leste in its nation-
building process. As we have assured Timor-Leste, we
are prepared to share our past experiences in nation-
building, as Malaysia shares many similarities with that
country. We will continue to provide technical
assistance in various fields, as discussed and agreed
between our two Governments, to assist Timor-Leste in
its national development.

We believe it is crucial for the friends of Timor-
Leste in the region in particular, and for the
international community to offer their full support to
Timor-Leste. We warmly welcome the cordial and
constructive contacts and the friendly bilateral
engagements between Timor-Leste and its most
immediate and important neighbour, Indonesia. We
believe that that augurs well for Timor-Leste in its
desire to play a useful role in the region and for the
aspirations of the countries in the region to peace and
stability.

