Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): First of all, allow me, Sir, to join others in
congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of January and to express
the readiness of our delegation to support you in all
possible ways in your work.

On behalf of the Russian delegation, I should like to
express profound condolences for the tragic death of
peaceable inhabitants of the village of Sheshleti on 5
January 1996. We firmly condemn this barbaric crime,
and we sincerely hope that the murderers of these
peaceable inhabitants, who included women and children,
will receive the harshest punishment.

The Russian delegation has actively participated in
preparing the draft resolution before us and believes that
it is an important document that, along with the extension
of the mandate of UNOMIG, contains important political
provisions. It reaffirms the dedication of the international
community to a settlement of the conflict in Abkhazia
through political dialogue on the basis of respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia and to
ensuring the rights of the multinational people of that
country.

Naturally, we, like the other members of the Security
Council, believe that the basic responsibility for ending
the crisis through mutually acceptable compromises lies
with the parties to the conflict themselves.

The situation of the negotiating process remains
complex. No change of position that would allow for
progress, particularly by the Abkhaz side, has yet taken
place. We believe none the less that the potential for a
peaceful political settlement of the conflict has not yet
been exhausted. As the facilitator for the negotiating
process under the aegis of the United Nations, Russia has
continued its vigorous efforts, in close consultation with
the Secretary-Generals Special Envoy to Georgia and his
 

Deputy, to find ways to intensify the negotiating process.
We are actively working to encourage the parties to be
flexible in their approaches to a settlement.

We very sincerely hope that the forthcoming meeting
of the Council of Heads of State of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) will contribute positively to a
political settlement. The mandate of the CIS peace-keeping
forces and the situation in the conflict zone as a whole will
be discussed at that meeting.

We are increasingly concerned by the situation
regarding the return of refugees and displaced persons. We
consider it essential that the comprehensive and safe return
of refugees be ensured. The solution of this problem will,
to a great extent, determine progress on other problems
involved in the settlement of the conflict. In the draft
resolution, the Security Council firmly demands that the
Abkhaz side accelerate significantly the process of return of
refugees and that it guarantee the safety of returnees
already in the area and of all persons in areas under its
control. The Russian delegation assumes that Sukhumi will
respond positively to this firm demand of the Security
Council.

We note the draft resolution's positive assessment of
cooperation between the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia and the collective CIS peace-keeping forces. We
are convinced that the atmosphere of mutual trust and
friendly relations that exists between United Nations and
CIS peace-keepers is of key significance for the successful
continuation of the peace-keeping operation in that region.

