Ms. Holguin Cuellar (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank you, Sir, for
having convened this debate, which is both timely and
extremely relevant at a moment when the United Nations
is working to develop the integrated regional strategy
for the Sahel and considering options to address the
crisis in Mali.

I thank the Secretary-General, Special Envoy
Romano Prodi and High Commissioner for Refugees
Antonio Guterres for their comprehensive and
informative briefings, which highlight the diversity and
complexity of the problems affecting a region that is
crucial for international peace and security.

The Sahel region is suffering the consequences
of persistent structural problems, which have been
aggravated since just over a year ago by deteriorating
security conditions, social and political instability, a
severe drought, and growing illicit arms trafficking,
the exacerbation of various forms of transnational
organized crime, and terrorism. All of this has resulted
in a humanitarian and food crisis, and a growing
number of human rights violations.

The dimensions of the crisis in the Sahel region
call for an approach that gives due consideration to
the particular conditions of each State and allows
for actions to be taken that focus on the region as a
whole. To that end, our work should be based on two
fundamental pillars. The first is the recognition of
national ownership in the search for solutions to the
various problems facing the Sahel. The second is close
and coordinated work with regional and subregional
organizations.

Colombia deems it essential that national authorities
agree and define clear and specific strategies that
respond to the needs and aspirations of the people, that
enjoy the necessary support from various sectors of
society, and that seek structural long-term solutions.
We attach special importance to the contribution of
regional and subregional organizations in addressing
situations that threaten international peace and security.
Such organizations have tools to build consensus and
define strategies, as well as access to the interested
parties and knowledge of the specific conditions of the
situation on the ground, which makes them important
partners for success in achieving the United Nations
goals in the Sahel.

United Nations activities must address immediate
needs, in particular with regard to humanitarian needs.
We are concerned about food insecurity, the large
number of internally displaced people and refugees,
and the poor provision of basic services, such as health
and sanitation.

On security matters, coordinated action that takes
into account the size and permeability of the borders
of the States of the region is important. Transnational
criminal groups and terrorist organizations take
advantage of border control challenges in order to act
with relative case. It is necessary to comprehensively
address those challenges to regional security and to
make progress in the discussion and agreement of
mechanisms among the affected countries in order to
facilitate the exchange of information and experiences,
the establishment of common legal frameworks that
respond to the specificities of the region, cooperation
on legal matters and the strengthening of border control.
Furthermore, Colombia believes that the activities of
the United Nations and the international community in
the region should seek to build and strengthen national
capacities and institutions by adopting a general
and long-term approach that takes all aspects of the
problems affecting the Sahel into account.

Mali is perhaps the country in which the
manifestations of the deteriorating situation of the
region have most dramatically converged. Social and
political instability; threats to its security, unity and
territorial integrity; a serious humanitarian situation;
environmental degradation; the destruction of its
cultural heritage, and ongoing economic fragility
are just some of the challenges that the country has
simultaneously faced over the past year. The crisis has
led to the mobilization of the countries of the region,
which, as members of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the African
Union, have called on the transitional authorities of
Mali and undertaken a series of actions that have forged
consensus within the international community.

With the adoption of resolutions 2056 (2012) and
2071 (2012), the Security Council responded to this call
and unanimously expressed its willingness to support
regional efforts. The urgency of the situation requires us
to advance further along this path. Colombia supports
the plan agreed upon by ECOWAS and supported by
the African Union to achiev a two-track solution that
favours a negotiated political solution for the restoration
of constitutional order and for the advancement of the
transition, and that, at the same time, seeks a solution
to the threat posed by armed groups in the north of the
country.

In that regard, we commend the work of the President
of Burkina Faso in his capacity as ECOWAS mediator
and by the core countries, which have made significant
progress in establishing a platform for dialogue. As was
shown at the high-level meeing on the Sahel region,
convened by the Secretary-General in September, in
general terms the international community recognizes
the need for the United Nations to support this two-
track solution.

Furthermore, Colombia believes that the recurring
call made by the authorities of Mali, ECOWAS and the
African Union for the Security Council to authorize the
deployment of the African-led international support
mission for Mali must be considered in a timely
manner. While questions remain regarding the concept
of operations and there are misgivings regarding the
possible humanitarian and human rights consequences
arising from the deployment of the mission, we believe
that they can be overcome. We must act with a sense
of urgency, resolve the pending questions and act to
ensure that the leaders of the country and the region
have effective mechanisms and resources to resolve the
crisis in Mali and mitigate its impact on the Sahel.

With my presence at this debate, Colombia reaffirms
its concern over the various forms of terrorism linked
to illicit trafficking. The Sahel region has also been
affected by this situation, and we therefore support the
international efforts aimed at tackling this phenomenon,
which is continually on the rise. Colombia supports
the regional efforts to develop a coherent, concerted
and timely strategy that contributes to peace and
international security.

