Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
meeting. As this is the last official Council meeting for
December, I should like to pay tribute to your leadership
and congratulate you and your delegation on the way
you have carried out your tasks this month. I should like
to thank the Secretary-General, the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa for their statements. I should also like to
acknowledge the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Guatemala at this important debate.
Just a few days ago, we met to address the situation
in the Sahel (see S/PV.7081). On that occasion I
underscored - and it is good to recall it again as we
address the issue today - how important it was to
maintain our full attention on the regional issue of
the Sahel while emphasizing the need and urgency to
implement the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel, which covers security, good governance,
development, human rights and humanitarian issues.

Regrettably, the Sahel and West Africa share
difficult challenges. Much of what was said last week
could be repeated today, as the two subregions have
among the lowest indices of human development in
the world, suffer from major shortages and have to
address the many illegal networks and various terrorist
and extremist groups operating in the countries in the
area. As we know, and as set out in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2013/354), the two subregions must
address the threat and scourge of drug trafficking and
associated crimes, which in certain instances are clearly
responsible for the destabilization of some countries
by preventing effective State control of borders and
territories and by striking at the very heart of States
through corruption. We also know that, in specific
contexts and places, it has been possible to establish a
causal link between transnational organized crime and
the funding of terrorist groups and non-State armed
groups.

Taking all of that into account, I wish to emphasize
the fact that, although drug trafficking can be linked
with other threats, such as those posed by international
terrorism, that relationship is not always a linear one.
It is also not always possible to establish connections
between transnational organized crime and international
peace and security in all contexts and circumstances.

I would also like to put on record the fact that
Argentina supports the principle of joint and shared
responsibility among producer, consumer and transit
countries. We give pride of place to a balanced focus
between combating drug trafficking and its connected
crimes and the adoption of measures to prevent drug
consumption and ensure assistance to drug-dependant
persons.

With that said, I first want to emphasize the primary
responsibility of States with regard to relevant actions
when it comes to combating drug trafficking. We also
acknowledge the value of, and the need for, regional
and international cooperation to effectively address the
phenomenon. With regard to the various areas where
cooperation is important, capacity-building in the
implementation of laws is of particular importance,
especially in the judicial and security sectors. Robust
State bodies and properly trained staff are essential in
combating drug trafficking. We must cooperate with
States to help them to develop their own capacities so
that they can rebuild and strengthen their institutions,
mete out justice, ensure the rule of law and provide
security. In that regard, I would like to commend the
important work carried out by United Nations police, as
well as the participation of officers from Argentina in
the missions in place in various countries of the region.

Secondly, I would like to say once again that many
of the problems that arise are the result of deep-rooted
causes and must be addressed through substantive
changes, not palliative measures. I therefore want to
point out that combating drug trafficking has to take
into account the need for development, for there can
be no doubt that, under certain conditions, a low level
of overall development provides a breeding ground for
criminal activities. As a result, any satisfactory plan to
combat drug trafficking must include measures aimed
at providing alternative means of subsistence - legal
ones - especially for young people, as well as decent
work for young men and women. We emphasize that we
must concentrate our efforts on achieving sustainable
human development based on the principle of shared but
differentiated responsibilities, with a focus on human
rights and on economic, social and environmental
dimensions.

Thirdly, I wish to underscore and commend the
many advances achieved by a large number of the
countries of the region with the assistance of the
regional and subregional organizations represented at
this debate.
Fourthly, I would like to underscore that it is
important for the Council to respect the purviews and
responsibilities of other bodies of the system, such
as the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and various agencies.

Lastly, I think it is important to emphasize that a
comprehensive approach to the problem must respect
the particularity of local and regional situations where
drug trafficking exists, since the problems caused by
drugs are different from place to place, on account ofthe
specific local, subregional and regional characteristics.

In conclusion, Argentina supports presidential
statement S/PRST/2013/22 and thanks the French
delegation for its work. Only by working together can
the international community prevail in the fight against
drug trafficking and other forms of organized crime,
such as human trafficking, arms trafficking, migrant
servitude and slavery, and money laundering.

Argentina extends its thanks to Azerbaijan,
Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo. We assure
them that we will continue to work together on the
priorities and challenges facing the Organization. Our
countries share the same principles and are working
towards the same ideals.

