Mr. Ryan (Ireland): Ireland fully associates itself
with the statement to be made shortly by the
representative of Spain on behalf of the European
Union.

It is now impossible to exaggerate the gravity of
the situation in the Middle East. It is, in the most
fundamental sense, a threat to international peace and
security and to the well-being and security of the
Israeli and Palestinian peoples and ofthe peoples ofthe
region.

In resolution 1397 (2002), the Council, only a
couple of weeks ago, affirmed a vision of a region
where two States - Israel and Palestine - would live,
side by side, within secure and recognized borders.

Since we adopted that resolution, the situation in
the region has gravely deteriorated. Acts of violence,
terror and the excessive use of military force have
created a vicious circle of violence and counter-
violence, reprisal and counter-reprisal. It is perfectly
clear that the parties are now trapped and cannot
emerge without outside help.

The Prime Minister of Ireland, Mr. Bertie Ahern,
earlier today issued a statement appealing to the Israeli
Government and the Palestinian authorities and to their
respective peoples to pull back from conflict. The
Prime Minister called for an immediate withdrawal of
Israeli forces from the territories controlled by the
Palestinian Authority and for an end to Israeli
harassment of President Arafat.

Mr. Ahern appealed for an end to all acts of
violence and terror, and he condemned in the strongest
possible terms the continuing attacks against Israeli
civilians. He called on all parties concerned to declare
an immediate ceasefire and to commence the
implementation of the Tenet and Mitchell proposals, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1397
(2002) of 12 March 2002.

I should add that Prime Minister Ahern conveyed
this position to President Arafat this evening when they
spoke by telephone. He expressed concern for the
unacceptable situation in which President Arafat has
been placed, and he appealed to him, notwithstanding
the restrictions placed on him, to do all in his power to
prevent further violence.
Ireland utterly condemns the Netanya terrorist
attack and the other atrocities committed against Israeli
civilians. As our Secretary-General just said to the
Council, such actions only subvert prospects for a
political settlement. These acts of terrorism must end,
and they must end now.

It should - to put it at its mildest - be entirely
clear by now to all sides that no solution can be found
through terrorism or any other form of violence or
through military action. Ireland regards the current
Israeli military actions, including in Ramallah, as
deeply dangerous and unwise. Whatever the
provocations, they serve only to exacerbate bitterness
and alienation among the Palestinian people.

President Arafat is, and will remain, the only
possible interlocutor for Israel in any process of
dialogue leading to an end to violence and to
negotiations on a political settlement. He cannot fulfil
this role if he is not allowed to fulfil it, by acts of
gratuitous insult and humiliation and by his enforced
physical isolation.

Security Council resolution 1397 (2002)
represents the only way forward: immediate cessation
of all acts of violence and both sides to cooperate in the
implementation of the Tenet work plan and the
Mitchell report recommendations.

The international community, the Secretary-
General, the quartet and General Zinni, in his current
mission, all are working to help resolve the current
tragic cycle of violence. To help resolve the impasse,
however, they must be allowed to help, and they must
be listened to.

My delegation calls on the Israeli and Palestinian
leaderships to pull back now from the brink and for
agreement on an immediate and unconditional
ceasefire. There are signs of hope. Yesterday's
proposals by Arab League leaders are an extremely
important and positive development, as the Secretary-
General stressed tonight. But without restraint and the
strongest political will on both sides, such efforts by
the international community or regional leaders will
remain only that - only hopes in an uncontrolled and
uncontrollable spiral of violence.

An end to violence is now the immediate
imperative. Beyond that, in the spirit of resolution
1397 (2002), there is a vital need for both sides to
recognize that a peace process must involve partnership
and that only through political negotiations and a
political settlement can both parties at last learn to
coexist side by side , at peace with each other.

Both sides must now rise to the challenge of
ending the Violence and building the peace. For our
part, the wider international community must leave no
action untaken in helping to end the pursuit of a path
that can lead only to catastrophe and in helping the
parties to begin again the process of dialogue and
negotiations.

All, including the Council, who are in a position
to help the parties to emerge from this grave crisis must
maintain their engagement to this end.

