The President: I thank the representative of Burundi
for his kind words addressed to me.

The next speaker is the representative of Zaire. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

Mr. Lukabu Khabouji N'Zaji (Zaire)
(interpretation from French): As this is the first time my
delegation has addressed the Council under your
presidency, Sir, we wish to join other delegations in
congratulating you on your work this month. We wish
also to convey our thanks to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation, for
the way in which he guided the work of the Council in
December 1995.

Let me also congratulate the new members of the
Council, all of which are friends of my country: Chile,
Egypt, Guinea-Bissau, Poland and the Republic of Korea.
We welcome them to the Council. We shall be counting
on them.
My delegation asked to participate in the Security
Council's consideration of the draft resolution before it
because we believe that the work the Council is doing is
useful for defusing the tense situation prevailing in the
Great Lakes region. We commend all members of the
Council for the present initiative.

We cannot fail to congratulate the Secretary-General
on his perseverance and insight on this matter.

The situation in Burundi calls for strong medicine
from the international community. We cannot hide our
heads in the sand: there is a problem. We must accept
this, and seek solutions. The situation in Burundi is
complex, to be sure, but that situation cannot be
addressed separately from that prevailing in one of the
neighbouring countries.

That is why Zaire believes that the draft resolution
before the Council today is an important step towards
applying the much-vaunted concept of preventive
diplomacy. Zaire endorses the appeal addressed to all
political factions in Burundi to apply, implement and
respect in good faith the Convention of Government of
10 September 1994, which is a programme that was
freely devised and agreed to by the people of Burundi to
help their country emerge from this persistent crisis.

But the solutions proposed have all proved
insufficient to bring the Burundi people the peace to
which they aspire. On the basis of this acknowledgement
of failure, Zaire strongly supports the draft resolution

 

before us, and we believe it constitutes a solution that, if it
had been used before, would have made it possible to save
thousands of the human lives that have been lost.

In accordance with the draft resolution before us,
which

"Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
as appropriate with the Organization of African Unity
and with Member States concerned, to consider what
further steps of a preventive nature may be necessary
in order to avoid the situation deteriorating further,
and to develop contingency plans as appropriate",
(S/I996/56, para. 5)

Zaire is at the disposal of the Secretary-General so that we
can explore more deeply with him what measures should be
proposed, and I confirm here that my country will
cooperate fully in the formulation of plans, if there are any
plans to be formulated.
Zaire is an important partner in the Great Lakes
region, and we must say that in the quest for solutions to
the crisis afflicting that region, Zaire is loath to be
presented with any faits accomplis. As to paragraph 8 of
the draft resolution, which envisages the adoption of
measures under the United Nations Charter, Zaire wishes to
state to the Council that, if in the light of the report awaited
from the Secretary-General such measures are adopted
pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter, Zaire will respect
them.

Let me conclude by saying that we are in a situation
in which peace can easily give way to war, leading to
thousands of deaths. By way of evidence for this, it is
enough to note the bellicose inclinations that can be seen in
the region. Every day there are killings. It is up to our
international community, therefore, to impose this peace -
by force if need be - upon those who violate it.

The President: I thank the representative of Zaire for
his kind words addressed to me.


