The President: There being no other speakers on
my list, I will now make a statement in my capacity as a
representative of the United Kingdom.

The bombing of Pan Am 103 over Lockerbie on 21
December 1988 was the worst single terrorist incident on
United Kingdom territory. Two hundred and seventy
people were murdered, and their families and friends have
endured continuing pain and grief.

Since that outrage, the authorities in the United
Kingdom have worked carefully and deliberately to bring
the Libyan official al-Megrahi to justice for that act. The
arrangements for the trial and appeal were made in
accordance with the Security Council resolution. The
Council also placed sanctions on Libya until certain
requirements were met, sanctions being the only means of
actually delivering justice.

Libya has now met those requirements. It has
accepted responsibility and has agreed to pay a substantial
sum of compensation to the relatives of those who were
murdered. Libya has agreed to cooperate with any further
Lockerbie investigation and has renounced terrorism.
Libya's renunciation of terrorism is the first time in the
modern era that a State has unequivocally renounced to
the United Nations the use of terror as an instrument of
policy. As a demonstration of that position, Libya has
signed the 12 international conventions on the fight
against terrorism. The United Kingdom welcomes Libyan
cooperation in the fight against international terrorism.

For all the above reasons, the United Kingdom, with
Bulgaria, sponsored and supported the resolution to lift
the sanctions on Libya. We expect Libya to abide by the
commitments and obligations it has entered into as part of
the agreement.

As this case demonstrates, the United Kingdom will
pursue those responsible for terrorism. The perpetrators
and sponsors will have to account for their actions,
however long it takes. Although nothing can bring back
those who died in Lockerbie, we hope this decision
today - and more importantly, what it represents - will
bring some measure of comfort to their relatives and
friends. The agreement was the result of patient
diplomacy based on clear points of principle and was the
culmination of many years of hard work. But it does show
that it is possible to find a way through and forward
through commitment, dialogue and cooperation.

We welcome the fact that the families of UTA flight
772 have also now been able to reach agreement with the
Qadhafi Foundation over further compensation payments.

The United Kingdom condemns terrorism in all its
manifestations. There can be no justification for terrorist
acts. In that context we also recall the horrific bombing of
the La Belle disco in Berlin in 1986. Three people died
and over 200 were injured. Three Libyan officials were
subsequently found guilty of attempted murder. In
complying with the requirements of the Security Council,
including on the renunciation of terrorism, Libya has
made a continuing commitment to the international
community to abide by new standards of behaviour. We
urge Libya to demonstrate that commitment now by
implementing the agreement with the UTA families in full
and by ensuring that full comfort is given to the families
of the victims of the La Belle disco. We look forward to
the full re-emergence of Libya into the international
community.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the business on
its agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.15 am.
