At the outset, I warmly welcome Her Excellency Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, to this video-teleconference meeting. I thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the Secretary- General for Colombia and Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, and Mr. David Santiago Cano Salazar, Consultant of the World Wildlife Fund in Colombia, for their informative and important briefings. My delegation wishes to make the following observations. First, in the period under consideration, Colombia witnessed positive developments, with the inauguration of all newly elected governors, mayors and members of municipal councils, including former members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) on 1 January, and the process of drafting departmental and local development plans for the next four years. We also welcome the continued positive steps in the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, including the integration of former combatants. In that regard, we highly commend the developments in Colombia that have brought hope for more security and stability. We welcome and believe that, with sustained efforts from the Government and departmental and local authorities, such progress will contribute to better promoting security and the livelihoods of the people, especially in conflict-affected regions. Secondly, we also welcome the announcement by the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional of a one-month cease-fire starting on 1 April to facilitate Colombia's response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We join the call by the Secretary-General for other armed groups to follow suit and to implement a lasting cease-fire towards a conflict-free Colombia for peace and development. In that connection, we call on the United Nations, its Member States, international organizations and all parties in Colombia urgently to take preventive measures needed in fighting the COVID-19 pandemic in the country. Thirdly, we share the concerns expressed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General that, despite the recent developments, the FARC and the Government of Colombia still have differences regarding the compliance with their obligations under the Final Agreement. We encourage the Government and the party to continue to engage in constructive dialogue, utilizing mechanisms at hand, to avoid mistrust and rhetoric that may hinder the smooth implementation of the peace process. We stress the importance of ensuring the national reconciliation process through high-level dialogue as the only viable solution to finally put an end to the conflict and overcome long-term challenges in Colombia. Fourthly, violence and attacks continue against communities, as well as killings of former combatants, human rights defenders and social leaders, the perpetrators of which are reportedly linked to illegal armed groups and criminal organizations. We condemn all such attacks and urge all the groups involved not to repeat such acts of violence, so as to contribute to the improving situation in Colombia. Fifthly, we support the priorities the Secretary-General identified in his most recent report (S/2020/239). As the Government works closely with local authorities and other relevant players to put a stop to the killings of former combatants, human rights defenders and social leaders, the root causes of failure of reconciliation and long-term peace must be unceasingly addressed. The reintegration of former 27/31 28/31 combatants should be implemented in a comprehensive and sustained manner to ensure the benefits of reconciliation reach them all. Development plans also need to take into account the particular needs of communities. In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our strong support the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia in supporting the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. We call upon all parties concerned to set aside differences at this critical juncture, lest the COVID-19 pandemic have further adverse impact on the process of peace, security, national reconciliation, national unity and development in Colombia.
