Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the presidency for having convened this
briefing. We also thank Lieutenant General Maqsood
Ahmed, Military Adviser for Peacekeeping Operations,
and the Force Commanders of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) for their
briefings. This annual practice should continue.

At the beginning of my statement, I would like to
reiterate my country's commitment to peacekeeping
operations, which are a key tool of the United Nations
under its peace and security pillar. Since 1948, Chile
has supported those efforts. Today, as my country's
Minister for Foreign Affairs said at the summit held
at Headquarters in September, we have offered new
materiel and training resources, in addition to the
existing ones, to be deployed in such cases in Africa.
The new situations and challenges facing the forces
on the ground have led us to acknowledge the need to
analyse and discuss peacekeeping operations, from
their inception to their implementation and conclusion.
The membership in general, in particular troop- and
police-contributing countries, should participate in that
process. In that regard, we underscore the role of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of the
General Assembly as the intergovernmental body to
address such matters. We welcome the announcement
by the Secretary-General to appoint a high-level panel
to review and to report on such issues.

My delegation supports a multidimensional
approach to conflict resolution that includes the
protection of civilians, the restoration of the rule of law,
accountability, reconciliation and social inclusion. We
also underscore the importance of strengthening the
gender perspective and the full integration of women,
in accordance with the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) and other existing resolutions. In the current
dynamic of conflict, we see the use ofnew technologies
and inter-mission cooperation as useful and necessary
mechanisms, which, in all cases, must have the consent
of the parties and comply with international law.

We underscore the commitment undertaken by
some missions to protect civilians. In the particular
case of MONUSCO, we value the optimal use,
in cooperation with the Congolese authorities, of
early-warning mechanisms at all levels, prevention
initiatives on the basis of community-based protection
committees and support for the drawing up such
plans based on interim and ongoing operations. We
believe that community-based early-warning networks
could be used in other peacekeeping operations. We
also highlight MONUSCO's contribution in terms
of training the Congolese police, which has included
the management of sexual and gender-based violence,
as well as the establishment of islands of stability in
priority areas to protect the civilian population.

In the case of Mali, the increasingly frequent
attacks against MINUSMA and its troops, as affirmed
today by Major General Bosco Kasura, point to a
change in the security conditions, in particular in
the north of the country. That makes it necessary to
consider a reconfiguration of the mandate. We believe
that it is appropriate for the Council to discuss the
possible options.

As for UNDOF, we emphasize that, for four decades,
it has been an effective liaison and communication tool
to prevent escalations of violence between Israel and
Syria. However, the outbreak of the conflict in Syria
and the emergence of non-State actors have changed the
reality on the ground and compromised the security of
the troops, even forcing the Blue Helmets to temporarily
withdrawal to the Alpha side. To deal with that new
situation, we believe that UNDOF should maintain its
close contact with the authorities of both countries.
We should support the strengthening of their defensive
capability, while making use of new technologies. We
should include more troops who speak Arabic so as to
strengthen ties with the local communities in the area
of separation and on the Bravo side.

My delegation views peacekeeping operations as a
broad concept, where peacekeeping and peacebuilding
tasks converge, recognizing the link between
security and development. It is therefore important
that the mandates, as well as being clear and having
the necessary resources and conditions for their
implementation, be the outcome of a proper debate
in the Security Council, in which the Peacebuilding
Commission, the relevant regional organizations and
troop- and police-contributing countries are duly heard.

