Mr. Oh Joon (Republic ofKorea): I thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her briefing on the recent developments
regarding Libya. We agree with her that Libya has
come a long way, despite all the challenges it faces,
by working closely with the international community,
including the International Criminal Court.

Regarding the recent developments between
the ICC and Libya, I would like to make a couple of
observations based on what the Prosecutor has just
explained. First, I believe that close cooperation
between the ICC and Libya is absolutely vital if the ICC
is to fulfil its mandate, as given by the Security Council.
We commend the Libyan Government's cooperation
so far, but also expect it to continue to implement its
obligations under resolution 1970 (2011) and to further
enhance its cooperation with the ICC. In that context,
we welcome the conclusion of the memorandum of
understanding on burden-sharing between the ICC
Prosecutor and the Prosecutor-General of the Libyan
Government. We hope that this new instrument will
help enhance their cooperation for the common goal of
fighting impunity.

With respect to the progress made in the cases
against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi, we think that the Court's decision set the
criteria for the questions regarding admissibility. We
hope that those decisions will also make a positive
contribution to the interpretation of the principle of
complementarity.

We support the Prosecutor's efforts to investigate
the allegations of crimes committed by pro-Al-Qadhafi
officials outside Libya, as well as those committed by
rebel forces. We look forward to a thorough investigation
of all those allegations with the full cooperation with
the Libyan authorities. It will be desirable for the ICC
Prosecutor to keep assisting and encouraging the Libyan
authorities in prosecuting criminal cases domestically,
whenever possible, in accordance with the policy of
positive complementarity.

Ms. Bensouda mentioned concerns about challenges
in the investigations and corrections process at the
national level. My delegation shares her concerns. In
that regard, we would like to stress the importance of
capacity-building in Libya and the continued support of
the international community to that end.

With all of those developments, we understand
that many tasks remain in Libya. However, with
the continued efforts and cooperation of the Libyan
authorities, the ICC and the Security Council, we
believe that Libya will successfully achieve sustainable
peace and democracy based upon the rule of law. As
we have done, my delegation will continue to work
with other Council members to that end with a firm
commitment to the Charter and the vision of the ICC.
Like the Permanent Representative of Argentina, we
also believe that we need the ICC.

