Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I should like to express my delegation's
pleasure at seeing you, Sir, preside today over the work
of our Council.

We believe that the theme selected by the
Romanian delegation for this debate is both useful and
relevant. Indeed, it allows us to pursue our thinking
following Mexico's initiative last year regarding the
need for enhanced cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations. Given the growing
needs in the area of peacekeeping, regional
organizations have a pivotal role to play in backing the
actions of the United Nations and in supporting it.

What is our situation now? I think that we can say
that great progress has been made in the past few years,
and even in the past few months, by regional
organizations in the areas of conflict prevention, the
diplomatic management of crises, and the maintenance
of peace - be it prior to United Nations action, in
taking over from it or in supplementing its work.

We are obliged to note, however, that not all of
the regional organizations can progress at the same
pace; that, naturally, they act according to their own
capacity; and also that a particular effort is being made
by some of those organizations. I do not wish to refer
to all of them, but I will mention a few of the
organizations that are making that particular effort.

The representative of the European Union took
the floor earlier, and I am pleased, as we take stock
once again, to be able to say that the European Union is
now firmly committed to strengthening its capacity to
support the crisis-management activities of the United
Nations - be it in Kosovo, in Bosnia or in Macedonia.

In the context of the continuation of Operation
Artemis in Bunia, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the European Union is also now acting under
the European Union-United Nations declaration of 24
September last in the area of crisis management.

Finally, we should not forget that the European
Union is also acting to strengthen the capacity of
regional and subregional organizations in Africa
through its peace support facility, which makes it
possible to finance African peacekeeping operations
such as the African Union observation mission, which
is currently deployed in Darfur.

I would like also to pay particular tribute to the
African Union, which has made major progress in the
establishment of an African standby force and an early-
warning system, which will contribute to strengthening
its capacity for conflict prevention and resolution. Nor
can we forget the commitment of the African Union in
Burundi, which was decisive for the peace process n
that country. The African force made it possible to
bolster the ceasefire at a time when the United Nations
was not yet ready to deploy a peacekeeping operation.

The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) - whose representative we have just heard
- also deserves our praise for the pivotal role it
played, with very limited resources, in conflicts such as
the ones in Liberia and in Cote d'Ivoire and in the
settlement of the most recent crisis in Guinea-Bissau.

The Organization of American States is firmly
committed to Haiti, and we welcome that. Reference
should also be made to the efforts of the Inter-
Government Authority on Development in Somalia and
those of the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community in the Central African Republic. We would
recall also the contribution made by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
recalled here earlier, which last year was referred to at
length during the debate held under the Bulgarian
presidency.

In that context, which is now more favourable,
the question arises as to what more can be done today
to improve existing cooperation between the United
Nations and some of the regional organizations. I think
that we are all asking what our approach should be. I
think we need to be both far-reaching here and
pragmatic - far-reaching because, as we have noted
for several months now, the United Nations cannot do
everything on its own. Factors for instability are
numerous, and the need for peacekeeping is continuing
to increase. Moreover, it is certainly not desirable for
the United Nations always to be called on to come to
the rescue, and we will certainly heed any proposals
that might be made by the high-level panel in that field.

We therefore need in particular to seek to enhance
mechanisms for crisis prevention. The regional
organizations can very often - more easily than the
United Nations because of their proximity, something
that has been said several times today - bring into
play their early-warning mechanisms and therefore
provide the United Nations with valuable information,
which must be reciprocated.

Progress has also been made in our relations with
the African Union, but we can clearly do more to
develop the principles laid down in Article 54 of the
Charter and to strengthen concerted action between the

Security Council and regional organizations.

That is the objective. In the short term, it must be
given specific application. So, for example, why not
work on the handover of a regional operation to a
United Nations operation? Such a transition must be
properly prepared and give rise to an in-depth
exchange with the Security Council. I must say that
was not the case recently. We could have been more
forthcoming and could have received the African
Union here in New York during the establishment of
the United Nations Operation in Burundi. We must see
to it that there is greater consultation in future. We also
need to improve our concerted action with the new
mechanisms acquired by the African Union.

We can also promote the role of regional
organizations in post-conflict situations, following the
withdrawal of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation, by involving the regional organizations at an
earlier stage in the strategy for addressing the crisis.

It seems to us that, in promoting such
coordination, our Council must remain, as I said
earlier, far-reaching, but also realistic. Given the broad
variety of situations and the fact that regional
organizations are not all committed at the same level, I
am not sure that we could a priori set up a framework
for procedures for the division of labour, which might
turn out to be more of a constraint than a benefit.

Excessive formalism might get us involved in an
approach that at this stage might be artificial. It would
be better to create a realistic dynamic process between
the United Nations and regional organizations. It is on
a case-by-case basis, using a pragmatic approach, that
we will manage to make progress.

The presidential statement you will soon be
making, Sir, encourages us to move in the right
direction. France fully supports those commitments.
