Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): I, too, wish to
commend your delegation, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate. We are also pleased to see all
the foreign ministers and dignitaries who are here
today. Their presentations have substantially enriched
our understanding of the complex challenges that must
be addressed in order to implement credible security
sector reforms, especially in those countries that are
still struggling to recover from the harrowing
experience of internal conflict.

The issue of security sector reform (SSR) is
gaining increasing importance on the international
plane, because it is seen as cutting across a wide range
of policy areas, from peace and security to economic
and social development. It is thus inextricably linked to
other stabilization and reconstruction priorities, such as
transitional justice; the rule of law; human rights;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes; equal and full participation by women in
national affairs; and the problem of children in armed
conflict.

The chronic instability that has characterized
most of the post-independence era in Africa raises
fundamental questions about the role of the security
sector in the political economy of the continent, given
its profound impact on the overall development of
African countries. Our experience with regional
3
integration - at least in West Africa - clearly shows
that the legacies of colonialism and the cold war
continue to cast their shadow on the outlook, traditions
and ethical standards of key institutions in the security
sector, including the military, the police, customs and
the intelligence agencies. It is imperative, therefore,
that we address the subject of security sector reform
from a perspective that is in harmony with the
determined efforts being made by the African Union to
achieve lasting peace and stability on the continent,
based on social inclusion, democratic governance and
sustainable development.

At this point, perhaps it would help to shed a
little more light on our position by referring to some
important decisions adopted by African leaders in the
recent past. Significantly, in July 1990, on the eve of
the end of the cold war, the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) adopted its landmark Declaration on the
Political and Socio-economic Situation in Africa and
the Fundamental Changes Taking Place in the World.
After taking stock of the continent's fortunes over three
decades, they concluded that its development would be
held back as long as an atmosphere of lasting peace
and stability did not prevail in Africa. The Declaration
further recognized that it was only through the creation
of stable conditions that Africa could fully harness its
human and material resources and direct them to
development.

Consistent with that position, African leaders
subsequently adopted the Lome Declaration on the
Framework for an OAU Response to Unconstitutional
Changes of Government, in which they unequivocally
condemned and rejected any unconstitutional change of
Government and reaffirmed the commitment of African
peoples to respect for the rule of law based on the
people's will, expressed through the ballot and not by
the bullet.

Those decisions have far-reaching implications
for the security sector in African countries, since the
overarching objective of security sector reform is to
ensure that security institutions effectively perform
their statutory functions - that is, providing security
and delivering justice to the State and its people - in
an environment consistent with democratic norms and
the principles of good governance.

The implications range from the very conception
and composition of the security sector to related issues,
such as the size of the military and of its budget, civil-
military relations, training and orientation and the
nature of technical cooperation with donor countries,
not to mention issues such as compliance with a code
of ethics, including the observance of human rights,
especially by police and intelligence agencies.

It is important to stress that, for the sort of radical
shake-up required to realign the security sector with
the ambitions reflected in those Declarations, the
initiative must first come from African leaders
themselves. After all, we know from experience that
the performance of the security sector is closely related
to, and invariably shaped by, the conduct of leaders in
their exercise of the powers of State.

In that regard, we welcome the significant efforts
that have been made recently by development partners
to adapt their technical assistance programmes in the
area of security to the changing reality in Africa. We
expect the United Nations as well to fashion a reform
strategy that will facilitate the attainment, where
possible, of the objectives that Africans have set for
themselves. A better appreciation of the history of the
continent and a deeper understanding of the dynamics
of its political economy are required in order to form a
meaningful partnership in security sector reform.

Ghana believes that security sector reform not
only is an integral part of the peacekeeping and post-
conflict peacebuilding, but also confronts us with the
need for clarity and consistency in defining the
objectives of such reform. Unless that challenge is met,
the search for a comprehensive, coherent and
coordinated United Nations strategy will prove elusive.
Moreover, many of the problems that threaten to derail
ongoing security sector reform programmes in our
region transcend the immediate needs of the post-
conflict societies directly concerned.

For instance, how does the widely accepted
notion of the right of the State to exercise a monopoly
on the use of force - which underlies most DDR
programmes - square up with the loose international
regulatory framework that permits the illicit trade and
proliferation in small arms and light weapons in
volatile regions? There is also the growing menace of
the private militias and military contractors that have
often been deployed to guard mining operations against
marginalized indigenous groups, not to mention those
that have been recruited, armed and organized by
central Governments either to terrorize their own
populations, to wage proxy wars against neighbouring
States or to do both.

As far back as in 1972, African leaders adopted
the Convention for the Elimination of Mercenarism in
Africa, which is complementary to the United Nations
International Convention against the Recruitment, Use,
Financing and Training of Mercenaries. The two
Conventions contain principles that are directly
relevant to the problem of implementing credible
security sector reform at the national level in order to
enhance global peace and security. Unfortunately, since
their adoption, the phenomenon of private militias has
grown by leaps and bounds, alongside the illicit trade
and proliferation in weapons. Indeed, the imperative of
the global effort to combat terrorism underscores the
need to fashion a strategy that tightens up both the
national and international regulatory frameworks for
the security sector.

Surely, if one of the central objectives of security
sector reform is to concentrate force in the hands of the
sole and legitimate authority of the State, then that
imposes enormous responsibility on all Governments.
When the State's monopoly on force becomes
perverted through the emergence of a dictatorial
regime that tramples on the rights of its citizens and
even perpetrates ethnic cleansing and genocide, how
should the international community respond? Should
such a regime continue to be armed to the teeth in the
face of its crimes against humanity? Can it be trusted
to honestly and impartially carry out the
demobilization and disarmament of the very forces that
it has unleashed in pursuit of its agenda? The
persistence of those tendencies reflects a certain deficit
in the political commitment within the international
community to achieve comprehensive and credible
security sector reform in developing countries.

The factors that have aggravated the growing
militarization of some African societies are indeed
complex. In View of the obvious interdependence of
States, as manifested in cross-border trade and the
movement of persons across borders, it is not only the
countries that are emerging from conflict at which
reform of the security sector must be targeted. That is
why the Economic Community of West African States,
for instance, has been increasingly active in the field of
security sector reform. Besides, the weak character of
most State institutions, such as public services, the
legislature, the judiciary and law enforcement
agencies, and the low capability of civil society groups
in most African countries tend to pose special
challenges.

Again, while national ownership is a sine qua non
for successful security sector reform, it cannot be
achieved without a reasonably literate population that
understands its civil rights and responsibilities and can
thus play a meaningful role in national affairs. Where
the overwhelming majority of the population is not
even aware of its rights or simply lacks the means to
ensure respect for them, those rights tend to be at the
mercy of the security forces.

A holistic approach to security sector reform must
therefore not be limited to building the capacity of
security and justice institutions, promoting
management and oversight mechanisms and tackling
SSR-related issues such as DDR and transitional
justice; it should also strive to fully empower the
population, particularly vulnerable groups such as
women.

That brings to the fore the imperative of an
integrated but flexible United Nations approach that
enables national authorities, regional organizations,
international organizations, non-governmental
organizations and civil society to work together
purposefully in addressing the security needs of the
countries in question. In that regard, it should be borne
in mind that each case is sui generis and there can be
no one-size-fits-all solution. Security sector reform in
any country should also be recognized as a long-term
process that must be adequately funded if it is to be
successful and sustainable.

We are aware of the importance of security sector
reform in the countries currently undergoing post-
conflict reconstruction, such as Liberia, Sierra Leone,
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
others. We hope that we shall have the opportunity to
review the progress made in those countries to enable
us to assess the impact of the strategies that have been
put in place to address their respective security
challenges. We also welcome the creation by the
Secretariat of an inter-agency working group on
security sector reform to identify current United
Nations engagement in that area. Once again, we
cannot overstate the need - not only among the
United Nations entities, but also among all relevant
international actors involved in post-conflict security
sector reform assistance - to coordinate their efforts
and thereby function as a whole. That was evident
when we debated the direction of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and it seems obvious that the same
challenges have emerged in today's discussions in
terms of the actions that must be pursued in order to
remove the obstacles to peace and stability and make
real progress in poverty alleviation and sustainable
development.

