Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
join Council colleagues in thanking the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2011/120*), Special
Representative of the Secretary-General De Mistura for
his briefing, and Ambassador Tanin for his statement.

The year 2011 is another important year for
Afghanistan. As transition gathers momentum, the
international community must continue to support
Afghanistan in making progress on the political and
civilian tracks. That is critical to securing a sustainable
political settlement and long-term stability in
Afghanistan. The United Kingdom is committed to
working with the Afghan Government, the United
Nations and the wider international community
towards that goal.

Foreign Minister Rassoul's letter, circulated to
the Council last week (see S/2011/118), rightly
highlights United Nations work in recent years in
support of lasting peace, security and development in
Afghanistan. The United Kingdom supports
Mr. Rassoul's call for the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to correspond with the principles of greater Afghan
leadership and ownership, in line with the mutual
commitments made at the Kabul Conference last July
and with an emphasis on transition. The draft
resolution currently being negotiated by the members
of the Council does exactly that.

The United Kingdom also agrees that, in line with
the London and Kabul Conference communiques,
donors should aim to channel at least 50 per cent of
development aid through the Afghan Government's
core budget and to align 80 per cent of aid to the
national priority programmes. As Mr. Rassoul says,
UNAMA has the primary responsibility for promoting
aid coherence.

UNAMA performs a vital role in Afghanistan,
coordinating the international effort in building a more
stable and secure country, working closely with and in
support of the Government of Afghanistan. UNAMA
can perform that role only if it has the full support of
the Afghan Government and if its staff can operate
where it is needed. While there are no plans at present
to open new offices, UNAMA's work must not be
limited to particular areas or zones of the country.

Any political settlement should be within a
constitutional and democratic framework. To that end,
we welcome the inauguration of Parliament and the
election of a new Speaker for the lower house. Now
that the 2009 and 2010 elections are over, this is the
ideal time for the Afghan Government to press ahead
with electoral reform. UNAMA has a central role to
play in supporting the Government as it works to
implement the commitments made by President Karzai
at the Kabul Conference. We commend UNAMA and
Mr. De Mistura for their work, and will continue to
encourage their support of the Afghan Government in
that area.

As the move towards transition gathers pace, we
will continue to work alongside the Afghan
Government, as well as our International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) partners, towards President
Karzai's objective of transferring lead security
responsibility to the Afghan National Security Forces
in all provinces by the end of 2014. The NATO defence
ministerial meeting last week reaffirmed NATO's
continuing commitment to a secure and stable
Afghanistan.

Since the Lisbon summit last November, the
Afghan Government has made good progress in
preparing for the start of transition. The Afghan
National Security Forces are growing rapidly in size
and capability, supported by improving governance and
development. There have been a series of security
operations in which they have played an increasing
leadership role. Indeed, over the past year, the Afghan
National Security Forces have expanded the area in the
south of the country under Afghan Government
control. If that progress is to be sustainable, it must be
supported by development across the rule of law sector
through the delivery of the commitments made at the
Kabul Conference.

We are ever mindful of the toll suffered by the
civilian population as a result of the insurgency. We
condemn in the strongest possible terms the insurgents'
use of violence and tactics that deliberately intimidate
the civilian population, including through assassination.
The United Kingdom is committed to working with
ISAF partners to take robust measures to protect
civilians, and we welcome the continued progress
made in that regard.

As we have heard repeatedly in this Chamber,
Afghanistan cannot be secured by military means
alone. A sustainable political settlement is essential to
long-term stability and prosperity. It will underpin the
military progress made by ISAF and the Afghan
National Security Forces. We welcome the work of the
High Peace Council in taking forward the political
process, including its outreach to countries in the
region and the provincial events that it has held to
build support for the Afghan peace and reintegration
programme.

While the challenges that Afghanistan faces are
considerable, we should acknowledge that progress is
being made. Such progress is a result of the partnership
among the Afghan Government, the international
community and the United Nations. The United
Kingdom is fully committed to continuing and
strengthening those relationships, underlining our long-
term commitment to the Government and people of
Afghanistan. UNAMA's role across Afghanistan will
become even more important as transition proceeds.
The United Kingdom warmly supports the renewal of
UNAMA's mandate.

