Mr. Pfirter: I would like to thank you for the
kind invitation to attend this meeting. I am pleased to
have this important opportunity to brief the Security
Council on various aspects of the mandate and
functioning of the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and to highlight the
important role it has to play in chemical disarmament
and non-proliferation.

The threat of chemical terrorism cannot be
underestimated. Ease of access to dual-use chemicals
and readily available knowledge of the technologies
and processes required to manufacture chemical
weapons make them a potential instrument of choice
for terrorists. Only yesterday we learned that Iraq, a
country whose people have in the past endured the
terrible consequences of the use of chemical weapons,
has suffered yet another series of cowardly attacks
involving chlorine, which was used to kill and injure
unprotected, innocent civilians.

With your permission, Mr. President, I would like
to read out a statement issued on my behalf at OPCW
headquarters today and here in New York.
3

"As Director-General of the Organisation
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, I
condemn in the strongest possible terms the
recent multiple use of chlorine gas by groups in
Iraq to kill and injure innocent civilians. The
international community has firmly rejected the
use of toxic chemicals under any circumstances
to inflict harm, as demonstrated by the
overwhelming international support for the global
ban on such weapons. The Chemical Weapons
Convention has 181 States parties, and Member
States of the United Nations have unanimously
condemned the use ofpoison gas.

I urge all Governments, particularly those in
the Middle East region, whether or not they are
parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention, to
join me in stating clearly that the use of poison
gas is unacceptable."

The role of the OPCW in bringing about a
comprehensive prohibition on chemical weapons is
indispensable to the larger objectives of the United
Nations in promoting international peace and security.
Resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006) recognize
the need for multilateral cooperation in this area.

Many of the measures in the operative paragraphs
of resolution 1540 (2004) dealing with chemical
weapons correspond to obligations that States parties
have assumed under the Convention.

Operative paragraph 1 of resolution 1540 (2004)
stipulates that States should refrain from providing any
form of support to non-State actors that attempt in any
way to develop or acquire weapons of mass
destruction. This is fully in line with the general
obligations set out in article I of the Convention and
further developed in article VII.

As you know, the OPCW is not an anti-terrorist
organization. Nevertheless, by helping States parties to
meet all requirements regarding national
implementation, it helps ensure that dangerous
chemicals are not misused in any manner, including for
terrorism.

In December 2001, two months after the terrible
attacks against the United States of America, our
Executive Council adopted a specific decision on the
contributions of the OPCW to the anti-terrorism effort.
These contributions include promoting universal
adherence to the Convention and the full
implementation of national obligations under the
Convention.

The objective of universal adherence to the
Convention remains fundamental to the achievement of
its object and purpose. This goal is also reaffirmed in
resolution 1540 (2004).

The failure of 14 United Nations Member States
to join the Convention continues to be an issue of
concern, including, in certain cases, as regards non-
proliferation. This is particularly serious in the case of
the Middle East and in the Korean Peninsula, where we
hope that recent developments will bring into sharper
focus the need to address accession to the Convention
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

I will now turn to the specific aspects I referred
to earlier concerning the destruction of chemical
weapons. According to the Convention, States parties
must declare any chemical weapons stockpiles,
including those which are old and abandoned.
Operative paragraph 3 of resolution 1540 (2004)
rightly addresses the need to develop appropriate
measures to ensure accountability and physical
protection of relevant materials. Under our
Convention, six States parties, Albania, India, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, the Russian Federation, the
United States of America and another State Party have
between them declared approximately 71,000 metric
tons of Category l and 2 chemical weapons. Overall,
more than 16,600 metric tons of chemical weapons
have already been destroyed under the verification
regime of the OPCW. This figure represents nearly a
quarter of the declared global total. The steps taken in
this connection clearly contribute to global security,
while reducing opportunities for non-State actors to
gain access to existing stockpiles.

We also carry out industry inspections. Since
June 1997, when inspections began for the purpose of
non-proliferation, the Secretariat has carried out over
2,700 inspections, including over 1,100 industrial
inspections in 73 States parties.

It is to the credit of the drafters of the Convention
that a treaty that had its beginnings in the cold war era
and was intended to address activities at the State level
also allows us to respond to today's threats.

In view of the need to ensure full implementation
of the Convention, our Conference of States Parties
adopted a plan of action to assist States parties that
07-24806
have yet to meet their obligations, under the articles of
the Convention, to enact implementing legislation and
to establish a National Authority.

Let me note that, in many cases, delays by
Governments in the fulfilment of their Convention
obligations are not the result of a lack of political will,
but are due to a scarcity of specific legal expertise.

The OPCW secretariat has actively focused on
offering practical on-site assistance tailored to the
needs of the States Parties that have requested it. Thus
far, we have worked on 241 drafts of implementing
legislation from 117 States parties.

At least 25 States parties have also offered
significant bilateral assistance. Of our 181 States
parties, 172 - that is to say, 95 per cent - have
established or designated a national authority. Sixty-
three per cent of them have reported that they have
adopted legislative or administrative measures to
implement the Convention. One hundred States parties,
or 56 per cent, have informed us of the measures they
have in place to control transfers of scheduled
chemicals. Fifty-six States parties, or 31 per cent, have
indicated that they have reviewed their regulations on
trade in chemicals and have confirmed that those
regulations are consistent with the object and purpose
of the Convention.

Hundreds of thousands of tons of scheduled
chemicals are traded internationally every year for
purposes not prohibited under the Convention. In order
to ensure that that is done only for peaceful purposes,
we count on the invaluable support not only of
Governments, but also of the chemical industry. The
involvement and cooperation of that industry stems not
only from its laudable support for the Convention in
general, but also from the evident risk of possible
attacks on chemical facilities - attacks by terrorists
that would turn industrial sites into horrendous
weapons.

Under article X of the Convention, each State
party is entitled to receive assistance and protection.
Our activities in this area are central to our mission and
are, again, fully consistent with the provisions of
resolution 1540 (2004).

The OPCW is also mandated to undertake
investigations of any alleged use of chemical weapons
and is equipped with the technical means and expertise
to do so. Here, I would note that, in the case of alleged
07-24806

use of chemical weapons involving State non-parties,
the OPCW is mandated to cooperate closely with the
United Nations Secretary-General and that, if so
requested, it will put its resources at the Secretary-
General's disposal.

Since the Convention entered into force in 1997,
we have trained more than 2,300 first responders
within our States parties. For instance, in October 2005
we conducted a field exercise, Joint Assistance 2005,
together with the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Ukraine. We
also conducted an exercise organized by the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and the Finnish Ministry of the Interior. In all
of these exercises, the hypothesis was an attack by
terrorists either on a plant or on facilities within States
members.

In just a couple of months, the OPCW will be
observing the tenth anniversary of its establishment
and of the entry into force of the Convention on
27 April 1997. During that short time, we have made
steady progress in carrying out our mandate. Indeed,
we take a measure of pride in what has been
accomplished in those 10 years.

The Convention and its disarmament and non-
proliferation agenda are being implemented effectively
and in an exemplary manner. Our States parties have
every reason to commemorate this important milestone
in the history of disarmament. As members may know,
I have extended a formal invitation on behalf of the
OPCW to the Secretary-General to attend the
commemoration ceremonies, which are to take place in
The Hague on 9 May 2007. I believe that his presence
and personal involvement in our commemoration
would symbolize not only his own support, but that of
the entire membership of the United Nations, for the
work of the OPCW, an organization that confirms daily
that even the most sensitive issues having to do with
disarmament and non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction can be dealt with multilaterally and by
consensus.

In closing, I wish to thank the members of the
Council for this timely opportunity to address them on
the work of the OPCW.

