Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, allow me to
join previous speakers in congratulating the Egyptian
presidency of the Council and expressing gratitude for
convening today's debate.

Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union earlier today. In
addition, I would like to make some comments in my
national capacity.

The violence and brutality inflicted by terrorists
on humanity is of grave concern. Egregious attacks on
innocent civilians in different parts of the world make
it obvious that terrorism - one of the most pressing
challenges for the contemporary world - has become
transnational and cross-border by its nature.

The situation in the Middle East overtly demonstrates
how inhumanely terrorists can abuse the opportunities
opened by modernity, modern technologies and growing
globalization. In a technological age, recruitment no
longer requires face-to-face communication. Da'esh
terrorists are using modern encrypted networks, which
poses a huge obstacle to law enforcement agencies in
the process of combating terrorism. No single State can
have full access to the relevant data.

To counter those challenges, Georgia has
significantly streamlined its procedures for
intelligence-sharing, and our special agencies have
demonstrated the good practices of successful
international cooperation. We added new articles
to the criminal code, criminalizing participation in
international terrorism and recruitment for membership
in a terrorist organization. We also amended existing
terrorist articles in accordance with the provisions of
relevant international treaties and best practices. We
have undertaken certain technical measures to tighten
border control, including strengthening document
security. Georgian law enforcement uses cameras,
United Nations sanctions lists, terrorist watch lists and
advance passenger name records on commercial flights
at ports of entry, all of which helps detect potential
terrorist movement. Georgia has adopted a strategy
and action plan for combating money-laundering and
terrorist financing. The Government established the
Interagency Commission on Implementation of United
Nations Security Council Resolutions to coordinate the
Government's immediate compliance with resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001).

But despite the progress achieved, the Russian-
occupied territories of Georgia continue to represent a
major challenge for the Government of Georgia in its
efforts to combat terrorism. Those areas, like black
holes, could serve as a safe harbour for terrorists and
other radical extremist groups that could potentially
destablize the security situation in the entire region,
while the seaports in the occupied areas could also be
used for transporting foreign terrorist fighters.

The occupied regions of Georgia, like any other
grey zones throughout the world where legitimate
national and international mechanisms are nonexistent,
have also been used for various illegal activities,
including the smuggling of nuclear and radioactive
materials. In that connection, I would like to remind
the Council that over the past years, there have been
a number of attempts at smuggling nuclear and
radioactive materials through the occupied regions.
The perpretrators were apprehended by the Georgian
authorities, and the international community has been
duly informed about that.

Full compliance with the obligations under the
relevant international arrangements - such as the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological
Weapons Convention, resolution 1540 (2004) and
so on - must stand out as the top priority for the
international community. In that regard, I would like to
remind the Council that, in cooperation with the United
Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research
Institute, the Government of Georgia organized high-
level side events in October 2014 and again in 2015
on topics related to chemical, biological, radiological
or nuclear (CBRN) risk reduction. In December 2015,
Georgia, the Kingdom of Morocco and the Republic
of the Philippines, as the Co-Chairs, established
the United Nations Group of Friends on CBRN Risk
Mitigation and Security Governance. It is aimed
at promoting various CBRN-related topics in the
United Nations by actively engaging with the Member
States and the United Nations Secretariat. The Group
will help to integrate the CBRN component in the
international security architecture and foster regional
and subregional cooperation on CBRN challenges.
As we held our second meeting at the ambassadorial
level in April, we once again encouraged other States
participating in the European Union's Risk Mitigation
Centres of Excellence Initiative to join the Group.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Georgia's resolve
and determination to further engage with our partner
countries and international organizations with the
common objective of reducing threats posed by
terrorism and violent extremism.

