Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): There was a moment in
history when we were all hopeful that there would be
peace in Israel and Palestine. That is no longer the case.
The hope for a just and lasting settlement has never
been lower. However, this gloomy picture could have
been avoided. It was not inevitable and is the result of
deliberate steps.

We are seeing increasing pressure on the daily lives
of Palestinians. Gaza is still under a blockade. Israeli
security forces use increasingly excessive force against
Palestinian civilians. There are restrictions for the
Muslims who want to visit Haram al-Sharif. Recently,
we have seen the displacement of Bedouins from
Khan Al-Ahmar and the introduction of the Jewish
nation-State law, which disregard the basic rights of
the Palestinian people. The aim of such measures is to
pressure Palestinians into accepting the status quo by
enforcing hardship and humiliation.

We are also witnessing systematic efforts to
undermine the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. That is an attempt to change the terms of
reference of the Middle East conflict and destroy the
hope for a two-State solution. We are entitled to our
own views but not to our own facts. According to
international law, the Palestinians have the right to
their own State based on the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. That cannot be changed.
According to United Nations resolutions, Palestinians
have the right to return to their homeland. That cannot
be withheld. The refugee status of the people of
Palestine is a legitimate right and cannot be used as a
bargaining chip. The Israeli settlements in the occupied
territories are illegal and cannot be ignored. Those are
facts and are based on international law.

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) is the
most recent target of the efforts to collectively punish
the Palestinians. The services provided by UNRWA are
vital to meet the basic needs of the Palestinian refugees
and to show that they are not forgotten. The Agency
also plays a critical role in the stability of the region.
Last month, schools for hundreds of thousands of
Palestinian children across Palestine, Jordan, Lebanon
and Syria were reopened. Who is going to benefit ifthe
Palestinians are subjected to more difficulty?

As Chair of the UNRWA Advisory Commission
and the Working Group on the Financing of UNRWA,
Turkey is proud to support the Agency's work and
has increased its annual contribution. We have
also requested traditional donors to increase their
contributions, and we have been working to expand the
donor base of UNRWA. During the high-level week,
we co-hosted a landmark meeting, during which we
mobilized $122 million. We expect all countries to step
up and help UNRWA.

It is high time to stand forjustice and the protection
of the established parameters for a lasting peace in
Palestine. The international community must fulfil its
moral responsibility. Turkey is ready to do its part.

