Mr. Seger (spoke in French): Allow me at the
outset to thank you, Sir, for having invited me to speak
in my capacity as Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).

I returned from a weeklong visit to Burundi in
late October, and my impressions in the field largely
confirmed the assessment and analysis contained in the
outstanding report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/751) and in Ms. Karin Landgren's briefing.
The country has indeed achieved some progress in
various fields, including the establishment of the
National Independent Human Rights Commission,
which Ms. Landgren just spoke of, the establishment of
an Office of the Ombudsman; and by continuing with
the transitional justice process.

I was particularly impressed by the President of
the National Independent Human Rights Commission
and the Ombudsman, who, through their commitment
and integrity, are contributing to improve the
functioning of institutions, good governance and
respect for human rights. Such institutions are
important to bolstering confidence between the people
and the authorities.

However, the various contacts that I had with
several representatives of civil society, State
institutions and representatives of the international
community on the ground confirmed the observations
made in the report of the Secretary-General to the
effect that considerable challenges remain on the path
to peacebuilding.

In my view, the three major obstacles to be
overcome are the socio-economic situation, the
political gulf between the Government and the extra-
parliamentary opposition, and, linked to this, the
human rights situation. As the report of the Secretary-
11-62586
General lists those shortcomings in detail, I shall not
repeat them here in order to save time. I merely wish to
say that I share his views.

This shows, in my opinion, that the bases for the
cooperation between the Commission and the
Government of Burundi, upon which we reached
agreement, as noted in the April 2011 document of
which I spoke during my previous briefing last May,
remain valid. However, given the developments in the
situation and the wishes of the Government of Burundi,
the PBC in future will place a heavier accent on
resource mobilization so as to implement the country's
poverty reduction strategy.

Indeed, the integration into society of groups
affected by conflict enables them to live in dignity and
also minimizes the risk of former combatants taking up
arms once again and returning to violence because of a
lack of alternatives. This is particularly true in the case
of young people, among whom the unemployment rate
remains very high. Work would not only give them a
sense of purpose in life but also the feeling of being an
integral part of society. In that respect, socio-economic
integration is a key pillar of peacebuilding.

I was particularly struck by the case of an
18-year-old, a former Forces nationales de liberation
combatant, who created a rice-producing association
jointly with local women with support from the PBC
Fund. That association made a profit of $7,000, which
is a small fortune in Burundi, and is continuing with
that project. We must replicate such projects, but the
country cannot do this alone, without international
support.

The Peacebuilding Fund has recently, as
Ms. Landgren noted, additionally disbursed nearly
$10 million to support such projects, and my most
sincere thanks go to the Fund for that decision. But
although that contribution is welcome, it is not nearly
sufficient to meet demand. As Ms. Landgren stated, we
must find an additional $15 million in the short term.

Here I wish to add my voice to that of the
Secretary-General and the Special Representative in
appealing to the international community not to forget
Burundi. The Government of Burundi plans to convene
international meetings in 2012 so as to mobilize funds,
and the configuration itself will spare no effort in
promoting the success of such endeavours.
5

I am well aware of the fact that the international
environment is not exactly conducive to this kind of
undertaking. However, given the high cost of an
international peacekeeping operation, providing
financial support to solidifying political and economic
development in a country emerging from conflict
would be considerably less expensive and more
economical than a major operation. Key partners such
as the World Bank, with which I have already met three
times, and the African Development Bank, with which
I met recently in Tunis, are ready to work with the PBC
to support the economic recovery of Burundi.

The economic and social progress that
Government is rightly seeking for its people will not be
sustainable in the absence of the rule of law and stable,
reliable institutions. The Arab Spring has shown us to
what extent peace, human rights and economic and
social development are interdependent.

Like the Secretary-General, I urge the
Government of Burundi to ramp up and speed up its
efforts in connection with political dialogue, respect
for human rights and good governance. I call in
particular on the Government to allow opposition
parties that are not represented in the Government,
human rights defenders and journalists to carry out
their activities freely, with respect for the law, without
fear of being intimidated, threatened or physically
attacked.

Reports indicating that opposition members have
been detained or even arbitrarily killed by the forces of
law and order are worrisome and are a blot on
Burundi's image as a democratic, peaceful country. It
is in the interest of the Government of Burundi that
such cases be addressed with seriousness and
objectivity and that the perpetrators be brought to
justice.

I also call on the opposition to abandon its
empty-chair policy, unequivocally distance itself from
all forms of violence and participate constructively in
political debate in the interests of the country. Like the
Secretary-General, I hope that the forthcoming
elections, scheduled for 2015, will allow all parties to
participate freely and equally. The elections will not
only be important for Burundi; I believe that they will
provide a assessment of our own endeavours to build
peace.

Every time I visit Burundi I am quite impressed
by the richness and human quality of the country. Its
6

people deserve a better future, and as a country
configuration we are ready to contribute to that. Based
on the reactions I have had from many conversations, I
believe that the follow-up by the PBC and my visits to
the country are appreciated. They are a signal to
Burundians that the international community and New
York have not forgotten them.

The fact that the Commission is a body made up
of States gives it significant political clout. For States
that give Burundi financial support, the involvement of
the PBC assures them that the country is part of a
structure that affords a platform for regular and
institutional dialogue on all peacebuilding-related
issues. The PBC's support helps complete the excellent
operational work that the Special Representative and
her team are doing on the ground and without which
the PBC could not fulfil its mandate. I should thank her
and her team sincerely for their work.

In conclusion, allow me to touch on the future of
the configuration in Burundi. When I briefed the
Council on 17 May (see S/PV.6538), I said that our
ultimate goal is to ensure that the Commission
becomes obsolete. The configuration has already
begun, flexibly and gradually, to prepare for that
transition. In the near future, however, as I have
already said, the PBC's big challenge will be to give
Burundi support in mobilizing resources for its
economic and social development. In that regard, the
Commission will focus its efforts on areas that are
closely related to support for conflict-affected groups
and the first pillar of the poverty-reduction strategy,
dealing with matters pertaining to peacebuilding. After
that we should be able to consider helping the country
attract private investment, since, ultimately, the people
of Burundi's prosperity will depend on developing its
private sector. The configuration is also willing to
support the national institutions that play a key role in
the areas of the rule of law and good governance, such
as the National Independent Human Rights
Commission and the Office of the Ombudsman.

Once those tasks are completed, it will be time to
take stock and decide together if and, should that be
the case, how cooperation with the configuration
should continue. Less intense support might be a
possibility. We are in any case heading in that direction
through holding meetings more often within the
steering group rather than convening the entire
configuration. I would like to thank warmly some of
the countries represented here in the Council that are
11-62586
especially active in the steering group, particularly
some African countries, the United Kingdom and
China and others. Their efforts have been extremely
important and very much appreciated.

As the Council will have noted, we still have
work to finish. I am ready to roll up my sleeves and
throw myself into those tasks as long as the
Government continues to show its interest and political
resolve to continue along this path with the
Commission.

