Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Let me first join my
colleagues in congratulating Poland on assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month. I thank the
Polish presidency for convening this timely debate. I
also want to thank all the briefers. Their briefings were
heart-breaking and some of the stories were not easy to
listen to, but we thank them. That information is very
much needed and appreciated.

My country, Georgia, aligns itselfwith the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. Let
me add the following remarks in my national capacity.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
landmark resolution 1882 (2009), but regrettably, 10
years later, boys and girls around the world continue
to live with the horrors of grave violations of their
rights 4 killing and maiming, recruitment and
exploitation, rape and other forms of sexual violence.
Children are the most vulnerable group and make up the
highest percentage of casualties of war, which last year
reached a staggering, record number of over 12,000.
The Secretary General's latest report on children and
armed conflict (S/2019/509), which takes note of those
figures, is absolutely appalling.

While we deplore those grave violations in
the strongest terms, it is also apparent that we, as
Member States, need to redouble our engagement
and do much more to support and strengthen child
protection mechanisms. In that sense, we welcome the
steps outlined in the report to improve the situation
of conflict-affected children globally, and appreciate
the significant efforts of United Nations agencies and
partners, including child protection actors working on
the ground.

Children and young people are exposed to even
greater risk of abuse when educational facilities become
the targets of attack during conflicts. That is in addition
to being deprived of their right to education and thus
of the realization of their hopes for the future. In that
context, let me underline the importance of the Safe
Schools Declaration, which is a significant instrument
for taking concrete actions towards safe schools for all
and thereby strengthening, in practice, the protection of
children and youth in armed conflict.

When it comes to the prevention of forced
recruitment and the use of children as soldiers,
strengthening adherence to the relevant international
legal instruments is of key importance. As a party
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its
Optional Protocol on the Involvement of Children
in Armed Conflict, as well as the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols of 1977,
Georgia is committed to upholding the norms for the
prohibition of recruitment and use of child soldiers. In
that connection, let me also mention that we recently
endorsed the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping
and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of
Child Soldiers.

While the Government of Georgia spares no effort
to protect children, their fundamental rights in Georgia's
occupied regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South
Ossetia continue to be violated by the occupying Power.
The prohibition of educating ethnic Georgians in both
regions in their native language remains a matter of
the greatest concern. In 2015, the Georgian language
was banned as a language of first-grade instruction at
the remaining Georgian schools in the Gali district,
gradually resulting in the total ban of native-language
education in the Abkhazia region. Teachers are subject
to immense pressure, with frequent raids at schools and
kindergartens, with the aim of uncovering evidence of
the use of the Georgian language, followed by frequent
repercussions. Since September 2017, education in their
native language has been banned in Georgian schools
in the Tskhinvali region as well.

Multifaceted restrictions on freedom of movement
further impede access to education, as children who
cross the occupation line to attend classes in Georgian
schools located in the vicinity of the Georgian-
controlled territory fall victim to Russian occupying
forces and must endure the forced inspection of their
schoolbags. If Georgian books are found, they are
detained for hours and suffer other forms of harassment
as well. The closure of the only remaining so-called
crossing point in the Abkhazia region in July has further
exacerbated the situation by preventing schoolchildren
from participating in exams for enrolment in the
universities located in the territory controlled by the
central Government. The arbitrary closure of the
crossing points causes additional problems for children,
such as access to health care, thereby making the
grave humanitarian conditions in the occupied regions
even worse.

In an attempt to address the issue of protection of
children and their rights in the occupied territories,
the Georgian Government's peace initiative, entitled
A Step to a Better Future, also seeks to improve the
humanitarian, social and economic conditions of the
population, including children and young people,
residing in the regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali by,
inter alia, enhancing their educational opportunities.
Despite the difficult context, I reaffirm Georgia's
strong and unwavering commitment to the protection of
the fundamental rights of the child. In that context, let
me also underline the importance of the international
community taking a consistent and firm stance on
safeguarding children's rights in conflict-affected
areas everywhere in the world, including the occupied
regions of Georgia, so no one is left behind.

