Mr. Jagne (Gambia): The tragic humanitarian
situation in and around Kosovo, which has been at the top
of the international agenda for some time now, continues to
unfold. Meanwhile, the policies and practices of ethnic
cleansing and deportation also continue unabated. Worse
still, there appears to be no end in sight to such practices,
which one would think would have been consigned a long
time ago to the cesspool of history. It must be recognized,
however, that, the urgent need to respond to the
humanitarian crisis notwithstanding, the underlying political
problems should also be given all the attention that they
deserve, because the longer we postpone the search for a
durable solution, the longer the suffering of the refugees
will continue. There is absolutely no doubt about that. This
is why my delegation believes that the principles outlined
by the Group of Eight leaders constitute a credible basis for
a lasting solution to the Kosovo crisis. We urge all
concerned to work towards that aim, as reflected in the
draft resolution before the Council. It is our sincere hope
that all the refugees will return home to the land of their
birth in safety and dignity. But this will remain an dream
so long as there is no settlement within the framework of
the Group of Eight principles. Those principles offer the
best guarantees for creating conditions most conducive to
a decent life free from fear and persecution.

At this juncture, my delegation would like to
commend the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for the wonderful job that it is
doing to provide humanitarian assistance to all those in
need. We also commend other members of the United
Nations family, such as the United Nations Children's
Fund, the World Health Organization and the World Food
Programme to mention but a few, which are helping to
reach out to the needy, sometimes under difficult and
dangerous conditions. We also recognize the important
contribution of a number of non-governmental
organizations in the face of all the risks to which they are
exposed. The safety and security of all humanitarian
personnel is of major concern to us, and we hope that this
concern will always be borne in mind by all wherever
they are rendering their selfless services. In this
connection, it is necessary to facilitate access for them
and to provide assistance to them in carrying out their
humanitarian operations.
It is gratifying to note that there is international
ownership of the Kosovo humanitarian crisis. But, as the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees pointed
out the other day, the Security Council should not
overlook the humanitarian situation in other parts of the
world, notably in Africa, where we have the highest
refugee population in the world. We certainly appreciate
all the efforts being made to alleviate the suffering of
refugees in Africa and elsewhere, but the fact remains
that we still need more help. In this regard, another
manifestation of the international ownership of refugee
crises would be most welcome. We are raising this issue
for two main reasons. First, my own country, the Gambia,
has been hosting refugees from our subregion for some
time now and, secondly, the causes that lead people to
seek refuge elsewhere may be different, but the effect is
always the same, that is, human suffering, which is the
subject of our discussion today.

That is why my delegation joined in sponsoring the
draft resolution before us and why we shall vote in its
favour.

