Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): At the outset,
my delegation wishes to thank Ambassador Jan Grauls,
Ambassador Neven Jurica and you, Mr. President, in
the capacity of Chairmen of the 1267 Committee, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the 1 540
Committee, respectively, for the briefings on the work
of the three Committees during the past six months. We
would like to commend the three Committees, under
the leadership of their Chairmen and with the
assistance of their expert bodies - namely, the
Monitoring Team, the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED) and the 1540 Expert Group - for
having accomplished a good volume of activities.

We take note of the survey of the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) by Member
States (see S/2008/379) adopted by Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and submitted to the Council in June
2008. While noting the Committee's intention to
further improve the survey, my delegation wishes to
reaffirm that any regional or subregional approach
taken by the CTC should pay attention to the particular
conditions of each country and encourage the
participation of all countries in the region or subregion.

We continue to support the CTC in carrying out
its programme of work and in its participation in
promoting the implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We encourage the
Committee's efforts to improve its dialogues with
Member States, such as providing Member States with
opportunities to present their views to the Committee
with regard to visits to their countries or the contents
of their preliminary implementation assessments
(PIAs).

The 1267 Committee has focused its efforts on
implementing the new measures introduced in
resolution 1822 (2008), which are intended to further
improve the transparency and effectiveness of the 1267
sanctions regime. Those efforts should continue to get
the guidance and support of the Council. The 1267
Committee should also find ways to improve Member
States' understanding of those new measures, such as
by providing interested States with opportunities to
seek clarification or exchange views with the
Committee in informal settings.

The 1540 Committee also made important
achievements, including the adoption in July 2008 of
the second report on the status of implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) (S/2008/493, annex). We take
note of the Committee's outreach activities. We are
keen to learn more about its enhanced role in
facilitating requests for assistance from Member States.

Cooperation and coordination among the three
Committees and their expert bodies are very important.
We follow with interest the preparation of the third
subregional common strategy workshop for the
Northern and Eastern African States, to be held in
Kenya from 11 to 13 November 2008, and look
forward to reports on its outcomes. We hope the
participation by representatives of CTED, the
Monitoring Team and the 1540 Expert Group in the
1540-specific workshops next year will further
improve coordination in the work of the three expert
bodies.
In conclusion, my delegation calls on the
Committees to continue looking for ways and means to
engage in constructive dialogues with Member States
to enhance Members' support for the Committees'
initiatives. We continue to pledge our cooperation with
other members for further success in the work of the
three Committees.

