Ms. Zappone (Ireland): Iwould like to thank today's
briefers and, in particular, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, for providing valuable
testimony for today's debate.

Ireland also aligns itself with the comments
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

We are here today to discuss a topic that none of
us would wish to have to discuss. As the Minister for
Children and Youth Affairs of Ireland, my focus is on
helping to build a better, safer society for children and
young people. They are our future. However, despite the
progress we have made in some areas, the Secretary-
General's report on children and armed conflict
(S/2017/821) highlights very worrying trends. They
include a disturbing increase in the number of child
victims of conflict, as well as a considerable increase in
the recruitment and use of children in certain conflict
situations. It also points to an increasing disrespect for
international humanitarian law and the impact that that
has on Children.

During a conflict, existing social, financial and
physical barriers to education are often compounded
by indiscriminate or targeted attacks on places of
education. The targeting of civilian infrastructure,
including schools and hospitals, can have devastating
consequences for children's health, safety and
education. Ireland's humanitarian assistance policy
recognizes that children are often disproportionately
affected by conflict. Children have always been the
most vulnerable in conflict situations to the effects of
malnutrition and disease, but other risks that threaten
the well-being of children include separation from
families or other caregivers, recruitment into armed
forces or groups, economic exploitation, physical or
sexual abuse, gender-based violence and physical and
psychological distress. Warlords, criminals and thugs
have placed them on the front lines.

Ireland shares the deep concern expressed by others
about children separated from their loved ones by war,
terror and human smuggling. A year ago, I instructed
our Child and Family Agency, Tusla, to establish a
national project office to assist children living alone
in the former "jungle camp" at the French port of
Calais. We are now assisting 30 young people who
have fled conflicts in Africa and Asia to restart their
lives in Ireland. I can confirm today that, in the next
two weeks, Tusla teams will meet and assess another
11 children for arrival into Ireland. We have built the
capacity to do so, and I am determined that we will play
a strong role in assisting, supporting and protecting
separated children. The protection of women and girls
from gender-based violence and sexual exploitation and
abuse in crisis and conflict situations is a priority for
Ireland. As Chair of the United Nations Commission
on the Status of Women this year and next year, Ireland
will embed the women and peace and security agenda
in all areas of its work.

Civil society has a crucial role to play in supporting
vulnerable and at-risk children. Ireland is proud
to support the important work being done by the
International Committee of the Red Cross and National
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in locating
children who have been separated from their families
by conflict or displacement, with a View to reuniting
them with their relatives. Ireland also supports the
International Commission on Missing Persons, which
focuses on conflict, post-conflict and natural-disaster
situations. The Secretary-General's report highlights
a number of issues for Children who are victims of
the conflict in Colombia. Ireland is pleased to be
offering assistance for the implementation of the peace
agreements, including projects on gender and justice.
As we approach the twentieth anniversary of the Good
Friday Agreement, we know from our own experience
of peacebuilding the importance of those issues.

The Secretary-General's report outlines very
clearly the dire situation facing children in many
conflict situations, and, put simply, too often children
bear the brunt of adult conflicts. No one is perfect.
We know only too well in Ireland the consequences
that can flow from not always protecting, valuing and
listening to our children. That is why we must all step
up our efforts to protect children, not least in and from
conflict. Given its mandate, the Security Council has
particular responsibility to ensure that it is using its
tools and mechanisms effectively to end violations
against children.

Once again, Madam President, I thank you for
organizing today's very timely and important debate.

