Mr. Levitte (France)(spoke in French): I wish to
thank Ms. Carolyn McAskie, acting Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for her accurate and detailed briefing,
which is very useful for our Security Council because
it sheds light on a misunderstood or little known aspect
of the tragedy being experienced by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo: the humanitarian situation.
Therefore, I also wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
having taken the initiative of organizing this Security
Council meeting on this vital question.

Our debate today is an important stage in the
work being done by the Security Council this month on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It clarifies our reflection on the international
community's attitude to the conflict in this country. In
two weeks we will be making decisions on United
Nations action in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and the Council must be in a position to
express a view when it has examined all the aspects of
the question.

The humanitarian aspects are, in our view,
essential. As Ms. McAskie has rightly emphasized, the
situation is tragic. In addition to Ms. McAskie's
briefing, we also bear in mind the information provided
by the Special Rapporteur on human rights in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Garreten,
whom the Security Council heard in October during an
"Arria" meeting. Mr. Garreton gave a briefing on
human rights violations throughout the country,
emphasizing in particular that the most basic right, the
right to life, was scorned, particularly in the eastern
part of the country. Mr. Garreten's report lists of
massacres of the civilian population and inter-ethnic
confrontations in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

We also bear in mind information transmitted to
us by non-governmental organizations. I refer
particularly to the report issued in June 2000 by the
American organization International Rescue
Committee, which estimated that from August 1998 to
May 2000 the conflict had caused the death of more
than 1.7 million persons in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo alone.

I do not mean to join in a battle of figures here,
but two essential points must be recalled: first, the
victims of conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo number in the hundreds of thousands,
unfortunately; and, secondly, the deaths result, on the
one hand, from the violence committed against
civilians and the resultant displacement of populations,
and, on the other hand, from the interruption of
assistance caused by instability in the area and the lack
of access to these populations. Thus the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has tragic
humanitarian consequences.

We must be aware that this crisis is political and
military. The current situation is deeply rooted in the
tragedies of the Great Lakes region over the last
decade. The immediate cause of the conflict is the
crisis that was triggered in August 1998. We must
therefore give the Congolese humanitarian support to
help them meet their immediate needs, and in this spirit
we encourage the actions of the United Nations
agencies, the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) and non-governmental organizations.

As part of the European Union, France is also
providing assistance through the European Community
Humanitarian Office (ECHO), which this year has set
up a programme to provide health care and assistance
to displaced persons.

However, we must also contribute to a political
settlement of this conflict. That is the responsibility of
our Council. Efforts to implement the Lusaka
Agreement and the relevant Security Council
resolutions have encountered many difficulties, but the
United Nations must continue to pursue those efforts.
I should like to say once again what I have often said
during our debates: we must not give up. How could
we give up, after hearing Carolyn McAskie's
comments?

In the coming days, the Security Council will be
called upon to decide, on the basis of recommendations
to be made by the Secretary-General, what support
MONUC can provide to the settlement process. France
believes that we must continue to pursue our efforts.
Here, I would like to endorse a point that our Argentine
colleague has just forcefully underlined: MONUC must
retain the resources envisaged for it last February so
that it can fully play its role, and these resources must
be effectively deployed.

In the light of our debate today, we will have to
consider whether MONUC can also play a role in
better evaluating the humanitarian situation and
thereby contribute to the assistance effort. In this
regard, we believe that it would be desirable to
strengthen the civilian component of the United
Nations mission. In several conflict situations, the
United Nations has incorporated a civilian component
into its on-site missions, particularly in missions with
both a civilian and military aspect, such as was the case
until 1998 in Angola. It is also the case in Afghanistan
at present, where there are civilian observers as part of
the United Nations Special Mission in Afghanistan.
Such a civilian observer component, as distinct from
military observers, could perhaps play a useful role
within MONUC in assessing the situation and ensuring
liaison with civil society.

Naturally, the conditions for deploying such
civilian observers- in particular with regard to
security- would have to be examined carefully.
Ilistened to the comments of our colleague from
Canada, and I, too, would like to hear Ms. McAskie's
opinion on that matter. I would also be interested to
hear her thoughts about my comments regarding the
possibility of deploying civilian observers within
MONUC in order to play a supplementary role.

