Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): We would ask you,
Sir, to convey our congratulations to the new
Permanent Representative of your country on the
occasion of his assuming the presidency of the
Council.

We are very grateful for the contributions made to
our debate by Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union - whom I
welcome to the Council - and by Ms. Nkosazana
Dlamini Zuma, Minister for Foreign Affairs of South
Africa. I would also like to join others in thanking
President Romano Prodi for his presentation of the
report of the African Union-United Nations panel
(S/2008/813) and for his very able leadership in
preparing it.
Austria fully supports the statement to be
delivered later today by the representative of the Czech
Republic on behalf of the European Union.

Austria commends the panel for the efforts it has
made in addressing the key issue of enhancing support
for African Union peacekeeping and in presenting
recommendations in that regard. The report of the
panel comes at a very timely moment. Just a few weeks
ago, the Security Council began to examine key
questions related to United Nations peacekeeping. At a
time when operational resources are scarce within the
United Nations, we must develop ways to enhance our
cooperation with regional organizations such as the
African Union.

Over the past few decades, United Nations
peacekeeping has changed tremendously in terms of its
nature and scope. Our response to the evolving
challenges must be updated accordingly. Strengthening
the capacities of the African Union is an essential
prerequisite if the African Union is to take on a more
significant burden in contributing to peace and security
in Africa.

The panel has made several proposals on how to
address that issue, including the development of a
comprehensive plan for long-term capacity-building
and the establishment of a multi-donor trust fund. Such
a trust fund could help to build synergies among the
efforts of various donors and thereby increase the
overall impact of their contributions. It could also help
to prevent possible funding gaps. African ownership
should be our guiding principle in the design and
implementation of such a mechanism. The positive
experience gained in the context of the African Peace
Facility of the European Union could serve as an
example.

In its report, the panel also outlines a possible
way to support African Union-led peacekeeping
missions under a United Nations mandate through
United Nations-assessed contributions at the very
beginning of a peacekeeping mission, before rehatting
by the United Nations has taken place. As I have
already said, we are in favour of enhanced participation
by the African Union in crisis management in Africa.
Therefore, we believe that all possible options aimed at
supporting African Union-led peacekeeping missions
under a United Nations mandate need to be discussed
and explored.
Each crisis or conflict is different. A one-size-
fits-all solution is, therefore, neither possible nor
effective. There might be cases in which an African
Union-led operation might be more effective than a
United Nations mission, or other cases in which the
United Nations might decide that it is time to reduce its
presence in a country and hand over to the African
Union. Each of those cases might require a different
support package.

09-2716]
The recent resolution 1863 (2009), on supporting
the African Union Mission to Somalia, provided an
example in which the Council took a decision based on
the specific needs of that country, setting up a support
mechanism through access to assessed contributions
and a voluntary trust fund. I believe that members are
aware of the important role that the African Peace
Facility of the European Union plays in that context.

Austria looks forward to receiving the Secretary-
General's assessment of the various options for
supporting African Union peacekeeping. As I have
said, we believe it is important that all possible options
be explored. The question of putting in place adequate
accountability mechanisms is also critical, and we
would certainly welcome proposals by the Secretary-
General in that regard. Addressing important cross-
cutting issues, such as respect for international law;
human rights, especially the rights of women and
children, in the situation of an armed conflict; and the
protection of civilians should be an integral part of our
approach.

Let me conclude by saying that we are grateful to
the presidency of the Security Council for having
begun the discussion on this very important issue
today. We look forward to continuing our deliberations
on the basis of a report of the Secretary-General.

