Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): Allow
me first to welcome the presence of the President of
Serbia among us today, as well as that of the Secretary-
General.

Today, the Security Council is considering, once
again, the question of the status of Kosovo. In October
2005, the Council supported the Secretary-General's
proposal to initiate a political process that was to
produce a definition of Kosovo's future status, as
envisioned in resolution 1244 (1999). It was a process
in which the international community, including the
Council, were widely involved and a process that
neither of the two parties could block unilaterally, as
the ministers of the Contact Group emphasized on
20 September 2007. Despite the engagement of the two
parties, Serbia and Kosovo, the Security Council and
the international community as a whole, a negotiated
solution could not be found. We regret this, but we
cannot ignore the reality on the ground: the Kosovar
authorities have declared independence in keeping with
the will of a broad majority of the population of
Kosovo.

Belgium will recognize Kosovo. The legal
process is under way. For Belgium, this independence
effectively and finally sets out the necessary conditions
for a lasting peace and for stability and prosperity for
the entire region and its inhabitants, regardless of
08-24256
ethnic origin or nationality. It is within that essential
framework that Kosovo's declaration calls into being a
democratic, secular, multi-ethnic society fully
respectful of the rights of all minorities.

Belgium's position on this matter is well known,
and we have described it many times. However, on
this, the day after the declaration of independence, I
would like to recall several essential points. A year
ago, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Martti Ahtisaari, presented us with his report and his
recommendations. His conclusion - independence,
supervised by the international community - was
supported by a very wide range of the members of the
international community, including the Secretary-
General and the European Union (EU). Belgium has
always felt that the Ahtisaari plan was the only realistic
and Viable option. Belgium is gratified at the
commitment expressed by the Kosovar authorities to
implement the provisions of the Ahtisaari plan, inter
alia, by the Kosovo Assembly's adoption of the
so-called Ahtisaari laws in the days to come.
Independence is not only a privilege; it is first and
foremost a responsibility.

In recent days the European Union has taken
important decisions, in full conformity with resolution
1244 (1999). These unambiguously show that the EU
itself is ready to shoulder its responsibilities and work
alongside the Kosovar authorities on their important
commitments towards the international community.
The new European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) is concrete testament to that.

Europe's commitment is not restricted to Kosovo.
I would like to avail myself of President Tadie's
presence to reaffirm once again the Belgian and
European position that the future of Serbia and the
Western Balkans in general lies within, and not outside,
the European Union. A strong and prosperous Serbia,
fully integrated into the family of European nations,
will contribute to stability and prosperity in the entire
region. This morning European ministers met in
Brussels and reaffirmed this position. We encourage
Belgrade to resolutely opt for a European future.

Kosovo's independence is situated within a
historical context that no one can ignore: the
disintegration of Yugoslavia, which led to the creation
of new independent States. The independence of
Kosovo is part of this framework and can thus in no
way be considered to set a precedent.
Finally, it is important that Belgrade and Pristina
develop a strong relationship as good neighbours based
on cooperation, which will enable them to jointly bring
about the European perspective that is unquestionably
theirs. It is important in that context that in the short
term no provocation or act of violence jeopardize the
possibility of attaining that goal.

Kosovo's independence under international
supervision, proposed a year ago by former Special
Envoy Ahtisaari, is now a reality. We are convinced
that its offers the best prospect for peace, stability and
prosperity in the region. All of us must now contribute
to achieving that peaceful objective.

