Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium associates itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union.

At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Representative Yamamoto not only for his briefing
but also for his tireless efforts towards lasting peace
in Afghanistan.

In the most recent debate on Afghanistan in the
Security Council (see S/PV.8199), Belgium welcomed
and supported the historic peace offer made by President
Ghani and his National Unity Government. That offer
was supported by the countries of the region, as well as
the international community, including at the Tashkent
conference on 27 March. Despite the annual launch of
the Taliban's spring offensive, the offer has found deep
resonance across the country in a civic movement for
peace and reconciliation. Another essential contribution
to peace was made on 14 May with the agreement on
the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and
Solidarity between those two countries.

Belgium notes with satisfaction the announcement
that parliamentary and district council elections will
be held on 20 October. It is important that that date
be kept. Belgium notes the significant efforts of the
Government, as well as the courage ofthe population, to
register for the elections. It is also essential that women
have an opportunity to participate in the elections both
as voters and as candidates. The process leading to
the holding of elections must be inclusive, transparent
and credible.

It is also very important to underscore that necessary
reforms must continue in Afghanistan, as outlined in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/539). Belgium
welcomes the fact that the effectiveness of the law to
combat violence against women is being strengthened
and encourages the Afghan Government to redouble its
efforts in the fight against impunity. In that context,
the implementation of the existing legal framework is
key. The anti-harassment of women and children law,
enacted on 31 December 2017, is a step forward in
improving complaints procedures and clarifying what
constitutes harassment in public spaces.

Since the beginning of the year, Belgium has been
working alongside Afghanistan in the Human Rights
Council. We welcome Afghanistan's accession to the
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture,
which is a strong sign of its commitment to human
rights. I believe that we should underscore that fact as
we mark the International Day in Support of Victims
of Torture. We welcome the offer of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to assist
the Government in the practical operationalization of
the commitments set out in the Protocol.

Belgium deplores the increase in the recruitment
and use of children by parties to the conflict and
supports the Secretary-General's call on all parties to
put an immediate stop to such grave violations. They
cannot go unpunished. We call on the Government to
bring the perpetrators to justice and to assess how return
and rehabilitation mechanisms can be strengthened.

Attacks on schools and medical centres continue.
We thank UNAMA for the careful monitoring of those
gross violations of international humanitarian law.
Such attacks remind us that the efforts of all parties
concerned to implement resolution 2286 (2016), on
conflict and health care, must be intensified.

In conclusion, Belgium commends President Ghani
and his Government on their unwavering commitment
to peace despite myriad challenges. The ball is indeed
in the Taliban's court.

