Mr. O'Brien: Let me take Council members to East
Aleppo this afternoon. In a deep basement, huddled
with our children and elderly parents, the stench of
urine and the vomit caused by unrelieved fear never
leaving our nostrils, waiting for the bunker-busting
bomb we know may kill us in this, the only sanctuary
left to us, just like the one that took out our neighbours
and their house last night; or scrabbling with our bare
hands in the street above to reach under concrete
rubble, lethal steel reinforcing bars jutting out at us as
we hysterically try to reach our young child screaming
unseen in the dust and dirt below our feet, choking to
catch our breath in the toxic dust and the smell of gas
ever ready to ignite and explode over us.

These are people just like us - not sitting around
a table in New York but forced into desperate, pitiless
suffering, their future wiped out. These are constant,
harrowing reports and images of people detained,
tortured, forcibly displaced, maimed and executed.
Bombings take place in plain sight, night and day, day
in and day out. Hospitals are destroyed, doctors killed,
schools destroyed and children denied education, water
stations destroyed, families cowering in basements.
Peoples' lives are destroyed and Syria itselfis destroyed.
And it is under our collective watch.

And it need not be like this; this is not inevitable. It
is not an accident; it is the deliberate actions of one set
of powerful human beings on another set of impotent,
innocent human beings. Never has the phrase of poet
Robert Burns, "man's inhumanity to man", been as
apt. It can be stopped, but the Security Council has
to choose to make it stop. And I would ask members
to remember that the world is not going to think the
worse of them for loss of face or power politics. Global
leadership is about doing the right thing to stop the
draining of the blood of Syrians. Syria is now a country
that will soon no longer resemble even the most basic
definition of a country. We should all remember that
Syria was one of the first signatories of the Charter of
the United Nations - "We the peoples".

As the Secretary-General pointed out last week,
the Aleppo offensive by Syrian and Russian military
forces has been the most sustained and intensive aerial
bombardment campaign witnessed since the beginning
ofthe conflict more than halfa decade ago. The results in
human terms have been horrific. Aleppo has essentially
become a kill zone. Since my last briefing to the Council
less than a month ago (see S/PV.7780), 400 more people
have been killed and nearly 2,000 injured in eastern
Aleppo. So many of them - too many of them - were
children. Last week, the High Commissioner for Human
Rights stated that indiscriminate air strikes across
the eastern parts of the city by Syrian and Russian
forces caused the overwhelming majority of civilian
casualties. He stressed that

"these violations constitute war crimes [and]
if knowingly committed as part of a widespread or
systematic attack directed against civilians, they
constitute crimes against humanity".

In amongst this apocalyptic horror in eastern
Aleppo, there have been cruel glimmers of hope, but
they are too quickly extinguished. Throughout last
week, following the welcome announcement of a halt of
all Russian and Syrian air strikes on Aleppo, the United
Nations, together With the Syrian Arab Red Crescent,
the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Syrian non-governmental organizations, immediately
set up plans to urgently evacuate critically injured and
sick people, as well as their family members, from
eastern Aleppo to places of their choosing. Our brave,
tireless humanitarian teams, led by the United Nations
Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator
in Aleppo itself, engaged in long and complex
negotiations involving multiple rounds of clarifications
on conditions and guarantees.

It is with intense frustration that I note that the
evacuations were obstructed by various factors,
including delays in receiving the list of patients to be
medically evacuated from the very representatives and
interlocutors of the people in eastern Aleppo, as well
as the Government of Syria's objection to allowing
medical and other relief supplies into the eastern side
of the city.

Despite these delays, the United Nations was
ready to launch our operations on Sunday, 23 October.
However, objections by two non-State armed
opposition - Ahrar al-Sham and Harakat Nour al-Din
al-Zenki - scuppered these plans. The United Nations
made every effort to get assurances from all parties,
only for the parties to then fail to agree on each other's
conditions about how evacuations should proceed. And
then we could not prevail upon the Syrian and Russian
authorities to extend their pause. Our teams stayed for
another 24 hours and the bombs were dropping within
500 yards of the fighting line before, disappointed and
frustrated, they managed to leave Aleppo, with two
staff members of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and one from the World Health
Organization bravely staying in Aleppo, where they
remain today, to try salvage the talks.

And the result? Once again, humanitarian hopes
have been smashed by parties who consistently fail
to put civilian lives above political and military
interests. For example, two children aged 9 and
14 - suffering from heart problems and intestinal
disease, respectively - were to be evacuated for urgent
medical treatment, but now remain trapped in eastern
Aleppo city. These are neither soldiers nor sympathizers
nor militants; they are children in urgent need ofmedical
care, and we, the international community, have just
failed to reach them. Goodness knows we have tried,
but selfish, inhuman interests have trumped the moral
and humanitarian imperative.

There will be complaints and accusations about
who caused the failure of the medical evacuations, but
it was those very complainers and those very accusers
who put their own interests above that of the injured
and sick, who refused to make reasonable compromises,
and who refused to allow anything to be done unless it
was their way. And their way was not possible. Yes,
they will fingerpoint at the United Nations - the one
party in all this that is not to blame- to attempt to
divert the blame from the perpetrators and refusers and
their hideous calumnies.

Humanitarian needs - the lives of children not
even in their teens - cannot be used as political or
military bargaining chips, and yet once again parties to
this terrible conflict have sought to do exactly that. It
is wrong for armed groups to hold to ransom the sick,
injured and children of those they cynically claim to
fight for. It was wrong for the air strikes to start again
when the bombers knew we still had a chance to get the
evacuees out.

Not only have the parties to the conflict not had
the moral fortitude to allow medical evacuations; the
Syrian and Russian forces from air and land could not
even demonstrate a willingness to protect what meagre
medical facilities still function inside eastern Aleppo.
Relentless attacks on health workers and hospitals have
left the handful of doctors still alive in eastern Aleppo
unable to cope. In fact, fewer than 30 doctors remain
in the east of the city, and only six partially functional
hospitals are still in service. Only 11 ambulances
are currently operative, rendering the collection of
injured people from the scenes of attack ever more
challenging. For many, it is impossible, so their fate is
left unattended. Hospital beds are too few, and essential
medicines - including anesthetics, intravenous fluids,
vaccines and trauma supplies - are running out.
Blankets are in such short supply that body bags are
being used for warmth instead:

Let me be clear - eastern Aleppo is besieged by
the Syrian Government. No United Nations assistance
has entered in nearly four months. Food is so scarce that
many people survive on one meal of rice a day, and what
is available in local markets is sold at vastly inflated
prices. At the same time, civilians are being bombed
by Syrian and Russian forces, and if they survive that
they will starve tomorrow. The tactics are as obvious
as they are intolerable - make life intolerable; make
death likely; push people from starvation to despair to
surrender; push people to leave on green buses.
The leaflets that have been dropped on eastern
Aleppo by Syrian and Russian aircraft operating in
that area make the intention chillingly clear. They read:
"This is your last hope... Save yourselves. If you do
not leave these areas urgently you will be annihilated"
And they end by saying: "You know that everyone has
given up on you. They left you alone to face your doom
and nobody will give you any help". And it is clear that
the aircraft that drop the bombs, the generals who give
the orders and the politicians who have designed the
strategy intend to make good on that horrific promise.

We have seen this happen numerous times
already - in Homs, Darayya, Moadamiya, Al-Waer
and now in eastern Aleppo. It will be the fate of those
hundreds ofthousands ofpeople still trapped in besieged
locations all across the country. That is not a world we
can accept. All parties and their sponsors must put an end
to these medieval tactics. All parties and their sponsors
must grant us safe humanitarian access - sustained and
non-politicized humanitarian and medical access - to
all in need throughout the country, to those in Aleppo
and the hundreds of thousands of people trapped in the
other 17 besieged locations around the country. Despite
what those abhorrent leaflets say, we must demonstrate
to the Syrian people that we have not given up on them,
that they are not left alone to their doom and that they
will not be annihilated.

In addition to the air offensive against eastern
Aleppo, and despite a brief lull in fighting last week
by Russian and Syrian air forces, non-State armed
opposition groups continued to fire mortars and other
projectiles into civilian neighbourhoods of western
Aleppo. In the past few days alone, scores of mortars
were fired into Hamdaniya, Zahra'a, Midan and
Sulaymaniya. Some landed right next to the Shahba
Hotel, forcing occupants, including United Nations
staff, to take shelter in bunkered rooms. Five people
were reported killed and 41 injured, including three
representatives of the Russian Centre for Reconciliation
in Aleppo, during the four days of the unilateral
pause. All in all throughout October, non-State armed
opposition groups fired more than 184 mortars and
other projectiles into western Aleppo, reportedly
killing at least 100 people, including 17 women and 22
children, and injuring 533 persons.

While the destruction of Aleppo - both east and
west - is perhaps the most distressing front in the
conflict at present, it is not the only place in which
humanitarian needs continue to rise, driven ever
higher by the relentless fighting. Hospitals and schools,
critical to both the survival and growth of communities
already trapped in conflict, continue to be targeted and
attacked, thus increasing the humanitarian crisis in
those areas. The precise details of what is happening
in other parts of Syria have been documented in the
Secretary-General's monthly report.

Government facilities have also come under
attack. In Hama non-State armed opposition groups
reportedly continued to push towards the city, now just
mere kilometres away from the city limits. Two suicide
bombings targeting a Government checkpoint and the
Baath party building in Hama city were reported on
2 October, with multiple casualties.

Each month I have come before the Security Council
and presented an ever-worsening record of destruction
and atrocity, grimly cataloguing the systematic
destruction of a country and its people. While my job
is to relay the facts to the Council, I cannot help but
be incandescent with rage. Month after month it is
worse and worse, and nothing is actually happening to
stop the war and the suffering. The Council has been
charged with the responsibility for ending this horror.
The buck stops with it. This litany of horror must surely
shake the Council's moral conscience, as it does around
the world. Surely the international community must
question the value they genuinely place in humankind,
when entire neighbourhoods in one of the world's oldest
cities risk annihilation, their residents treated with
gross contempt as nothing more than bricks and mortar
pounded into dust; when the destruction of hospitals
has become the new normal; when more than 100,000
children are trapped in basements with nowhere else
to hide.

This is the legacy that parties to the conflict and
their supporters leave as of today. We cannot turn back
the Clock on what has happened, but surely the Council
and its members can take some action to prevent the
endless repetition of the events that will surely occur
if the status quo is maintained. At the very minimum,
I call upon all Council members that have operational
military assets in Syria to take concrete steps to halt
the aerial bombardment of civilian areas in order to
deliver on their existing international obligations and,
above all, to protect civilians and allow us to deliver
humanitarian assistance to those in heed.

As already announced on 30 September, the
Secretary-General established an internal and
independent United Nations board of inquiry into the
horrific incident involving a United Nations-Syrian
Arab Red Crescent relief operation in Orem Al-Kubra
on 19 September. The board will by Lieutenant General
Abhijit Guha. He and his team have experience with
similar bodies and have expertise in areas relevant to
this investigation, including international humanitarian
law, humanitarian operations, munitions and explosives.
The board started its work earlier this week, and it is
expected to deliver its findings in early December.
The board's report will be an internal document of
the United Nations. However, the Secretary-General
intends to make available a summary of the board's
findings. I urge all parties concerned to extend their
full cooperation to the board.

As I have stated previously, deliberate interference
and restrictions by the parties to the conflict, most
notably the Syrian Government, continue to prevent
the effective delivery of aid. On 19 September, the
United Nations submitted its inter-agency convoy plan
for the month of October, which included requests to
reach some 962,000 people across 29 besieged, hard-
to-reach and priority cross-line locations. Based on
current procedures, a response was expected around
30 September. The Syrian authorities responded on
7 October, granting full and partial approvals for
25 locations and 63 per cent of the beneficiaries
requested by the United Nations, while denying access
to four locations. Denied locations included, once
again, eastern Aleppo, as well as three areas in rural
Damascus. Last week, on 18 October, the November
monthly inter-agency convoy plan was submitted to
the Syrian authorities. The plan includes 18 requests to
reach 904,500 people in need in 25 besieged and hard-
to-reach areas. A response is expected tomorrow.

To put things into perspective, last month only six
of the 33 requested locations were reached. In August
only four inter-agency convoys were deployed as a
result of late approvals of the monthly plan, delays in
the issuance of facilitation letters, requirements for
additional approvals above and beyond the two steps
agreed with the Government in April, lack of adherence
to agreed protocols at checkpoints and insecurity. For
same reasons, this month only five aid convoys have
been able to proceed so far: Duma on 19 October, Dar
Kabira on 20 October, Moadimiya this past Sunday,
Al-Houla on Monday and Al-Waer today.

All in all in the past three months, the United
Nations has been unable to deploy the first convoy
until the third week of the month. The first cross-line
convoy in August deployed only 23 August. The one in
September deployed on 19 September. And the one in
October deployed on 19 October. That means that no
aid reached many of those most in need in besieged and
hard-to-reach locations for the first three weeks of each
ofthe past three months. And while airlifts to Qamishly
continued these past few weeks, air drops to deir ez-
Zor needed to be suspended, as one Syrian Arab Red
Crescent volunteer was hit by shrapnel from shelling
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant while at the
collection site.

Moreover, the removal of lifesaving medicines
and medical supplies by the Syrian authorities, such
as surgical kits, midwifery kits and emergency kits,
has continued unabated. So far this year, between
January and September 220 tons of medical supplies
were delivered to besieged and hard-to-reach areas as
part of inter-agency convoys. But 65 tons of medicines
and medical supplies were not. These last few weeks
alone the Syrian authorities removed or prevented the
loading of nearly six tons of medical supplies, mostly
surgical materials, diarrhoeal and midwifery kits,
intravenous fluids, anesthetics and various medicines,
from inter-agency convoys: to Duma on 19 October,
Dar Kabira on 20 October, Moadamiya on 23 October,
Al-Waer on 24 September, Zabadani and Madayya on
25 September, and Al-Rastan and Duma- aborted- on
27 and 28 September. Those restrictions are not only
violations of international law and Security Council
resolutions, they are actions deliberately and cynically
designed to inflict more unnecessary suffering on
civilians living in besieged and hard-to-reach locations.

Throughout the country nearly 8 million children
have lost their parents, their homes and their schools.
They have suffered immense emotional and physical
trauma. Children in besieged eastern Aleppo were due to
resume school in late September. They did not. Instead,
shell-shocked children are retrieved from rubble and
left writhing in bloody clothes on dirty hospital floors.
They are stuck in hideouts. They cannot play, they
cannot sleep. That has become the reality for 100,000
children in eastern Aleppo. Across the country, as
many know, one in four schools has ceased to function.
More than 52,000 teachers have left their jobs. Over
2 million children remain out of school, and another
400,000 are at risk of dropping out as the horrors of this
brutal and savage war continue unabated. Hundreds of
thousands of Syrian children have become stateless. It

does not matter that many of us are trying to reach them
and would reach them if we could; those children who
are somehow just surviving, feeling abandoned by the
world, abandoned to face their future alone.
What future do these children have - illiterate,
orphaned, starved and maimed? What future does
a country have when its next generation is a lost
generation? These children do not have the luxury
of waiting for another Geneva, Vienna or Lausanne
agreement to succeed. They need our protection now.
What happened to "never again"? What happened to our
commitment to protect the most vulnerable, those who
face mass atrocities? What happened to the Council's
responsibility to act in a timely and decisive manner?
There is surely nothing timely nor decisive about the
world's approach to Syria thus far. The international
community cannot fail the children of Aleppo, as it did
in Srebrenica, Cambodia and Rwanda.

There is no question today as to whether the
members of the Council know what is going on - we
clearly and tragically do. The question today is: What
will we do? What steps will we take to ensure that
people in dire need get assistance? Humanitarians
stand ready to continue to deliver to any and all in need,
but that is not enough. Action must be taken, and safe
access must be made possible. For that to happen, the
violence must be stopped, and it is within our power to
stop it. If we do not take action, there will be no Syrian
people or Syria to save - that will be the Council's
legacy, our generation's shame. It is in our hands today
to take the right path and avert the looming irreversible
tragedy of our time.

