Itis my honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three African countries that are members of the Security Council plus one (A3+1) - the Niger, South Africa, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. We express sincere thanks to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, and UNICEF's Executive Director, Henrietta Fore, for their insightful briefings. They say that a child shall lead us. To Mariam, we extend a special word of gratitude for her courage, guidance and wisdom. Ensuring children's participation matters because solutions crafted with and for them are more likely to succeed. As the Security Council marks the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), the A3+1 welcomes this opportunity to reflect on key developments and priority actions towards the protection and empowerment of children globally. Notwithstanding the challenges related to collecting data on the six grave violations against children, we have registered significant progress in the monitoring and reporting mechanism processes. Those improvements supported the emergence of evidence-informed, country-specific action plans on child protection, national child-focused legislation and child-centred policies. Moreover, mechanisms for collaboration across the United Nations system and the wider international community underpin a number of important initiatives, including the presidential enactment of the Child Rights Protection Law prohibiting bacha bazi and the recruitment and use of children in Afghanistan; the adoption of the Child Protection Code in February 2020 criminalizing the recruitment and use of children in the Central African Republic; cooperation on the protection of children during military operations in the Sahel; and the widespread inclusion of child-protection actions within the various United Nations peacekeeping and special political missions' mandates. The protection of children in armed conflict should be addressed at all levels, including through preventive diplomacy, mediation in peace processes, at all stages of peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and as a key dimension of the protection- of-civilians mandate. We wish to recognize the work, commitment, advocacy and overall contribution of UNICEF and of local civil-society organizations to these developments. As we continue to witness worrying levels of recorded violations against children, coordinated leadership among global governance institutions, regional and subregional organizations, national Governments and civil society will continue to prove crucial in ending such unconscionable harms globally. In that regard, the A3+1 recognizes the child-protection programme in the African Union's Peace and Security Department, in collaboration with the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, and the commitment made by African Union leaders to eradicate the burden of conflict and thereby prevent it from affecting future generations and to focus on prevention efforts as part of the Silencing the Guns by 2020 in Africa and the wider Agenda 2063. In addition, we appeal for full compliance with internationally recognized juvenile justice standards, focused on the release, rehabilitation and reintegration of child victims. We regard the indiscriminate criminalization and incarceration of children, particularly those recruited and used by violent extremist groups, as compounding their victimization. Educational and vocational training as well as psychosocial and socioeconomic support by the international community, the State, local communities and families should form part of wider actions to protect and support children in these contexts. The African Union's Youth Envoy, Aya Chebbi, reminds us that education is the most powerful instrument for peace and that the success envisioned under the Silencing the Guns in Africa initiative requires quality education for children, with a specific focus on girls' education. Internally displaced children and refugees, who are made particularly vulnerable, also deserve access to a quality education. The A3+1 denounces attacks on education and urges all parties to conflict to adhere to their obligations under international law to protect children, educators and educational institutions from violence and destruction. We also call for an end to impunity by extremist armed groups and other perpetrators of such attacks, including kidnapping and gendered and sexual violence in schools or along school routes, where girls are particularly targeted. We support the enactment of existing commitments under the Convention on the Rights of the Child, its Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict, and related national and regional child-protection legislation and policies. We strongly urge all parties to cease their occupation of educational institutions for military purposes and to adhere to the call to ensure that schools remain zones of peace and places where intellectual curiosity and an appreciation for social justice are cultivated. Access to meaningful education, health care and key socioeconomic protections remain seriously compromised for children and their families affected by protracted conflict. In addition to direct violence, the devastating effects of preventable illnesses associated with malnutrition and poor sanitation in conflict- affected countries continue to ravage communities, acutely affecting children. Children are also the most affected by the security crisis in the Sahel, the Lake Chad basin and other regions affected by the triple threat of conflict, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and climate change, with adolescent girls in particular suffering the egregious consequences of conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence. We encourage Governments in armed-conflict situations to do all they can to institute a culture of respect for women and children among their armed forces. We also call for improved age- and gender-responsive actions to prevent abuses, provide reparation and psychosocial support to victims and survivors, and promote positive shifts in consciousness regarding childhood and gender. Further, we encourage our friends and partners in the international community to renew efforts to support the socioeconomic development of those regions, in line with national needs and priorities and in accordance with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In closing, we wish to reiterate that long-term, strategic, child-centred and focused interventions must be supported by immediate measures to address children, rendered most vulnerable in conflict settings. With the numbers of displaced persons on the rise globally, the majority of whom are women and children, parties to conflict must comply with international humanitarian law and international refugee law. As noted by the Secretary-General, the cross-border dynamics of conflict, intercommunal violence and military processes associated with counter-terrorism operations have all hindered access for child-protection actors. We urge parties to ensure unimpeded access, in line with international law, for the delivery of critical life-support supplies and access to health care by children and their families to save lives and sustain child development. We appeal to Members to strengthen their political commitment to the children and armed conflict agenda and for organizations to remain committed thereto, especially in the light of the further budgetary constraints occasioned by the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Children represent a significant proportion of populations globally, a figure much higher in countries ravaged by armed conflict. They are owed a more fruitful inheritance. Nothing short of global, national, local and individual transformation will deliver the change they deserve.
