Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Mr. Christian Schwarz-Schilling,
High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
introducing his report. We would also like to welcome

Mr. Nikola Spiric', Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to thank him
for his statement.

My delegation continues to expectantly follow
the progress being made in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We view as positive the fact that developments
following the general elections in October have
resulted in a reconstructed Government in Republika
Srpska, the setting up of the Council of Ministers and
the establishment of the Federation Government. There
are also new governments in seven of the ten cantons.
Nevertheless, all that progress has taken quite a long
time to achieve, illustrating the persistence of certain
political domestic difficulties.

We also take note of the success of the technical
negotiations regarding the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union. We
trust that the various entities of the Bosnian
Government will meet the necessary preconditions to
make its implementation possible, in particular as
regards restructuring the police force. That requires
political understanding at the domestic level, which my
delegation would like to encourage.

We are concerned about the lack of major
progress in cooperating fully with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. We urge
the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to redouble
their efforts in that regard, thereby demonstrating their
commitment to their country and to the international
community, which expect that there will be no
impunity for those crimes.

With regard to constitutional reform, we support
the efforts of the High Representative to carry out that
process. All the parties involved must understand the
need to implement and contribute to that reform. It
should be acknowledged that the circumstances in
which the constitution was drafted have changed and
are now very different. It is therefore necessary to
make adjustments in order to set the country on a new
path towards political and social development that is
based on participation in the European community.

It is also important to pursue progress on the
economic front. We recognize that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has experienced growth, and we
encourage the country's authorities to work on the
necessary reform of economic and fiscal legislation to
make it possible to lay the foundations for the
development of the private sector.

Lastly, with regard to the closing of the Office of
the High Representative, my delegation generally
supports the idea of national authorities increasing
their control over the country's situation and exercising
ownership over their own fate. However, we believe it
a priority that the international community remains on
the ground as long as necessary in order to ensure that
ownership is exercised effectively and that it
guarantees that the causes of the conflict do not
re-emerge.

I would like to conclude by expressing profound
gratitude for, and acknowledgement of, Mr. Schwarz-
Schilling's dedication, efforts and contribution to
bringing peace to the country, building democratic
institutions and laying the foundations for the rule of
law in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

