Mr. De la Fuente Ramirez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Indonesia for convening this
debate on a fundamental issue for the Security Council.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2019/373).

Twenty years after the adoption of resolution 1265
(1999), commendable progress has been made in relation
to the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. But it
is clear, as we have heard throughout this debate, that
such progress is insufficient and this issue deserves a
rigorous review. Unfortunately, civilians are the main
victims and continue to be the targets ofindiscriminate
attacks that are clear violations of international and
humanitarian law. In situations where we see an increase
in the number of civilians being killed or injured, it is
natural that the number of refugees and asylum-seekers
due to armed conflict also increases.

Moreover, restrictions on access to humanitarian
assistance are still all too frequent. We consider this
unacceptable. All parties to conflicts must adopt
measures to ensure the uninterrupted, safe and timely
access delivery of humanitarian aid. Humanitarian
assistance cannot be held hostage to political
considerations. We condemn any attack on medical
and humanitarian personnel. Such attacks constitute a
war crime and for that reason, together with over 30
countries, we signed the French-led declaration on the
protection of humanitarian and medical personnel in
armed conflict.

We are also concerned that examples of
accountability in this area, as provided in international
criminal law, have been few and far between. Reports
of serious crimes must be investigated and addressed.
In this regard, the work of the International Criminal
Court is critical to combatting impunity, but the Court
needs the support and cooperation of Member States to
fulfil its mandate.

The impact of conflict on the availability of
food is also cause for alarm. The practice of starving
civilians continues to be used as a method of war.
Armed conflicts have also had a grave impact on the
environment and cultural heritage. Finally, we must
emphasize that people with disabilities continue to
be disproportionately affected in armed conflicts. We
agree with the Secretary-General that it is necessary
to pay particular attention to this vulnerable group,
and we also support the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative to protect civilian personnel participating in
peace operations.

The problem of arms flows to conflict zones
requires our urgent attention. As a State party to the
Arms Trade Treaty, Mexico reaffirms our binding
obligation to conduct only responsible transfers of
arms. The export of arms to places where they are used
to commit violations of human rights or international
humanitarian law must be prevented. We urge weapons
exporters and those who import those weapons to
consolidate this norm and become States parties to the
Treaty. I must also recall that the countries of Latin
America and the Caribbean have recognized the urgent
need to avoid the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas. At the regional conference on the matter held
in Santiago, Chile, last December, we adopted a clear
political position in this regard.

The Security Council has a fundamental role to
play in the protection of civilians in armed conflicts
throughout the world. However, the Council's repeated
paralysis due to use of the veto has prevented it from
acting in the face of crises involving atrocity crimes such
as genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
It is therefore inadmissible for a procedural tool to
prevent the Council from fulfilling its obligations,
especially when the lives of individuals and even entire
peoples are at stake. In keeping with the spirit of our
times, greater accountability is necessary. We must
fully assume the responsibility that attends the veto and
the costs generated by any paralysis of the Council.

We will continue to insist on the need for all States
Members of the United Nations, and in particular
the permanent members of the Council, to join the
Franco-Mexican initiative on restraint in the use of
the veto in the event of mass atrocities. This project is
already supported by over 100 States and we hope that
many more will soon be joining us.

