Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Sir, I would like to convey the apologies of your
sister Her Excellency Ms. Kamissa Camara, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
the Republic of Mali, who was unable to travel to New
York owing to a scheduling conflict. She asked me to
convey her warm congratulations to you, Sir, and to the
entire delegation of Equatorial Guinea on a productive
and successful presidency this month.

Before continuing, on behalf of the President
of Republic of Mali, the Government and the people
of Mali, I would like to reiterate the most heartfelt
condolences to the Governments and families of the
personnel of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali who have died
in the line of duty in Mali. On this painful occasion, I
pay special tribute to the brave Chadian, Sri Lankan
and Guinean soldiers who were torn from our midst
from January to date, not to mention the many injured,
to whom I wish a speedy recovery.

I paid that well-deserved tribute to all of the
victims of conflict - Malian and non-Malian, civilian
and military - in order to highlight the relevance and
timeliness of the theme of today's debate on silencing
the guns in Africa. In that regard, I would like to share
with members some food for thought as our contribution
to today's debate.

I would like to start with peaceful options that I
believe are the most appropriate for ensuring lasting
peace and security. In my view, silencing the guns
requires good governance, first and foremost, including
justice and equity in the management of public affairs. It
further requires the right balance to be struck between
the issues of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States and the legitimate demands of populations
for respect for their identity, culture and active and
effective participation in the management of public and
local affairs. Our States must promote national unity
in diversity.

Secondly, another equation to be solved is to find
the appropriate measures to enable people in remote
areas, far from capitals, to truly live as part of the
national whole and feel part of the nation. In that way,
we will be able to strengthen the legitimacy of our
States in the eyes of our populations.

Thirdly, peacefully silencing the guns requires
comprehensive responses to the root causes and
aggravating factors of armed conflict, in particular
inclusive sustainable development. We must work
tirelessly to meet the basic needs of our populations,
including education, health care, food security,
water, energy and decent employment opportunities
for young people, who make up the vast majority of
African populations.

The ultimate peaceful tool to silence the guns
is speech. In some conflict situations in Africa, we
know that speech, when it encourages deliberate
mischaracterization, stigmatization, hatred and
violence, can lead to divisions by sowing the seeds
of long-term conflicts, and even worse, it can lead to
killing. We must convey messages ofpeace and national
cohesion in our words and deeds.

In that regard, the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, which was the outcome of the
Algiers process, reflects the common resolve of the
Malian parties to prioritize a peaceful settlement of the
internal dimension of the Malian crisis. I would like
to welcome Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, former Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Algeria, who was the principal
mediator in the negotiating process that led to the
signing of the agreement in Algiers in 2015.

I turn now to security solutions. Faced with
imminent and real threats, our States have no choice
but to take military action to secure populations and
their property, as well as their territories. That is
what we are doing in Mali and the Sahel, with the
support of international partner forces, including the
French Operation Barkhane and the Group of Five for
the Sahel, against terrorist groups, drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime, including
human traffickers.

Moreover, we must work towards the full
implementation of the various international instruments
on the flow of weapons, particularly small arms and
light weapons, with a view to helping to silence the guns
in Africa. I recall that, on behalf of the States members
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), Mali annually submits a resolution to the
General Assembly entitled "Assistance to States for
curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons
and collecting them", in support of the ECOWAS
Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their
Ammunition and Other Related Materials. We also
need to strengthen cooperation among States to combat
the illicit trade in those weapons, which are causing
more casualties on the African continent.

Lastly, the delegation of Mali welcomes the
strengthening of the strategic partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations, and remains
convinced that it will add value to ongoing national
and regional efforts to silence the guns, including the
United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. I welcome
resolution 2457 (2019), which was adopted by the
Security Council this morning on that issue.

