Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Augustine Mahiga for his
briefing on the situation in Somalia and for his
presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/549). We are also grateful to the new Prime
Minister of the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG), Mr. Abdiweli Mohamed Ali, for his analysis of
the situation and prospects. We also thank
Mr. Boubacar Diarra, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union
for Somalia, for his statement.
As has been said, in spite of clear success in
driving Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu, the security
situation in Somalia continues to be of great concern.
Fundamental breakthroughs have not yet been
achieved. The efforts of extremists have not yet been
extirpated. They continue to control half of the country
and they seem unwilling to lay down their arms.

We share the concern that the security vacuum
following the withdrawal of extremists from
Mogadishu may not be filled by the TFG and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), but
rather by local militias that are not under the control of
the Government. In those circumstances, it is important
to prevent the campaign against Al-Shabaab from
turning into a clan war of the most unpredictable
nature. We are also worried by what is stated in the
Secretary-General's report with regard to delays in the
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1964
(2010) and efforts for strengthening African
peacekeepers and increasing their force strength to the
planned level of 12,000.

To consolidate security, there must be active
prevention of internal attempts by the Somali
opposition. The Security Council must therefore give

due attention to the need to increase the effectiveness
of the sanctions regime.

In our view, the positive outcomes of the
consultative meeting in Mogadishu and the adoption of
the road map for the conclusion of the transition period
are grounds for optimism. The Transitional Federal
Institutions must immediately proceed to the
implementation of their tasks, with optimal support by
participants at the meeting.

We view it as important to continue working on
the participation of a large number of representatives
from local administrations and civil society
organizations in the current unprecedented efforts to
galvanize stability in Somalia. In the end,
comprehensive success in Somalia will depend on
Somalis themselves.

Of particular concern is the exacerbation of an
already chronic humanitarian situation in Somalia. We
support the call by the General Assembly for a more
effective international response to the situation, where
almost half of the population is affected by famine and
life support systems are in danger of collapse. The
Russian Federation stands ready to provide emergency
food aid to Somalia by way of an additional targeted
contribution of $2 million to the World Food
Programme.

Piracy off the coast of Somalia is an area of
particular concern for us. This criminal enterprise is
itself becoming a threat to peace and security in the
region. The force component of the drive against
piracy has revealed its insufficiency. However, the
situation in those troubled waters continues to be
dangerous. In our view, the situation will not improve
as long as pirates and their facilitators get away with
their actions. In that regard, we are disappointed by the
negative reaction of Somali authorities at all levels, in
particular the TFG's response to the promising
proposal of international efforts to establish an
extraterritorial Somali court. Nevertheless, we continue
to work with other States on creating an effective
justice mechanism in the region in order to bring
pirates to justice.

We believe it is appropriate to maintain a step-by-
step approach in expanding the presence of the United
Nations in the country. In that respect, a key factor
would be to take into account the security situation. We
favour strengthened coordination of the activities of
United Nations bodies working on Somalia. We
support the proposal of the Secretary-General to
establish a separate sub-unit of AMISOM. for the
protection of United Nations personnel and those of
international organizations in Mogadishu.

In close cooperation with its partners, Russia will
continue to support the efforts of the President of
Somalia and of the TFG in establishing lasting peace
and national reconciliation based on the Djibouti
Agreements and in the interest of strengthening
security and stability in the region.

In conclusion, we are grateful to the delegation of
the United Kingdom for preparing the draft resolution
on the continuation of the AMISOM. mandate.

