I would like to thank all the other briefers, especially Bob Malley of the International Crisis Group. I want to echo his appeal to China to liberate Michael Kovrig. He is not only a member of the International Crisis Group but a former colleague of ours, a former diplomat. On the subject, I do not need to repeat the description of the situation, all the tensions and divergences, the divisions, the shrinking democratic space and details of the suffering of the people, in particular in Yemen. Germany's response to all those challenges will not surprise anyone, and it is very much along the same lines as we just heard from our Estonian colleague. The framework for peace and security in the region already exists: it is international law; it is international humanitarian law; it is human rights law. Unfortunately, international law is violated every day in the region. We have spoken about the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and resolution 2231 (2015). Other Security Council resolutions in the wider Middle East are not adhered to, from the resolutions concerning the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to those concerning sanctions on Libya. International humanitarian law is violated every day. We see it in our regular briefings on Yemen. It is totally unacceptable in view of the victims of the conflict among the civilian population. Human rights are violated every day in many countries in the region. Particularly in Iran, civilian and political rights are violated every day. The prisons in Iran are the most abhorrent in the whole region, similar to what we witness in Syria. Religious minorities such as the Baha' are persecuted. On international law, even today Iran is still calling for the destruction of Israel, and this is just unacceptable. Germany can only urge and continues to urge adherence to international law, the JCPOA and other international agreements. I would like to pick up on Bob Malley's proposal that we have to start with small steps of confidence-building measures and prevent unintended and accidental incidents. We also would need some steps to overcome the divergences in the Gulf Cooperation Council. In that context, I would also like to pay tribute to the late Amir of Kuwait, who did a lot to that effect. I can only encourage Kuwait to continue its good offices. If confidence-building measures succeed, they should be developed into a more comprehensive and cooperative approach to promote collective security and sustainable stability in the region. We encourage the Secretary-General to take initiatives. In his statement, he expressed his readiness to do so, and we should all support him. This was already stated, and some mentioned, resolution 598 (1987). It was atime when West Germany was also sitting in the Security Council. Germany stands ready to help. We provide support in particular through humanitarian aid. We also support political processes. We have been doing this in Libya with the Berlin Conference. We have announced that early next year we will have a conference on Yemen in the Permanent Five plus three format, and we stand ready to provide support. The solution to all these problems is respect for international law.
