Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): Over
the past three years, the Syrian conflict has continued
to escalate, causing heavy casualties and serious loss
of property, as well as the displacement of millions
of civilians. China is seriously concerned at the
ever-worsening humanitarian situation in Syria and
sympathizes with the Syrian people who have sustained
profound suffering. The current humanitarian situation
in Syria must not continue.

China supports the efforts made by the international
community, especially the United Nations, to ease the
humanitarian situation in Syria and appreciates the
contribution made by neighbouring countries in hosting
a large number of Syrian refugees.

China has on many occasions provided
humanitarian assistance to Syria and the neighbouring
countries through multiple channels and will continue
to provide help to the best of its ability to the Syrian
people, including Syrian refugees outside Syria, so as
to ease their suffering.

As the core of the collective security mechanism,
the Security Council bears primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The adoption by the Council of resolution 2139 (2014)
is yet another unanimous action taken by the Council
on the question of Syria since the adoption of resolution
2118 (2013) last year. This is the result of the common
efforts of the members of the Council.

In the current circumstances, the actions taken by
the Security Council on the humanitarian situation in
Syria should be objective, balanced and conducive to
the maintenance of international humanitarian norms
and of the momentum for the political settlement of the
Syrian crisis.
Resolution 2139 (2014) reiterates respect for
the independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria, states the responsibility of all
parties concerned in Syria for the improvement of the
humanitarian situation, stresses the imperative for all
parties to abide by the guiding principles of United
Nations humanitarian relief work, expresses support
for the political settlement of the Syrian question and
sends a unanimous and powerful message for the early
improvement of the humanitarian situation in Syria. As
such, it is of great significance.

Going forward, the international community
should ensure the implementation of resolution
2139 (2014). We urge all parties in Syria to set their
sights on the interests of their nation and their
people, comprehensively implement the resolution,
fully cooperate with the United Nations and other
organizations and make common efforts for the
improvement of the humanitarian situation in their
country. The international community should continue
to provide humanitarian assistance to Syria and actively
support the efforts made by neighbouring countries in
hosting Syrian refugees.

Humanitarian measures can offer only temporary
relief of the suffering of the Syrian people. It is only
by seeking a political settlement to the question of
Syria that it will be possible to achieve a fundamental
improvement in the humanitarian situation in Syria.
Thanks to the common efforts of all parties, including
China, the second Geneva conference was held last
month. That was an important step in the political
settlement of the question of Syria.

Resolution 2139 (2014) gives fresh impetus to
the political process in Syria. The question of Syria
is complex and sensitive and not easy to resolve. We
hope that the international community will insist on
the political settlement of the question of Syria, insist
on letting the Syrian people decide the future of their
country themselves, continue to promote an inclusive
political transitional process and continue efforts to
foster the realization ofnational reconciliation and unity
in Syria and to ensure the delivery of humanitarian
assistance in Syria and in neighbouring countries. We
hope that the parties concerned in Syria will comply
with this resolution, engage in dialogue and negotiations
to establish mutual trust, meet one another halfway
and draw on other useful experiences so as to reach a
settlement on the basis of the claims of all parties that
is in line with the national conditions of Syria and that
accommodates the interests of all parties.

As a permanent member of the Security Council
and a responsible member of the international
community, China will continue to make a positive
contribution to the promotion of the early realization of
the comprehensive, lasting and appropriate resolution
of the question of Syria.

