Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I am pleased to welcome
Mr. Jan Eliasson and Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim to the
Council and to thank them for their briefings. We are
highly appreciative of their endeavours in discharging
their complex and difficult - but noble and lofty -
mandates.

It is regrettable that the security situation in
Darfur has deteriorated during the period under
consideration, as attested to by this morning's
briefings, by the reports of the Secretary-General and
by what internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
humanitarian workers told the Security Council
mission during its visit to Darfur.

The 10 May action by the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM), targeting the capital, and the
ongoing violence among tribal groups, rebel
movements and the Government underscore the need to
accelerate the deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and to

08-3959]
ensure that it has the capacity necessary to protect
civilians, in particular those in IDP camps, and
humanitarian workers. The number of IDPs grows by
the day, which regrettably means an increased number
of people in need of assistance and protection.

But there has been a delay, if not a disruption, in
the deployment of UNAMID, due in large part to the
mission's considerable shortfall in equipment. For
example, as the report indicates, the deployment of the
first Egyptian battalion has been delayed owing to the
absence of necessary equipment. The same is true for
the Ethiopian battalion. Be they Egyptian or Ethiopian,
these troops are prepared to be deployed in Darfur. Yet
the camps were not ready to receive them, thereby
impeding their arrival. In addition, the Nepalese and
Thai troops were also late to arrive.

We listened to the Sudanese officials whom we
met during our visit expressing their unqualified
cooperation in the deployment of the hybrid force.
Because the deployment of the hybrid force is clearly
in the interest of the Sudanese Government and, more
broadly, in the interest of stability and peace, we
expect that the Sudanese Government, together with
the Mission, will constitute a joint team to overcome
all the problems standing in the way of the
deployment. The Sudanese officials clearly expressed
their willingness to operate the airports in the Darfur
region on a continuous 24-hour basis, although that
required overcoming technical deficiencies and
completing the unfinished airport infrastructure to
enable them to receive the aircraft deployed for the
mission. In this regard, paragraph 29 of the report
contained in document S/2006/400 deserves special
attention. It reads as follows:

"Despite ongoing efforts, critical mission
capabilities are still lacking, namely, 18 medium
utility helicopters, six attack helicopters, one
aerial reconnaissance unit, one medium transport
unit, one heavy transport unit and one multi-role
logistics unit."

Once again, the mission is regrettably still facing
deficiencies that hamper its deployment.

All of us know that success in deploying the
hybrid Mission depends on providing for its
requirements so that it can discharge its tasks. That is a
sine qua non, a precondition to ameliorate the
humanitarian and security conditions in Darfur and to
improve the chances for success ofthe political process.

Participants at the Geneva meeting on 5 June
under the chairmanship of the two mediators expressed
their disappointment over the late deployment of the
force as well as the adverse consequences resulting
therefrom on the political process. The two mediators
emphasized this fact in the Council this morning as
well.

It is regrettable that, despite the efforts deployed,
particularly by the two Envoys, Mr. Jan Eliasson and
Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, the political process has not
achieved even a modicum of progress; rather, it has
deteriorated. Some rebel movements refuse to join the
political process. Further, they insist on continuing the
violence, despite the fact that the Sudanese
Government expressed its readiness to engage in
dialogue and hastened to declare a unilateral ceasefire,
as mentioned at the launching of the Sirte negotiations.

We believe that greater attention must be directed
by this Council to the political process, in addition to
supporting the efforts made by the two Envoys,
providing propitious circumstances for the launching
of the peace process. In our estimation, that requires
the following steps. First, there must be an attempt to
achieve Sudanese-Chadian reconciliation through the
support of the efforts of the contact group that was
formed as a result of the Dakar Agreement. On that
score, I agree with Mr. Salim about the impossibility of
achieving peace in Darfur if there is no Sudanese-
Chadian reconciliation.

Secondly, persons and groups that refuse to
accede to the peace process or seek to achieve a
ceasefire with the current measures should be targeted.
The Council has hesitated a great deal on this point.
Some movements have refused even to engage in mere
participation in designated security consultations
despite the efforts of the two international mediators
and the specific appeals made to them. It would also be
useful for the peace process to offer incentives to those
who are taking positive stands.

Thirdly, greater attention to and support for civil
society and the traditional leadership are also
important. Unfortunately, we have to acknowledge that
traditional tribal leaders have tremendous influence,
greatly exceeding that of the political leadership. We
believe that civil society and the traditional leadership
are more eager to achieve peace, stability and security.
That is the reality in tribal societies.

Fourthly, we are in full agreement with the
observations made by the participants in Geneva,
namely that the continued flow of arms to Darfur
unfortunately persists. It is therefore important to
redress this matter urgently and effectively.

In conclusion, I agree with Mr. Eliasson's
statement on the need to agree to the six points he
raised. That will undoubtedly have a considerable
effect on advancing the peace process.

