Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on presiding over this important debate
on the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question - an issue of particular importance to the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. I would also like to
welcome Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen, Assistant
Secretary-General ad interim for Political Affairs.

Our country endorses the statement to be delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. Nevertheless, I
would like to set out our national position on the matter
before us.

The fomenting of armed conflicts and the
maintenance of colonial situations and foreign
occupation in some areas of the world have a negative
impact on international peace and security. We cannot
remain indifferent to these facts and their gravity,
especially when we recall that the Charter of the United
Nations enshrines the commitment of Member States to
safeguard future generations from the scourge of war.

The Venezuelan delegation reaffirms its full support
for the right to self-determination, which entitles
the nationals of the State of Palestine to live within
internationally recognized borders, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council. In this regard, we reiterate our repudiation
of the illegal policies implemented by the occupying
Power, Israel, which seek to deny the Palestinian people
their rights, with the political-territorial disintegration
of the State of Palestine as the goal.

Our country urges the immediate cessation of Israeli
settlement construction in the occupied territories
that are part of the sovereign and independent State
of Palestine. Such Israeli practices flagrantly violate
international law. Moreover, we condemn the Israeli
occupying Power's withholding of tax revenue from the
State of Palestine, in contravention of the agreements
signed between both parties regarding the transfer of
resources.

Israel is attempting to suffocate the State of
Palestine by cutting it off from basic supplies,
including economic income, food, medicine and other
goods essential to residents' everyday lives and to the
functioning of its political institutions, including the
payment of salaries to public sector employees. Israel
must refrain from implementing measures of collective
punishment against the Palestinian people that worsen
their appalling humanitarian conditions, in clear
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention. At the same
time, we deplore the fact that the blockade imposed by
the occupying Power against the Palestinian population
of Gaza since 2007 is still in force, which affects the
human rights and worsens the already precarious living
conditions of the inhabitants of that area. We demand
that Israel immediately and definitively lift this brutal
blockade.

The Israeli military occupation is the leading cause
of the flagrant violation of the human rights of the
Palestinian population and of international humanitarian
law. Venezuela advocates the establishment of a
timeline for bringing an end to this unsustainable and
illegal occupation of territories belonging to the State
of Palestine, in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council.
In keeping with the Charter of the United Nations,
our country encourages both parties to continue
with negotiations in order to achieve a firm and
lasting peace, whereby both States can safely coexist
as sovereign and independent countries, within
internationally recognized borders. A negotiated
political solution to this matter is a decisive factor for
peace and security in the Middle East. In addition,
we welcome the accession of the State of Palestine to
various international instruments, which confirms its
irrevocable commitment to the cause of international
peace and security, human rights, cooperation and
development.

Lastly, we reiterate our unwavering support for the
request of the State of Palestine to be admitted as a full
Member of the United Nations. We hope the Security
Council will fully assume the responsibilities bestowed
upon it by the Charter, so that the General Assembly,
under the recommendation of this principal organ, will
be able to quickly decide on the matter.

