Mr. Pascoe: I should just say first that the
Secretary-General's voice was very strong up until the
end, but in Gaza City, he was trying to project to at
least 500 employees at the back of the room and then
gave a press conference where the smoke from things
that were still smouldering was pretty bad. I think that
between the two of them, they did him in in the end.

I will, with the Council's indulgence, read out the
following statement of the Secretary-General.

"I was pleased to brief and consult with the
Council eight days ago, before embarking on a
trip to the Middle East that was intended to send
a simple and unmistakable message about the
crisis in Gaza and southern Israel: the fighting
must stop; resolution 1860 (2009) must be fully
respected and implemented. I deeply appreciated
the Council's support for my mission, which was
also reiterated by the General Assembly in its
resolution ES-lO/l8 last Friday. I believe it
significantly strengthened my efforts to stop the
violence.

"In the days since, I visited and met with
the leaders of Egypt, Jordan, Israel, the occupied
Palestinian territory, Turkey, Lebanon and Syria. I
took part in a meeting convened by President
Mubarak in Sharm el-Sheikh and the Arab
economic summit in Kuwait. I also spoke on the
telephone on many occasions with several of the
leaders and of course met with all of the leaders
at the two meetings to discuss the situation in
Gaza. I Visited Gaza City and Sderot yesterday to
show my solidarity with civilians and underscore
the urgent and important tasks ahead. Throughout
the mission, I have been seeking to maximize
coordination in the diplomatic efforts to end the
crisis and to make clear the expectations of the
United Nations as embodied in resolution 1860
(2009).

"I commend the leadership and initiative
taken by Egyptian President Mubarak to help
achieve a ceasefire. I also pay tribute to the many,
many leaders from around the world who have
made significant contributions to this effort.

"The fighting has ended with declarations
of unilateral ceasefires and, today, the withdrawal
of Israeli troops. This is an important
achievement and offers a much-needed respite for
the suffering civilians, especially in the Gaza
Strip. But conditions are still fragile, and much
more remains to be done on both the
humanitarian and diplomatic fronts.

"In this regard, I look to Egypt and others to
continue vital efforts to seek understandings and
mechanisms to ensure that a durable and
sustainable ceasefire is quickly put in place. And
I look to regional and international leaders,
including members of the League of Arab States,
the Quartet and the Security Council, to come
together to contribute to and help sustain these
guarantees and arrangements, as called for by
resolution 1860 (2009). The unilateral ceasefires
must be translated into a lasting arrangement that
prevents illicit trafficking in arms and
ammunition and ensures the sustained reopening
of the Gaza crossings on the basis of the 2005
Agreement on Movement and Access between the
Palestinian Authority and Israel. This is the
framework outlined in resolution 1860 (2009),
and it will help stabilize the situation on the
ground.

"For many in Gaza, this also remains an
hour of despair, grief and desperate need. They
were caught throughout this crisis between
Hamas's unacceptable and irresponsible actions
and Israel's blockade and use of excessive and
disproportionate military force.

"During my Visit yesterday, I saw part of the
destruction and suffering caused to this small and
densely populated area by more than three weeks
of heavy bombardment, shelling and street
fighting. This, of course, follows on top of
months and years of occupation, conflict and
economic deprivation. I was deeply affected by
what I saw.

"I went to Gaza to show my respect and
concern for the deaths and injuries of so many
people, and the thousands of people who lost
their family and friends. I wanted to send the
signal that the United Nations stands with the
people who have borne this tragedy and disaster,
and that we will not abandon them.

"And I visited Sderot, to meet with the
civilians of southern Israel who have been
exposed to indiscriminate rocket and mortar fire
for too long.
"In both places, I underscored the urgent
need for international humanitarian law to be
fully respected and for civilians to be protected.
As I made clear, where civilians have been killed
and there are allegations of Violations of
international humanitarian law, there should be
thorough investigations, full explanations and,
where it is required, accountability.

"In Gaza, I met with the United Nations
staff on the ground, who worked bravely,
courageously and heroically during these past
weeks. They have made the United Nations proud
and humbled us by their example. I cannot praise
and thank them enough, and I pay tribute to the
United Nations staff members and contractors
who have been killed or injured.

"I also assured the people of Gaza that the
United Nations will work urgently and diligently
to provide urgent humanitarian assistance and to
start a daunting and challenging process of
recovery and reconstruction.

"Tomorrow, Special Coordinator Robert
Serry and Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs John Holmes will visit
Gaza to begin an urgent needs assessment
focusing on immediate humanitarian priorities
across the board. These include medical care,
food, shelter, rubble removal, unexploded
ordnance and possibly mines, electricity, cash,
water and sanitation.

"Mr. Holmes and the Commissioner-
General of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), Karen AbuZayd, will report to the
Council directly on the humanitarian situation
next week. The United Nations intends to launch
a flash humanitarian appeal within 10 days of that
first mission. The United Nations is also working
to support the development of assessments and
plans for early recovery and the rehabilitation of
critical services, even as it supports ongoing
emergency repairs. It will coordinate closely in
this regard with Prime Minister Fayyad. There are
plans for a comprehensive report to be presented
at a conference in Cairo and feed into the work of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee thereafter. It will
be crucial for major donor countries to take part
and contribute generously in the humanitarian
and early recovery efforts ahead.
"Indeed, I wish to emphasize that as we
begin to meet the challenge of humanitarian
relief, early recovery and reconstruction, we need
to work together in close coordination and
consultation. In addition to the parties
themselves, the United Nations is already in close
contact with key partners: Egypt and other Arab
countries; the European Commission and the
World Bank; Norway as the Chair of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee; Turkey; and the Quartet
members - Europe, Russia and United States. In
that regard, I will continue to urge the new
President of the United States and his team to
make peace in the Middle East one of their top
priorities.

"I would like to note here that immediate
and increased access to Gaza is key to any
humanitarian effort, let alone reconstruction. In
my meetings with Israeli leaders, I insisted on the
importance of increased access to the Gaza Strip.
I asked President Mubarak to ensure that Rafah is
open for humanitarian material.

"The Council is well aware of the several
incidents of outrageous attacks against United
Nations facilities and heard a briefing here last
Thursday on the attacks that saw UNRWA main
warehouse burn down, with much urgently
required assistance lost. This attack took place on
the day I arrived in Israel, and I saw for myself
yesterday the still-smoldering ruins of our
facilities. From the outset, I have protested the
attacks against United Nations facilities in the
strongest possible terms and have called on all
combatants to respect the sanctity of United
Nations premises. I must inform the Security
Council that when I was in Israel I was given
personal assurances by the Israeli authorities that
such attacks would not happen again. Despite
that, a mere two days later there was an attack
against a United Nations school that served as a
refuge and shelter to those who had nowhere else
to hide, and two little boys were killed.

"When I met the Israeli leadership on
several occasions, I demanded a thorough
investigation by Israel into every one of these
incidents. I expect to receive a full explanation of
each incident and that those responsible will be
held accountable for their actions. Prime Minister
Olmert promised to provide me with the results of
their inquiry on an urgent basis. I will then decide
on appropriate follow-up action.
09-21519

"The challenges ahead are immense and
numerous. While our immediate priority now
may be humanitarian relief and early recovery,
we must also continue our work to ensure
sustainable arrangements underpinning a durable
ceasefire and our longer-term effort to achieve
peace.

"As part of this effort, I have discussed the
political way forward at length with regional and
international leaders. It is clear to me that, for
any sustainable political progress to occur and for
Gaza to properly recover and rebuild, Palestinians
must face the challenge of reconciliation. In both
Gaza and Ramallah, I made a passionate appeal
for Palestinians to overcome divisions and work
to restore one Palestinian Government within the
framework of the legitimate Palestinian
Authority. I repeat that appeal here today. I have
stated clearly that the United Nations will work
with a united Palestinian Government
encompassing Gaza and the West Bank. In
Kuwait, I appealed to the Arab world to unite in
support of this endeavour, and I have taken note
of the efforts of King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia in
this regard. I also appeal to the international
community as a whole to do the same.

"I also Visited Lebanon, where I met with
President Sleiman, Prime Minister Siniora and
Speaker Berri. I had the honour to address the
Lebanese Parliament. Before my arrival, I was very
aware of the risk that Lebanon might enter into a
new conflict with Israel as a result of the situation in
Gaza. However, I was encouraged by the
condemnation by the Government of Lebanon of
the incidents of rockets being fired from southern
Lebanon into Israel and by the prompt action taken
by the Lebanese Armed Forces and the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).

"In Israel, I asked the political and defence
leadership to exercise restraint and to take steps to
implement outstanding elements of resolution 1701
(2006), especially the withdrawal from Ghajar. I
visited UNIFIL in the South, and would like to once
again congratulate the Force for the important role it
is playing to stabilize the area and implement
resolution 1701 (2006), together with the Lebanese
Armed Forces. I also discussed Lebanon at some
length in Syria with President Assad.
09-21519
"Let me be clear. Yes, the recent crisis in
Gaza and southern Israel requires conflict
management and containment, but it is also a
symptom of broader problems and deeper
conflicts demanding conflict resolution. If the
past weeks of violence are not followed quickly
by broad political action, we face the real risk of
greater polarization and frustration in the region,
not to mention a possible repeat of what we have
seen.

"A true end to violence and lasting security
for both Palestinians and Israelis will only come
through a just and comprehensive settlement of
the Arab-Israeli conflict. This effort must have at
its centre the implementation of Security Council
resolutions and the framework of the Arab Peace
Initiative. We do not need new plans and
processes. We have the tools we need. We need
only political will and action. Peace has eluded us
for far too long.

"The violence, destruction and suffering
before us have been a mark of collective political
failure. We made a genuine effort last year but
did not succeed. We must do more now. Nothing
short of a massive international effort is now
required to support and insist on a resolution of
this conflict. The peoples of the region, and
indeed the international community, can afford no
less.

"As Secretary-General of the United
Nations, I will continue to uphold the need for an
end of the occupation that began in 1967, the
creation of a Palestinian State to coexist in peace
and security alongside Israel, and a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace between Israel and all
its Arab neighbours. I am more determined than
ever to see this achieved."

