Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
for introducing the report (S/2011/28l) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
welcome the participation of Mr. Vuk J eremic', Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, in today's meeting of the
Security Council, and we share his views.

We listened closely to the statement by
Mr. Hoxhaj. However, we must direct a comment at the
Secretariat. As Mr. Hoxhaj was speaking in his
personal capacity, the text of his speech should not
have been distributed as it was. We are firmly
convinced that this mistake by the Secretariat will not
be repeated.

Russia's position on non-recognition of Kosovo's
unilateral declaration of independence remains
unchanged. We support the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Republic of Serbia. We also believe
that resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in force and
is binding for all as the international legal basis for
Kosovo's settlement, as well as for ensuring security in
the province. Moreover, the Security Council should
continue to play a leading role in addressing the issue
of Kosovo.

We welcome the resumption of dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina. We are convinced that a viable
solution to the Kosovo issue can be reached only
through negotiations. We believe that it is necessary to
have an official presence by representatives of the
United Nations Mission in Kosovo at meetings held in
the framework of the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, given the need for the Security Council to
receive adequate information about the progress and
the substance of the talks and for the purposes of the
quarterly report of the Secretary-General. That need
also stems from the agenda of the meetings themselves.
As we know, participants in the talks discuss issues
directly related to UNMIK, such as Pristina's
chairmanship this year of the Central European Free
Trade Agreement (CEFTA). In that regard, I would like
to recall that UNMIK is the signatory of CEFTA for
Kosovo.

We believe that the European Union, which is
mediating the talks, must provide an appropriate place
for the United Nations at the talks, especially given the
possibility that the Organization may provide
assistance. UNMIK should continue to provide
maximum assistance for a settlement of the Kosovo
issue, as well as to carry out its duties to ensure
Kosovo's external representation in regional and
international organizations and mechanisms.

We consider unacceptable the unilateral actions
of Pristina and international presences in the north of
Kosovo aimed at changing realities on the ground. In
this context, we draw attention to the potentially
explosive situation in the northern part of the province.
There have been attempts to Albanicize local Kosovo
police units and to extend the activities of Kosovo
custom officers to the north. There is also the
uncontrolled resettlement there of the Albanian
population, which was not agreed with all interested
parties. All of this will inevitably lead to an escalation
of tension.

Of serious concern is the operation carried out in
Zubin Potok on 15 February by the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), with the
support of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the Kosovo
Albanian police, to detain - as they stated - local
criminal elements. In fact, the purpose was to detain
importers of oil products from Serbia who refused to
pay taxes into the Kosovo Government coffers. In the
eyes of the local population, this operation stood out as
an act of intimidation. We believe that in this case the
international presences to which I have referred acted
as an instrument of the Kosovo Albanian authorities,
bringing to the north of the province the rules and ways
established by the authorities in Pristina. We call on
EULEX and KFOR to observe the status neutrality
stipulated by their mandate.

We share the concern of the Serb authorities and
the Serbian Orthodox Church about the situation that
developed in connection with the transfer by NATO
forces to the Kosovo police of the responsibility for
protecting the most significant Serbian cultural and
religious heritage sites. We believe that these actions
could cause additional tension in Kosovo in the area of
security, especially given that cases of theft and
vandalism against Serb holy sites were once again
documented during the reporting period.

The situation with regard to the return to Kosovo
of internally displaced persons - including the
Serbian population - continues to be unsatisfactory.
There are many reasons for this situation, not the least
of which is the fact that returnees do not have certainty
about their own security.

On 19 April, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia sent a letter to the Secretary-General setting out
the approaches of the Serbian side to the issue of
carrying out an investigation in connection with the
well-known report by Dick Marty about illegal
trafficking in human organs in Kosovo. We support the
proposal contained therein to establish, by decision of
the Security Council, an international investigative
mechanism accountable to the United Nations. It
should be granted adequate resources to ensure the
functioning of a reliable witness-protection
programme. In carrying out its work, the mechanism
should work closely with interested States, UNMIK
and EULEX. Its progress and results must be reported
to the Security Council through the Secretary-General.
We are convinced that carrying out a detailed,
de-politicized and independent investigation will be in
the interests of establishing truth and reconciliation in
the province.

We believe that arguments made today by
Mr. Jeremie are more than convincing. We do not
understand the aspirations of some colleagues in the
Security Council to limit the investigation to EULEX,
which has never done anything like that. The
international community has, more than once, looked
at these serious crimes; once we overlook them, we
cannot do so a second time. We are convinced that we
will revisit this issue in the Security Council in the
near future.

