Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Mr. President, I
would like to express my delegation's appreciation to
you for having convened this debate on the work of the
Al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions Committee, and we
thank in particular Ambassador Mufioz for his
comprehensive report on and assessment of the
Committee's work. Let me commend him also for the
leadership and initiative which he has shown in
guiding the work of the Committee. This has been key
to the success of the Committee's work.

My delegation has taken due note of the fact that
the Monitoring Team is in the process of preparing
country profiles based on an analytical study of all the
reports so far received. We believe that developing
guidelines based on the best practices and lessons
learned from the accumulated experiences of previous
and existing expert panels and monitoring groups, as
well as on pertinent recommendations of working
groups on sanctions, might be relevant to the goal of
improving the implementation of sanctions within the
framework of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999).
By adopting resolutions 1267 (1999), 1390
(2002), 1455 (2003) and 1526 (2004), the Security
Council took the unprecedented step of bringing into
force legislation binding on all States on the issue of
combating terrorism. Those resolutions laid a strong
foundation for halting the flow of money to terrorists
associated with the Al Qaeda network as well as for
preventing their entry into, or transit through, their
territories, and for preventing the direct or indirect
supply, sale and transfer of arms and similar
equipment.

The international community has already made
remarkable progress in freezing terrorists' assets.
Controlling financial resources is an important aspect
of the international campaign against terrorism. The
Committee should continue to focus on alternative
remittance systems. In that context, it is important to
provide greater assistance to States in need of it to
improve their financial structures, including banking
systems.

The need to make the consolidated lists kept by
the Committee available to various institutions other
than banks should be given greater attention, including
in the context of travel bans.

The position of my country regarding the need to
introduce further legislation and amend our legal
framework to incorporate the sanctions measures,
including financial legislation, is stated in the report
that we submitted last year, as requested by resolution
1455 (2003).

The general issues arising from travel bans, arms
embargoes and how they can be handled by the
Security Council were discussed in the Bonn-Berlin

report. We fully endorse its recommendations. My
delegation is of the view that credible reports of
sanctions evasion have often not resulted in a proactive
response by the international community. There is a
need to reverse that position. The Al Qaeda and
Taliban sanctions Committee therefore needs to
coordinate its efforts and cooperation more closely
with United Nations agencies and regional and
subregional organizations, as well as to strengthen its
relationship with the private sector and non-
governmental organizations.

In that regard, the Kimberley process for the
certification of rough diamonds has demonstrated that
financial institutions and insurance and transportation
companies both have the capacity and expertise to
contribute to the implementation of sanctions. We
believe that this is an example which could be
followed.

Terrorism is no longer a localized problem that
can be solved through domestic actions alone, and the
Chairman's report is quite clear on this. It is the view
of my delegation that we need long-term solutions to
address this problem. Measures to combat terrorism
should be based on international cooperation and
coordination. Furthermore, the Committee can be
successful in fulfilling its mandated tasks only if there
is the fullest cooperation from Member States. Such
cooperation, as has also been stated by Ambassador
Mufioz, should be a two-way street, that is, from the
Committee to States and from States to the Committee.

In that regard, we welcome the Chairman's visit
to Algeria, Tunisia, Spain and Senegal, which took
place from 1 to 8 May. We believe that his visit was
very useful in assisting the Committee to observe, in
loco, the measures that have been taken by various
countries. African countries have been targeted by
terrorist actions, and that mission provided a good
opportunity to review, in loco, the progress made and
the steps taken by the countries of the continent to
respond to the terrorist threat.

Today - 25 May - is also Africa Day, and I
take this opportunity to acknowledge the happy
coincidence of the presentation of the report on the
Committee's visit to various African countries.

I conclude by saying that I commend the
Monitoring Team for the role it has been playing in
furthering the work of the Committee and in
monitoring compliance with Security Council
sanctions. As in the past, we look forward to working
with the Team in a spirit of openness and cooperation,
and we hope that the Team will maintain its
independence and improve its analytical reporting to
the Council.

