Miss Durrant (Jamaica): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the 14 members of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) which are Members of the
United Nations: Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas,
Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago and
my own country, Jamaica.

We are particularly pleased to see you, the
Foreign Minister of Singapore, a country with which
all CARICOM. States have close relations, presiding
over today's historic meeting of the Security Council to
celebrate the independence of a new small island
developing State: East Timor. We also wish to express
our appreciation to the Singapore team for the efficient
manner in which it has led the Council during this
month.

CARICOM. joins the rest of the international
community in celebrating the long-awaited inclusion of
East Timor in the family of nations. This momentous
event marks the culmination of a long and arduous
struggle by the people of East Timor. As an association
of countries that have long supported the people of
East Timor in their quest for independence, CARICOM
is pleased that the people of East Timor have now
achieved their objective. We are confident that they
will embark on the task of nation-building with their
characteristic vigour and strength of determination.

CARICOM. also congratulates President Gusmao
and Prime Minister Alkatiri on their election to the
high offices of Government. At the same time, we
remember all those other East Timorese who did not
live to see this day, but whose vision, leadership and
sacrifice started the country on its path to self-
determination and freedom.

CARICOM. is proud of the part played by the
international community in assisting the people of East
Timor towards self-determination and independence.
The United Nations in particular, through the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), performed a laudable role. The timely
attention paid by the United Nations to East Timor in
the period leading up to and following the referendum
in 1999 and in the monitoring of the electoral process
in 2001 and 2002 for the Constituent Assembly and
general elections respectively exemplifies the
commitment of the international community to
promoting the principles of democracy and good
governance in East Timor.

The Security Council should also be recognized
for its pivotal role in promoting stability in East Timor,
beginning with its timely mission, led by Ambassador
Martin Andjaba of Namibia, following the referendum
in 1999.

The international community also owes a debt of
gratitude to those countries that provided military and
civilian personnel to the International Force in East
Timor and to UNTAET. We especially remember those
who paid the ultimate price in the service of peace.

Secretary-General Kofi Annan and his Special
Representative, Sergio Vieira de Mello, are to be
commended for ensuring that dialogue and conciliation
have been pre-eminent in the process of transition in
East Timor and for assisting the people in developing
structures of Government that will serve them well as
an independent nation. We wish to place on record our
appreciation to the men and women of UNTAET for
their dedication to their tasks.

At the same time, greatest credit must go to the
people of East Timor, who have shown unflagging
support for the democratic process. They now face the
challenging task of nation-building to consolidate the
gains of independence and to sustain democratic and
economic viability. It is therefore important for the
international community to maintain its assistance to
the people of East Timor.

The United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET) will play a vital role in the
development of viable administrative structures crucial
to the stability and development of the new State by
providing assistance in areas relating to security and
capacity-building. We take this opportunity to
congratulate His Excellency Mr. Kamalesh Sharma on
his appointment as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for East Timor, and we wish him
every success in his assignment.

The pledges of support totalling over $360
million made recently at the international donors
conference will assist in providing an enabling
environment for the reconstruction and the sustainable
development of East Timor. CARICOM. urges that this
assistance be disbursed expeditiously.

In conclusion, let me again express CARICOM's
congratulations to the people of East Timor on this,
their independence day. We look forward to welcoming
East Timor as the one hundred ninetieth State Member
of the United Nations.

