Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and European Union Special
Representative, for his comprehensive briefing. We are
grateful also to His Excellency Mr. Nikola Spirie,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for his statement. Once again, we
congratulate Bosnia and Herzegovina on its election as
a member of the Security Council and wish them every
success during their term.

What we have just heard describes an overall
situation that remains fragile and bleak and that
appears to be close to an impasse. The Republika
Srpska's constant challenges to the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and constitutional order of Bosnia
and Herzegovina pose a serious obstacle to vital reform
and, in general, to efforts towards peace in the spirit of
Dayton. We are deeply concerned about the resurgence
of nationalism, which inflames passions and weakens
the Federal Government, which is already beset by
financial difficulties. We are equally concerned by
threats against the High Representative, which must be
taken seriously.

We hope that the political negotiations in the
framework of the Butmir process initiated by the
European Union and the United States will restore
dialogue and ensure progress. We also welcome the
Security Council's adoption on 18 November of
resolution 1895 (2009), which extends the mandate of
the European Union military mission in Bosnia and

Herzegovina (EUFOR). That European force
undeniably remains the key support for stability and
security in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We urge the
political actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
particular the leaders of Republika Srpska, to keep
dialogue alive in order to safeguard the territorial
integrity of their country and make democratic
progress for the benefit of their citizens. In that regard,
Bosnia and Herzegovina should do all it can to make
its Euro-Atlantic integration a reality.

In a different vein, my delegation notes with
regret that the country's National War Crimes
Prosecution Strategy, which we welcomed last May,
and the National Justice Sector Reform Strategy have
not yielded the hoped-for results, principally because
they have been blocked by Republika Srpska, in
particular with respect to the extension of the mandates
of international judges and prosecutors.

The economic situation in the country is very
worrying, and the outlook is grim due to the effects of
the global economic and financial crisis. In addition,
the energy problem, which is now acute and a decisive
factor of Bosnia and Herzegovina's economic health,
must urgently be resolved.

With regard to ongoing reforms, in particular
those related to the economy, public administration and
defence, we call on the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to accelerate the implementation of
strategies, plans of actions and programmes in order to
rapidly meet the conditions for the transition from the
Office of the High Representative to a European Union
Special Representative mission. Similarly, efforts must
be made to ensure progress in the areas of human
rights, principally with respect to the protection of
minorities and refugees, and freedom of press.

The regional environment is also a determining
factor in the political, social and economic
transformation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is why
we welcome the improvement of the country's relations
with its neighbours.

In conclusion, we encourage the political actors
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to move forward and to
demonstrate firm resolve to break the gridlock in their
country in order to build a strong and stable State, of
course within the framework of its integration into
Europe.

