Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation to the
Polish presidency for having organized this debate. I
would also like to thank the briefers for their input into
today's debate.

I align myself with the statement to be delivered
later by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

It is most unfortunate that civilians still account for
the vast majority of casualties in armed conflicts. As
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/462)
indicates, civilian populations continue to bear the
brunt of armed conflicts across the globe. The report
shows that at least 26,000 civilians were killed in 2017
as a result of armed conflicts in only six countries,
namely, Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Yemen.

The report paints a very bleak picture of the current
state ofthe protection of civilians in armed conflict and
respect for the rules of international humanitarian law
and human rights law. According to the report, attacks
against civilians and civilian infrastructure, medical
workers, facilities and humanitarian convoys have
increased since the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016).
Those attacks are taking place in various places around
the world, but they are more prevalent in the Middle
East. We condemn all the attacks that have taken place
against civilians, including medical and humanitarian
staff throughout the world, especially in Palestine,
Afghanistan, Yemen, Syria and Myanmar.

The new round of repression and the massacre of
unarmed Palestinian civilians in Gaza, including women
and children, is the latest in an old pattern followed
by the Israeli regime over the past seven decades. On
14 May, the world and the Council witnessed the Israeli
army commit yet another war crime in Gaza, killing
more than 60 unarmed Palestinian civilians and injuring
thousands more in a single day. Given the circumstances,
there is no doubt that those vicious attacks and killings
were planned and deliberate. Those criminal acts took
place with total impunity being extended to the Israeli
regime by the United States, the same country that later
tried to prevent the appointment of a commission of
inquiry in the Human Rights Council.

The account of Canadian physician Tarek Loubani
is very telling, as he recounts:

"On 14 May, while treating patients with gunshot
wounds in Gaza during the Great March of
Return, I was shot in both legs by Israeli forces.
One medic on my team, Musa Abuhassanin,
was killed while attempting to providing care to
Palestinian protesters".

That happened with medical staffwearing high-visibility
jackets. When they approached injured Palestinians,
they did so with their hands raised so as to show soldiers
that they were unarmed medical professionals.

More than three years of Saudi-led aggression
against an already impoverished Yemen has claimed
thousands of civilian lives, in particular those ofwomen
and children, and brought about the destruction
of Yemen's civilian infrastructure - including
hospitals, schools, roads, food factories and power
plants - thereby depriving civilians of their most basic
necessities. Blocking humanitarian access to an already
famine-stricken Yemen has led to further deterioration
in the humanitarian nightmare in Yemen and led to
the most catastrophic humanitarian situation the world
has seen for many decades. That aggression continues
under the watch of the Security Council. Worse still,
this inhumane war enjoys the full military, logistical
and training support of the United States.

We are living in a world with a growing sense of
frustration with regard to dealing with the suffering
of civilians in conflict. No one is winning wars. For
the sake of the millions of civilians who are suffering
around the world, the international community urgently
needs to end current conflicts and to prevent new ones
from erupting.

