Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank Mr. Jacob Lew, United
States Secretary of the Treasury, and his delegation
for having convened this debate on an issue of such
importance - the threat to international peace and
security posed by terrorism and its financing. We also
thank in particular the Finance Ministers and other
national officials for their presence here this afternoon,
as well as the Secretary-General and the President of
the Financial Action Task Force, Mr. Je-Yoon Shin, for
their attendance here today.

My country highlights the unity and joint efforts of
all the members of the Security Council that enabled the
unanimous adoption today of resolution 2253 (2015),
whose provisions are central to addressing this issue of
global reach while also serving to adapt the instruments
and mechanisms of the Council to the situation facing
humankind today, in particular the ruthless actions of
terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS). We note that the Security Council is able
to effectively fulfil its mandate when the necessary
political will is there. We hope that this spirit will
prevail, enabling us to address and resolve important

issues that have awaited the Council's attention for
years.

Venezuela reiterates its categorical rejection of
acts of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
irrespective of motive, wherever and by whomever it
is committed, bearing in mind that such acts constitute
flagrant violations of international law and violate the
right to life. Accordingly, my country wishes to express
its deep concern over the accelerated pace at which
the phenomenon has spread, and the unprecedented
military and logistical capacity at the disposal of
terrorists acting in the Middle East, Africa and Europe.
The extraordinary military capacity of terrorist
groups has been directly linked to the destabilization
of countries such as Iraq, Libya and Syria through
military intervention, foreign interference and war. It
must be stated clearly that the rapid rise of terrorism
is the result, inter alia, of the financial and military
support provided to armed and violent non-State
actors who were previously exploited as instruments of
destabilization before becoming terrorist groups that
merged with ISIS, expanding rapidly.
My country is appalled by the suffering and high
cost in human life paid by the peoples ofIraq, Libya and
Syria, among others, as a result of the barbaric acts and
violence of terrorist groups. It is time for the Security
Council to act to prevent the financing and support of
terrorism, while complying with international law. My
country therefore firmly supported resolution 2199
(2015) and resolution 2253 (2015), which we adopted
earlier today. We hope that all States will work towards
their strict implementation, without exception or double
standards.

The most recent terrorist attacks, in particular those
committed by ISIS, demonstrate that vulnerability in
the face of this terrible scourge and the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters is now worldwide. That is
why the role of the Council will be crucial in the fight
to address this extraordinary threat to the future of
humankind. In the same vein, we stress that effectively
combatting terrorism, including the financing thereof,
will require robust joint efforts on the part of the
international community. States must boldly assume
their responsibility for fighting this scourge by ensuring
full compliance with the provisions of international
instruments and the resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly prohibiting the transfer of
arms to, the financing and training of, and the provision
of safe haven to terrorist groups.

Effectively tackling this phenomenon does not
allow for dichotomies, because there is no such thing as
good terrorists and bad terrorists. Terrorism is a single
phenomenon that must be prevented, confronted and
eliminated unequivocally. That is why the international
response to this scourge requires an assessment of the
conditions that favour its spread throughout the world,
without justifying the commission of terrorist acts in
any circumstances, with a view to developing effective
and innovative strategies to counter terrorist and
extremist narratives so as to prevent the radicalization,
recruitment and mobilization of both human and
economic resources in its favour.

Much progress has been made since 11 September
2001 in combating financing for terrorist groups,
but clearly it is not enough. As terrorist societies and
groups have evolved, these criminal organizations have
also improved their methods of building and managing
their resources. The best example of that is the way
that ISIS has supported itself thanks to revenue illicitly
generated in the occupied territories, primarily by
exploiting and selling oil, looting banks, smuggling
cultural heritage and antiquities and kidnapping
for ransom, among others. In that regard, financial
intelligence activities, along with the timely exchange of
operational information, are crucial if we are to disrupt
and dismantle the financial infrastructure of such
terrorist organizations, keeping in mind that ending
their financing will help to limit and even contain their
criminal activities. It is important to understand how
they manage their resources if we are to combat them
effectively.

Finally, we believe the international community
must continue to work to create, implement and
strengthen strategies that can neutralize terrorist
groups' ability to act. In that regard, we believe that the
eventual adoption of an international convention against
terrorism would complement the range of international
legal instruments we already have, by enabling us
to arrive at a definition that would strengthen the
consensus on this subject.

