Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank the Senegalese presidency
for convening this Security Council open debate on
an issue that falls under the theme of the maintenance
of international peace and security: water, peace and
security. My delegation would like to thank today's
briefers - the Chair of the Global High-Level Panel
on Water and Peace, Mr. Danilo Turk; Ms. Christine
Beerli, Vice-President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross; and Mr. Sundeep Waslekar, President
of Strategic Foresight Group - for their contribution
to this important public debate. We also wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for your concept note (S/2016/969, annex) in preparation for this meeting, as it highlights
the salient points of our debate.

(spoke in English)

Djibouti wishes to commend Senegal for its
leadership in convening the Arria Formula meeting
on the same subject last year, presided over by His
Excellency President Macky Sall. It built on past efforts
by the Security Council to consider the nexus between
water, peace and security and the protection of natural
resources as a tool for preventing conflicts and building
peace in post-conflict countries.

Since the General Assembly's adoption of resolution
47/193, of22 December 1992 -which declares 22 March
each year World Day for Water - pressure on water
has been rising and action is urgent. In many places
growing populations, more water-intensive patterns of
growth, increased rainfall variability and pollution are
combining to make water one of the greatest obstacles
to poverty eradication and sustainable development.
Flood and drought have already imposed huge social
and economic costs, and climate change is making
water extremes worse. The action plan of the High-
Level Panel on Water and Peace affirms that

"If the world continues on its current path,
projections suggest that the world may face a 40 per
cent shortfall in water availability by 2030. The
consequences ofsuch stress are local, transboundary
and global in today's interconnected world."

Water is an important element ofthe discussion as a

potential driver of conflict, a potential cause of disaster
and an essential precondition for development. It is high
time that we raised the political commitment to urgently
address the issue. Africa has 64 transboundary river
basins, covering 90 per cent of the continent. There
is still no agreement for some of those river basins
in Africa. There is also increasing recognition that
transboundary groundwater must be better factored
into transboundary cooperative arrangements for
water. Moreover, transboundary water cooperation is
needed for the proper implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals, especially indicator 6.5.2, on
the proportion of transboundary basin areas with an
operational arrangement for water cooperation.

(spoke in French)

The Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), our regional organization, has devoted much
time and attention to developing a regional policy and
legal framework for water resource management. In
2015, ministers responsible for water resources of the
member countries ofIGAD demonstrated strong political
will to meet, in a coordinated manner, the multiple
challenges linked to the common management of
natural resources, in particular water governance. They
agreed to promote closer cooperation for the equitable,
sustainable, lasting and coordinated use, protection,
conservation and management of transboundary water
resources within the IGAD region; to promote and
facilitate the establishment of institutional agreements
and arrangements for the management of transboundary
water resources within the IGAD region; to foster
the harmonization of policies and legislation on the
use of the development, protection, conservation and
management of transboundary water resources; and
to encourage research, technological development,
awareness and capacity-building in the development
and management of transboundary water resources.

(spoke in English)

It is also worth underlining that IGAD and the
United Nations have agreed to develop a collaborative
effort aimed at sharing experiences and good practices
and, most important, at promoting a conflict-sensitive
approach to managing natural resources, including
fresh water and rivers.

We wish to take this opportunity to commend
the role played by the International Committee of
the Red Cross in raising awareness about the norms
of international humanitarian law and in continuing
to ensure the protection of water in times of armed
conflict, and also for its vital humanitarian work as one
of the main providers of water to populations affected
by armed conflict.

To conclude, Djibouti wishes to reiterate its
profound gratitude to Senegal and to the members
of the Security Council for putting this issue on our
agenda. We are convinced that investing in prevention
so as to avoid the escalation of tensions in water-related
conflicts should be one of the main priorities of this
organ, as it has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
benefits far outweigh the costs.

