Mr. Mbayu (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for taking the
initiative to organize a public debate in the Security
Council on the situation in Somalia. Like earlier
speakers, I would like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Yusuf Hassan Ibrahim, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Transitional National Government of Somalia.
We would also like to thank him for the detailed
information he gave us at the private meeting this
morning on the situation in his country and the efforts
being made by the Government to foster peace and
national reconciliation in Somalia.

The situation in Somalia has been a major cause
of concern to the international community for many
years. It is a country that has been divided, torn apart,
devastated and ravaged by war. Given that background,
we warmly welcome the most recent report of the
Secretary-General; the information that it contains is
cause for renewed hope. We must take advantage of
these positive signals.

Cameroon believes that by the end of this debate
the Council will have stressed the importance of five
points. The first is the need to maintain and strengthen
national dialogue among all the Somali factions. The
second is the need to step up the process of national
reconciliation so as to foster a fully representative,
broad-based Government, while at the same time
preserving the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
unity of Somalia. Thirdly, specific steps must be taken
for social and economic recovery and the restoration of
peace, security and stability in that country. That will
require increased mobilization of financial resources so
as to attain the $83.7 million requested in the most
recent Inter-Agency Consolidated Appeal to meet
humanitarian needs. There will also have to be material
and financial support for the very promising activities
in the field by the World Health Organization and
Doctors Without Borders. Fourthly, additional
assistance will be required for the United Nations
consolidated inter-agency disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration plan. Fifthly, activities aimed at
economic recovery for the consolidation of peace need
to be strengthened, with particular emphasis on
combating illiteracy, ensuring respect for the rule of
law, demining, demobilizing militia groups and
reintegrating former militia members, and ensuring
respect for human rights.

In order for the recovery and reconstruction
process in Somalia to succeed, our Somali brothers
must demonstrate a spirit of tolerance, patriotism and
dialogue, and accept negotiations with a View to
national reconciliation. To that end, my country
supports the initiative by the member countries of the
lntergovernmental Authority on Development to bring
all factions together at a national reconciliation
conference during the second half of April 2002. It is
our hope that all factions will participate effectively at
the conference.

Cameroon also supports the initiative of the
Secretary-General to set up a Committee of Friends on
Somalia, at both Nairobi and New York. The
membership of the two groups must nevertheless take
into account the complexity of the matter and the stated
sensitivities of those in the subregion.

Lastly, I would like to congratulate Mr. Tubman,
the new Representative of the Secretary-General. I
wish him good luck in his new and noble task of
bringing about peace and heartfelt reconciliation in
Somalia.
