Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, permit me to express at the
outset my appreciation for the efforts you have made to
hold this meeting on measures taken by the Security
Council to combat international terrorism within the
framework of implementing resolution 1373 (2001)
and for making our deliberations a success. Allow me
also to express our sincere appreciation for the
presence of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, at
this open and important meeting of the Security
Council.

I would also like to express our sadness upon
learning of the departure of Ambassador Jorge
Navarrete, because this is a great loss for us all. I am
pleased to express our sincere hopes for his success in
his future endeavours at the next stage of his career.

Permit us also to express our gratitude and
sincere thanks for the tireless efforts made by Sir
Jeremy Greenstock, the Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, to implement the provisions of
the resolution.
My delegation is pleased to join its voice to the
statement that will later be made by the Permanent
Representative of the sister State of Morocco before
the Council on behalf of the League of Arab States.

My country attaches great importance to the
discussion of terrorism, whose great impact on security
and peace in the world makes it a very pressing matter.
We must never forget the tragic events of 11
September, and we wish again to express our strong
condemnation of the brutal crime that claimed many
innocent civilians in New York, Washington, DC, and
Pennsylvania. Because it targeted innocent civilians, it
violated the fundamental right to live in security and
peace and contradicted the religious, spiritual and
humanitarian values that we all believe in.

The Member States of the United Nations know
that Syria's fight against terrorism did not start with the
events of 11 September. We trust that all countries will
recall that Syria was the first country to submit specific
proposals to the General Assembly, through its Ad Hoc
Committee on Terrorism, in a serious effort to put an
end to the threat of terrorism.

In 1986, the late President Hafez al-Assad called
for an international conference in which Member States
would participate in a discussion of terrorism, to define
it and distinguish it from the just struggle of people to
free themselves from foreign occupation. Member
States of the Non-Aligned Movement supported this
Syrian call, as did the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the League of Arab States. Many other
countries of the world were sympathetic to this
invitation as well.

The validity of the Syrian proposal is reflected in
the fact that many prominent individuals, including
writers and politicians, are calling upon the United
Nations and the international community at large to do
what Syria called upon them to do several years ago: to
formulate a definition of terrorism in order to mobilize
all States in effectively combating terrorism.

The President of the Syrian Arab Republic,
Mr. Bashar Al-Assad, has unequivocally stated Syria's
denunciation of terrorist acts. He has indicated that
Syria has long held that position and that Syrian policy
on this matter has been unchanged for decades.
President Al-Assad has taken note of the confusion
regarding use of that term throughout the world, and
has said that it is natural for States to differ in their
views and concepts, but that all States must agree on an
understanding of the facts as they are and on the
universal use of consistent criteria in addressing this
situation. President Al-Assad has also said that it is
necessary to analyse the causes and reasons of the
increasing spread of terrorist acts throughout the world
rather than approaching the issue from the standpoint
of the results to which these have led.

Syria has always stressed the importance of
working at all levels to combat international terrorism
and of doing so in a manner consistent with the
principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter.
Syria has signed agreements with many other States to
combat transnational crime, with a view to
coordinating joint action against terrorism, illicit drug
trafficking and money-laundering. The relevant
authorities are now engaged in the legal procedures
necessary for the signature of remaining United
Nations anti-terrorism conventions. Syria is a party to
the Arab Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism,
and made an effective contribution to the adoption of
the Convention of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference on Combating International Terrorism.

Nowadays, there are some who, unfortunately,
choose to criticize and cast doubt on United Nations
achievements in the elimination and ending of
colonialism. But it goes further than that: there are
those who deliberately disregard the Charter and the
resolutions of the United Nations. We reaffirm here
that foreign occupation is the most brutal form of
terrorism; therefore, resistance to foreign
occupation- especially Israeli occupation of Arab
territories in Palestine, the Syrian Golan and southern
Lebanon - constitutes legitimate struggle. Here, Arab
Ministers for Foreign Affairs, at their special meeting
held at Cairo on 20 December 2001, stated that

"Israel's attempt to link its assassinations
and oppression aimed against the Palestinian
people to the events of 11 September is a flagrant
attempt to hoodwink international public opinion,
to cloak Israeli acts of terrorism, to promote and
deepen the hatred between Arabs and the United
States, and to undermine the peace process."

The crimes committed daily by Israel against the
Palestinian people are war crimes; their perpetrators
must be brought to justice. Here, we must recall the
sight of dozens of Palestinian houses demolished by
Israeli tanks a few days ago in the Rafah camp. That is
not very different from the scene at the World Trade
Center, which was destroyed by the terrorists whom we
have all agreed here to fight and eliminate.

If those Israeli crimes are not terrorism, what else
can they be? The greatest danger we face in our fight
against terrorism is the Israeli interpretation of
combating terrorism and of resolutions of international
legitimacy, which is based on a pretext of self-defence.
What kind of self-defence is this which permits
occupation, settlements, killing and destruction? It is
regrettable that the Security Council, which has a
Charter responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and which today is
deliberating the fight against international terrorism,
has not yet denounced Israeli State terrorism or
repeated Israeli violations of international humanitarian
law and of the United Nations Charter. We all know the
reason for that silence.

Seeing with one eye means seeing only half of the
truth. Terrorism, wherever it may be, must be dealt
with in a unified way. The reason for everything taking
place in the Middle East is the continued Israeli
occupation of Arab territories and Israel's denial of the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. A just and
comprehensive peace in the region must be based on
the implementation of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and on the principle of land for
peace. These must be the first steps towards bringing
peace and security to all in the region. Threats of force
against any Arab or Islamic country are unacceptable;
we reject them; they do not serve the goal of combating
terrorism. They make the situation in the area more
complicated and more volatile and have a negative
impact on economic and social development in that
very important region, a region that needs genuine
support from the international community.

Syria calls for more effective international
cooperation within the framework of the United
Nations to put an end to terrorism, as an important and
necessary step towards putting an end to the ongoing
threat. On that basis, Syria has been in the forefront of
States that have responded to resolution 1373 (2001)
by submitting reports pursuant to paragraph 6 of that
resolution. Since the resolution did not define
terrorism, Syria has based its report on its obligations
under the 1998 Arab Convention on the Suppression of
Terrorism, which clearly distinguished between
terrorism and legitimate struggle against foreign
occupation. That is consistent with international anti-
terrorism agreements to which Syria is a party and with
Security Council resolution 1333 (2000).

In its report, Syria stresses its condemnation of
terrorism in all its forms, along with its commitment to
international legitimacy. It states its readiness to
cooperate with the United Nations in combating
terrorism in conformity with the United Nations
Charter, with international legitimacy and with the
fundamental principle of national sovereignty. The
Security Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee has
adopted many detailed measures pursuant to the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001), including
guidelines for States on the preparation of their reports
under paragraph 6 of that resolution. Here, Syria, as a
member of the Committee, will cooperate with other
members in discussing the reports submitted by States
with the greatest possible sense of responsibility,
integrity and impartiality and in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter and international
law.

In many briefings and statements to the press,
Ambassador Greenstock, as Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, has affirmed that the purpose of
the Committee can be summed up as promoting and
supporting the activities of Member States in the fight
against terrorism and as providing the necessary
material and technical support and advice to countries
that need this to formulate their own anti-terrorism
legislation and measures. The purpose of the
Committee is not to level accusations at States,
individuals or institutions on specific issues or to adopt
rulings against them. Syria fully agrees with
Ambassador Greenstock's vision, and affirms that it
will cooperate with him and with the other States
members of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and of
the United Nations on the basis of that understanding.

