Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We affirmed in our statement this afternoon
that there was an Arab Summit that adopted a peace
initiative to end the Arab-Israeli conflict and to achieve
a just and comprehensive peace in accordance with the
resolutions of international legality. We had great hope
that the Council would start its resolutions in the wake
of that initiative on the Middle East with a resolution
that would take into consideration and include that
historic Arab Summit resolution on achieving a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace.

But it is clear that the resolution before us is only
a repetition of resolution 1397 (2002), on which we
abstained, while there is a resolution adopted by the
Arab Summit that deals with the peace process as a
whole. Consequently we thought that the Council
would deal with that resolution if there was any real,
serious intent to achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the region.

The Arab Summit resolution has also affirmed the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State with
East Jerusalem as its capital. Syria supported that
initiative and the establishment of that State, as has
been clarified by the Arab peace initiative. Therefore,
we believe that dealing with this very serious issue in
this manner and in such haste, without even giving us
time to consult with our capitals, is not an example we
should follow as a way of dealing with things in the
Council.

It is clear that the resolution before us does not
take into consideration the positive outcome of the
Arab Summit. It is selective; it does not condemn the
Israeli attacks against the Palestinian people, but it
condemns the bombings. It links an immediate
withdrawal of Israeli troops from Palestinian
territories, even naming them "Palestinian cities", to a
ceasefire. This means that a withdrawal cannot be
effected until the Palestinian Authority has
implemented a ceasefire. Consequently, the resolution
again treats the victim and the criminal equally.

In addition, we do not find any condemnation of
the Israeli terrorism in this resolution, about which we
talked today in different ways and forms. In its
operative paragraph 1 it calls for a "meaningful
ceasefire", instead of asking Israel to withdraw
immediately from occupied Arab territories.

We were hopeful that the Council would really -
and we have made all efforts in that respect - keep its
unity by not referring to resolution 1397 (2002), on
which we have clarified our position completely and
did not accept. This resolution does not fulfil even the
minimum aspirations that we have; therefore it came
out in very weak language. It does not achieve the
aspirations of the Arab Group, and it does not help in
dealing with the explosive situation in the region in a
drastic manner.

Based on all these considerations, we did not take
part in the voting on this draft resolution.

