Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): Allow me very briefly to
congratulate you, Sir, on behalf of my delegation for your
assumption of the presidency of the Council this month
and to say what a pleasure it always is to work under
your guidance.

We also thank Ambassador Albright and the United
States delegation for the very clear and firm leadership
which they gave to the Council in the month of February.

The British Government continues to follow the
situation in Burundi with concern, and we shall vote in
favour of the draft resolution before the Council today. I
should like to pay a tribute to the Caucus of the Non-
Aligned Movement for its work in bringing this draft
resolution to the consideration of the Council.

The draft resolution focuses - rightly, in our
view - on preventive diplomacy to assist efforts at
finding a lasting political solution and it encourages the
international community to help underpin those efforts in
support of continuing political progress.

 

The message which this draft resolution sends to the
leaders of Burundi, both within and outside the
Government, is crystal clear. We call upon all parties to
refrain from violence and to engage seriously in political
dialogue. We are prepared to support a dialogue from
outside and to provide international assistance of a political,
preventive and material kind in support of the progress
which they achieve. The initiative and the responsibility lie
with the Government of Burundi itself.

There have been some encouraging signs since January
this year, when the Council adopted resolution 1040 (1996).
These positive developments deserve to be acknowledged,
providing as they do the basic elements for political
progress. It is clear, for instance, that there has been a
reduction in tension, attributable largely to the
Government's recent pacification campaign. We are also
glad that a date has now been set for the National Debate.
The parties in Burundi must now build on these relatively
positive developments and start the process of a genuine
political dialogue in support of the principles of the
Convention on Governance.

While Burundi's leaders are ultimately responsible for
restoring hope and stability to their country, the draft
resolution addresses many ways in which the international
community can help. It encourages international assistance
and expertise in support of a continuing political dialogue.
In this context, we strongly support the collective efforts of
former President Nyerere, former President Toure, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Burundi,
the Organization of African Unity, the European Union and
eminent regional leaders appointed by the Cairo Conference
of Heads of States of the Great Lakes Region. All the
actors have their roles to play, and it will be important as
they go about their work that their efforts are properly
coordinated, a process which, we are glad to see, has
already begun with their meeting in Addis Ababa on 29
February.

The draft resolution also envisages more concrete
forms of assistance. It looks to the possibility of a United
Nations radio station to promote reconciliation and
dialogue. More generally, it requests further contingency
planning on other steps to support a comprehensive
dialogue. In our view, that might include the possibility of
an international presence to underpin the political process.

The situation in Burundi remains volatile. The
Secretary-General's report depicts a sobering picture of the
suffering that might result if the parties in Burundi do not
build on the fragile gains which have been achieved. We
know that Burundi will not rid itself easily or quickly of
political violence and extremism. We and the Council
therefore remain prepared to consider further measures
against those who reject this approach and choose to
pursue violent means to achieve their aims. We fully
support the call in the draft resolution for continued
contingency planning for a humanitarian response against
the possibility of widespread violence and a worsening of
the humanitarian situation.

We believe that international attention should
continue to be focused on Burundi and that this Council
should remain closely seized of developments. There is a
lot to be gained for the people of Burundi and of the
region as a whole by a concerted, major push to advance
the political dialogue. The means are there if the will is
there. We hope that the voice of the Council and of the
international community expressed in this meeting today
will be clearly heeded by those who hold Burundi's future
in their hands.

