Mr. De Mistura: The stakes in Syria today are
very high; we all know Why. In the light of recent
developments, two paths lie before us: one is more
outrages, more destruction and death, stoked by
regional and international divisions or even escalation
and deeper confrontation. That is what all Syrians fear,
and I share their fears.

But there is another path- more serious discussion,
a real de-escalation and ceasefire, and a rallying
behind the only way out of the Syrian nightmare. We
urgently need a consensus among major stakeholders to
support concretely the United Nations-led negotiation
process, and this is the occasion for doing it with the
goal of attaining a package for an orderly, mapped-out,
credible and irreversible agreed political transition as
per resolution 2254 (2015).

Before the events of last week, we had made
modest but incremental progress towards that goal.
The fifth round of intra-Syrian talk in Geneva saw no
breakthroughs - let us be frank - but no breakdown,
either. The parties engaged - truly engaged - on
substance for nine full days, which was no small feat.
The discussions were mostly business-like and correct,
and on the final day they all told me that they were
ready to return to Geneva for a sixth round in May, at
our invitation.

The Government and the opposition discussed
in parallel, in the format of proximity talks, all four
baskets: governance issues, constitutional process
issues, election issues and counter-terrorism, security
governance and confidence-building measures. These
discussions were framed by the goal of a political

transition, while preserving - obviously, we do
not want mistakes like those we have made in the
past - the sovereignty, unity, independence and

territorial integrity of Syria within the context of
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), the
statements of the International Syria Support Group
(ISSG), and resolutions 2118 (2013), 2254 (2015),
2268 (2016) and 2336 (2016). Council members are all
familiar with these, since they adopted them.

Yes, the delegations preferred to focus on different
issues and yes, the gaps are still wide, but everyone in
Geneva did engage on all baskets. They also discussed
general principles regarding the character of a future,
post-transition Syrian State. These United Nations
ideas remain living points that can be further developed
as the negotiations progress on the substance of each
of the baskets. One day soon, we hope, all of these
discussions must come together into a package for an
overall negotiation - a real negotiation.

While it was premature to secure common
understanding at this stage, some points became
quite clear or more clear than before, at least to me,
and perhaps to the Syrians, too. For example, I felt a
growing appreciation that the basis of transition must
be legally and constitutionally solid and the journey
and destination well-mapped out and agreed upon. I had
hoped that we could have proceeded in more detail on the
constitutional dimension, which has potential for how
to ensure the constitutional basis of the transition and
how Syrians in transition mode might write and agree a
new constitution. Nevertheless, there was a deepening
of the process, and this should not be underestimated.

But now, let us be frank, this fragile progress is
indeed in grave danger. Already in Geneva, the talks
were overshadowed by an intensification of fighting on
the ground and continued lack of safe, sustained and
unimpeded humanitarian access. I sent formal written
appeals to the Astana ceasefire guarantors the Russian
Federation, Turkey and Iran. I urged all with influence
and leverage to restore the credibility of the ceasefire
and to do more to ensure that the United Nations can
reach 4.7 million people in hard-to-reach and besieged
areas. We are ready to do so.

Displacement also has continued. Over the past
month, more than 6,000 fighters and their families
have been evacuated from Al-Waer to Idlib as part
of local agreements. We have also learned of serious
developments regarding the so-called four towns.
Political statements issued after the Geneva talks
also sent some warning signals. The Government
stated its intention to reconquer the entire territory
of Syria rather than emphasize a ceasefire with real
negotiations. Some opposition voices, on the other
hand, also expressed support for military offensives,
including battles led by internationally prohibited
terrorist groups, or even cast doubt on the need to
return to Geneva and give priority to military solutions.
Then, as representatives from over 70 countries and
international organizations gathered in Brussels in
what was supposed to be and has been an important
meeting regarding the future of Syrian to address
Syrian humanitarian needs and commit to a post-
transition reconstruction, which is terribly needed, we
witnessed the horrors inflicted by chemical weapons
on innocent Syrian victims, including children, women
and men, in Khan Shaykun.

This outrage shocked the conscience of the whole
human family. People all over the world also realized
once again that the Syrian calamity is notjust an affront
to our shared values, but that it can affect the lives of
citizens of any land, particularly if chemical weapons
are used and war crimes, terrorism, mass displacement
and unending war are accepted as something that we
have to live with. The Syrians cannot live with it and
neither can we, wherever we are.

A few days later, the United States targeted
Al-Shayrat air base with a strike of 59 Tomahawk
missiles. Under-Secretary-General Feltman briefed
the Council on that extremely serious development on
Friday (see S/PV.7919). Since then, we have seen more
fighting and violence, with new claims of the use of
cluster munitions in inhabited areas, barrel bombs and
incendiary weapons, including in close proximity to
Khan Shaykhun itself.

The Secretary-General has made clear his own
position. He is appalled by the chemical weapons
attack in Khan Shaykhun and calls for accountability
for such crimes. In the aftermath of the United States
strike, he is mindful of the risk of escalation and
appeals for restraint. He calls for for reinstating a
nationwide ceasefire and for a refocus on the need for
a political solution, which is also essential in the fight
against terrorism.

This is a time for clear thinking, strategy,
imagination and cooperation. on the ground. Those who
do not want a negotiated a political settlement - we
call them spoilers, as Council members know - are
stopping at nothing to undermine the political process.
They want us to fall into their trap. We must not allow
that to happen. We must all resolve that the time
has come for the intra-Syrian talks to move beyond
preparatory discussions and into the real heart of the
matter, across all four baskets, in order to secure a
meaningful negotiated transition package.

The United Nations is ready to do its part. I have
consulted with the Secretary-General, and I personally
remain at my post and will continue to serve, especially
in view of the current emergency. I am ready to
reconvene talks in May, and the United Nations is ready
to offer a real, substantive starting point for discussion
and negotiations among the Syrians. But let us see a
few things sorted out first, if we can.

As we speak, United States Secretary of State
Tillerson is in Moscow to meet with the Russian
Government. We welcome that direct, high-level
diplomatic engagement at this crucial moment between
the United States and Russia. I was in Moscow myself
just before the last round and in Washington, D.C.,
yesterday. I participated on behalf of the United
Nations in the trilateral encounter with the United
States and Russia during the Geneva talks. Those
two countries, the co-chairs of the ISSG, have serious
differences - we know it - but also common interests
and, indeed, responsibilities. They must find a way to
work together in order to stabilize the situation in a
deliberate, realistic and concerted way in support of the
political process. Indeed, the Council, the region, and
the ISSG members need to unite behind one process of
mediation in Geneva.

We also need the ceasefire guarantors to step up
and deliver now. Important countries have assumed the
responsibility as guarantors. Those guarantees are being
put to a severe test. Next week, the guarantors will meet
in Tehran for a working-level meeting before a higher-
level meeting in Astana planned for early May. We urge
them to work towards renewing the ceasefire and on
confidence-building measures linked to the ceasefire,
along with a continued effort to fight terrorism. Astana
must bring forth Geneva and vice versa. That is why
the United Nations will be in Tehran and Astana, and
provide whatever technical support it can to what we
consider a very important step.

It has been said so many times. We have said it
together so many times, but I will say it again: there
can only be a political solution to that bloody conflict.
There is no military solution despite what some try
or believe. That is what I hear from Syrians from all
walks of life. That is what we have been told from those
who participated in the United Nations Civil Society
Support Room and by the Women's Advisory Board.
That is the voice of the Syrians. That is what members
of the Council have long agreed upon. Let us therefore
view this moment of Crisis - and it is a moment of
Crisis - as a watershed and an opportunity, perhaps,
for a new level of seriousness in the search for a
political solution.

