Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me first and foremost to thank both Mr. Ashraf Qazi,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Iraq, and Ambassador John Bolton, Permanent
Representative of the United States of America, for
their briefings to the Security Council. Allow me also
to welcome the presence among us of the Ambassador
of Iraq this morning.

Iraq is witnessing considerable progress at the
political, constitutional and democratic levels. The first
Iraqi Government elected under the new Constitution
was formed last June. This represents a culmination of
the transitional political process which is in keeping
with the transitional administrative law approved by
the Security Council in resolution 1546 (2004).
However, this progress has been overshadowed by the
seriousness of the tense internal situation, a lack of
security and widespread violations of human rights due
to intensive violence and grave terrorist acts, making it
incumbent on the Government, indeed the entire Iraqi
people, to make a national dialogue a top priority so as
to promote national reconciliation and overcome the
intercommunal strife and escalating violence which
afflict Iraq and have led to one of the worst
humanitarian crises in the world today.

Nearly 3,000 innocent civilians are falling victim
to violence every month, and thousands more are
wounded. The number of displaced persons this year
has so far reached 200,000. As a result, national,
regional and international efforts must be mobilized in
order to address this priority issue. In that regard, we
look forward to the holding of the Iraq reconciliation
conference, to be held under the auspices of the League
of Arab States and which the United Nations is
currently helping to prepare.

We also hope that the national reconciliation plan
announced by the Iraqi Government in June will be
crowned with success. We are confident that our
brothers in Iraq will overcome the obstacles on the
road to stability, because that is the best way to set Iraq
on an irreversible course towards a future of peace and
democracy that allows for the withdrawal of foreign
troops.

In addition to promoting a comprehensive,
participatory and transparent political process that
responds to the aspirations of all communities in Iraq,
the current deteriorating security situation must be
brought under control so as to enable the Iraqi security
forces to take over responsibility for security in the
country, a responsibility now being discharged
primarily by the Multinational Force.

Ensuring that the basic living conditions of the
Iraqi people improve and addressing the deteriorating
humanitarian situation is no less important than
national reconciliation or, indeed, than strengthening
security forces to ensure the stability of Iraq.

In that regard, last July the Iraqi Government and
the United Nations signed the International Compact
with Iraq, headed jointly by the Government of Iraq
and the United Nations. The ministerial meeting to be
convened by the Secretary-General in New York next
week will be an opportunity for the Iraqi Government
to set out its economic programme as well as specific
frameworks for agreement, which we hope will bolster
the Iraqi economy and thereby benefit the Iraqi people.
Such an agreement must be as comprehensive as
possible so as to ensure constructive and interactive
regional and international participation.

In the light of the difficult situation prevailing in
Iraq, the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
has an important and commendable role to play in
providing support, advice and electoral assistance. It
also provides reconstruction, development and
humanitarian assistance, as well as assistance in the
area of human rights. The Mission is also providing the
necessary assistance Iraq needs to enable it to achieve
the fundamental goals of resolution 1546 (2004).
Finally, let me stress the importance of the unity and
cohesion of Iraq.

