Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Iwould like to welcome all the Force Commanders
who have joined us today and to commend the initiative
of Under-Secretary-General Herve Ladsous. His input
will certainly be useful and very beneficial.

Before moving to the substance of my statement, on
behalf of the Kingdom of Morocco, I would like to pay
a warm tribute to the Blue Helmets and to commend
their devotion, commitment and spirit of sacrifice
for the noble goals of the United Nations. I take the
opportunity to reiterate our condolences to the families
of those countries that have lost members of their armed
forces or police or civilians in the service of the United
Nations.

No one can dispute that the peacekeeping mission
is the most tangible and visible activity of our
Organization's work. It is increasingly complex and
demanding in terms of human and financial resources.
Its fundamentals remain the same.

First, peacekeeping certainly remains the most
effective and least costly way to restore and to build
peace.

Secondly, the multidimensional nature of recent
peacekeeping operations requires us to find responses
tailored to the changing needs of such operations, as
well as to the new challenges and circumstances that
arise once missions have been mandated.

Thirdly, peacekeeping requires different approaches
in order to take into account the realities specific to
each situation. In that respect, seeking harmonized
practices, other than in logistics, cannot be through a
one-size-fits-all approach or an end in itself.

Fourthly, in trying to find innovative responses to
new challenges, it is essential to remain committed to
the core principles of United Nations peacekeeping,
namely, respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States, the consent of parties, impartiality
in implementing Council mandates and the non-use of
force except in the case of legitimate defence.

Fifthly and lastly, as others have underscored this
morning, the protection of civilians remains the primary
responsibility of nation States and, when mandated by
the United Nations, requires adequate training and
logistical resources for its implementation.

In reaction to the presentations that we heard this
morning, allow me to highlight the following elements.
First, it is essential to adapt the financial and material
resources available to peacekeeping operations to
mandates adopted by the Council. In that context,
notwithstanding the need for rationalization, budgetary
and financial constraints should not hamper the
effectiveness and efficiency of operations mandated by
the Security Council.

As was amply and tangibly demonstrated this
morning, peacekeeping operations usually take place
in difficult conditions, sometimes with the involvement
of actors who threaten the security and physical safety
not only of civilians, but also of Blue Helmets. In that
respect, in addition to early-warning systems, Blue
Helmets must have the necessary means and equipment
to defend themselves, and those who attack them must
be fully brought to account.

In order to succeed, any peacekeeping mission must
base its activity on the neutrality and impartiality that
characterize the work of the United Nations, pursuant
to the mandates established by the Council. That is the
only way to ensure the trust and the cooperation of the
parties to a dispute.

More than a decade ago, resolution 1353 (2001) set
the stage for increased cooperation among the Council,
the troop- and police-contributing countries and the
Secretariat. Despite some progress, the full potential of
such triangular cooperation is far from being achieved.
We must do more, and we are committed to doing
so. In that context, the issue of training was rightly
emphasized by several speakers this morning. We
believe that training at the national level and through
modules prepared by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations should be complemented by the sharing of
knowledge and good practices among troop-contributing
countries.

In that regard, the issue of multilingualism is
extremely important and must be reflected in the goal of
ensuring greater effectiveness and cooperation between
peacekeepers and not only the authorities, but also the
people that they are mandated to serve and protect.

Finally, I would like to take advantage of the
presence of the Force Commanders with us today to
highlight the importance of inter-mission cooperation.
Moreover, in the context of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, which I have the honour to
chair, we have decided to keep that topic as a priority in
our debates and analysis. I would like to ask the Force
Commanders who are here if they can share with us
the best practices that they have acquired in the field
so that we can be inspired by them and ultimately
establish them as consistent practices to be applied in
other missions.

On the basis of Morocco's commitment to the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the role of the
United Nations as an arbiter in the peaceful settlement
of disputes and in maintaining international peace and
security, my country has consistently contributed to
peacekeeping operations almost since its independence.
We will spare no effort in continuing to contribute
to strengthening the role of the Organization in
maintaining peace and to the ongoing improved
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.

