Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I
believe that Mr. Annabi's briefing today was timely. As
he reminded us, the Secretary-General will be visiting
the region in a few days' time, and last week the
Gaborone meeting on national dialogue - to which he
referred - took place.
I should like to make a few brief comments. The
representative of Belgium will be speaking later on
behalf of the European Union, and I should like to
associate myself with the statement that he will be
making.

My comments relate to the Gaborone meeting and
the inter-Congolese dialogue, as well as to the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, the question of Kisangani, the future
deployment of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), humanitarian issues and next steps for the
Council.

With regard to the Gaborone meeting of the inter-
Congolese dialogue, we should like first of all to note
the significance of the fact that it took place. The
meeting was successful. Agreement was reached on the
next meeting, which, as Mr. Annabi said, is to be held
in mid-October in Addis Ababa. We should like to pay
tribute to President Masire and his team. The
Congolese have shown a spirit of compromise and
made efforts to work towards national reconciliation.
They have all said that they want to put an end to the
war, preserve their independence and national unity
and, working together, restore democracy. I believe that
the international community should draw the
appropriate conclusions from the inter-Congolese
process and should encourage them by resuming aid
and cooperation with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

I also believe that the international community
should encourage them by resuming aid and
cooperation with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The positive developments in the peace process
should be accompanied by progress in the daily lives of
the Congolese people, and they need international
assistance. I would like to refer to an excellent article
by Brian Atwood, the former Administrator of the
United States Agency for International Development
who recently visited the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It appeared in the International Herald Tribune
of 25 August, and was entitled "Congo Is Making
Progress and Deserves More Western Help". I think
that, in fact, the international community should assist
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in its economic
and social recovery.

The Secretary-General will visit the region very
soon. He will touch upon a number of the issues
referred to by Mr. Annabi. He will undoubtedly speak
about disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR) and confidence-
building measures among the parties. Mr. Annabi told
us that the peace process has made progress, that the
ceasefire has been more or less respected, that progress
has been made in disengagement, and that it is now
time to move beyond that by implementing the plan for
the withdrawal of foreign forces, as was required by an
overwhelming majority of the participants in the
Gaborone meeting, who demanded the withdrawal of
foreign forces.

As Mr. Annabi has said, we need to move
forward without delay in the process of DDRRR of
armed groups. A plan is now being drafted and
finalized. For this plan to be successful, however, we
need a political framework and agreement on this
DDRRR plan among the main countries involved,
beginning with the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Rwanda, as Mr. Annabi said. An agreement will be
possible only if trust is established between the leaders
of those two countries. The Secretary-General was in
contact with those two leaders on the occasion of the
Lusaka summit and will see them again in Kinshasa
and in Kigali. These leaders need to come together and
work together in order to move the DDRRR process
forward.

Once the parties have reached full agreement on
the details of the political framework, the international
community should provide financial and material
support and assistance in kind to support the DDRRR
programme. We then need to reflect on and provide
support for phase III of the MONUC deployment,
which Mr. Annabi also mentioned.

The second point Mr. Annabi raised related to the
demilitarization of Kisangani. This is an important
issue, and the Security Council has made it quite clear
that Kisangani needs to be demilitarized, and this is up
to the Rassemblement congolais pour la de'mocratie
(RCD-Goma). Resolution 1304 (2000) was very clear
on this point. Rwanda and Uganda accepted the terms
of that resolution. The next step is to convince
RCD-Goma to accept it and to obtain their cooperation,
because they alone now have troops in Kisangani. Let
me recall that this city has become somewhat symbolic
in the peace process. We therefore need to demilitarize
Kisangani. The present situation cannot be allowed to
continue.

It is not a question of the RCD-Goma evacuating
the city. The city needs to be demilitarized, which is a
very different matter. That obligation does not affect
the civilian presence of the RCD-Goma, which can
continue to administer the city until the crisis is
resolved. However, the RCD-Goma must withdraw its
military forces from the city of Kisangani.

Another point was the importance of the parties
continuing to cooperate with MONUC and the question
of the future deployment of forces, which was also
referred to by Mr. Annabi. Mr. Annabi spoke about
cooperation of the parties with MONUC. The Security
Council must not accept that United Nations personnel
should be subjected to threats and to pressure. This is
an important issue that the future deployment of
MONUC clearly depends upon. Mr. Annabi has given
us useful information, including on the four
coordination centres and on the outlook for phase III.
We will be calling for the future deployments and an
increase in MONUC personnel, especially a gradual
deployment in the eastern part of the country.

Mr. Annabi referred also to economic,
humanitarian and human rights issues. He said that the
economic and humanitarian situation is still disastrous
despite the progress already achieved in difficult
conditions by the United Nations and non-
governmental organizations. The re-opening of the
river, to which he referred, will be a breath of fresh air
for the Congolese people, allowing for better provision
of supplies to the cities. The parties must assist
MONUC in re-establishing river traffic, which is of
vital importance for the Congolese people.

With respect to human rights issues, all parties
need to continue and do more very strictly to respect
human rights in all areas under their control. In liaison
with the Special Rapporteur, Mr. Garreton, the Council
plans to remain watchful on this issue. There cannot be
any settlement or reconciliation if those who violate
human rights go unpunished.

Another issue on which the Council has focused
is the plundering of resources. In April, we received
the report from the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Following the publication of that report, we noted
growing awareness by the international community of
this plundering, which is considered to be fuelling the
conflict and to be one of the reasons for the grave
serious human rights violations as a result of the
plundering. The Security Council needs to implement
appropriate measures to end the illegal exploitation of
resources. We hope that the Panel of Experts document
to be published this autumn will indicate that progress
has been made in this area.

Let me speak briefly about the future timeframe.
The Council will continue to follow the question of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo very closely. Next
week we will meet with Sir Ketumile Masire, the
facilitator of the inter-Congolese dialogue. At a later
stage, the Council intends again to invite to New York
the members of the Political Committee of the Lusaka
Agreement, with whom the Council maintains an
ongoing dialogue. I think members will recall that they
were invited here last February and that during the
Security Council mission to the region in May, the
Council met all the members of the Political
Committee of the Lusaka Agreement.

On the occasion of the special session of the
General Assembly on children, we will have an
opportunity for further contacts, since I understand that
most of the countries of the region will be represented
at the very highest level during the summit on children
to be held from 19 to 21 September.

In the meantime, we wish complete success to the
Secretary-General, who will be going to the region. We
understand that his new Special Representative,
Mr. Ngongi, will be accompanying him in his travels.
We welcome Mr. Ngongi's appointment and arrival. We
take this opportunity to pay tribute to Mr. Morjane for
his outstanding work, as I told him a few days ago,

before the conclusion of his duties in Kinshasa.

