Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote d'Ivoire thanks Ms. Bintou Keita,
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Mr. Ismail Wais, Special Envoy for
South Sudan of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), for their briefings on the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and on the
political process in that country.

My intervention will focus on the following points:
the political process initiated by IGAD through the
second phase of the High-level Revitalization Forum of
the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan, the humanitarian
and human rights situation and the renewal of the
UNMISS mandate.

Cote d'Ivoire commends all IGAD-led initiatives
in the political process and welcomes the successful
holding of the second phase of the High-level
Revitalization Forum on the peace agreement, despite
persistent tensions. The level of participation by the
various actors in the South Sudan conflict in the second
phase, as well as the intense consultations that took
place in Addis Ababa, point to the gradual ownership
of the political process by all parties.

My delegation is gratified that the parties have
agreed on some adjustments to the 2015 peace
agreement and encourages them to continue discussions
on governance and security issues under the auspices
of Special Envoy Wais, as part of the upcoming
resumption of the second phase of the Forum. C6te
d'Ivoire reaffirms its support for a political solution to
the South Sudan crisis, and we welcome the renewed
commitment of the parties to respect the cessation of
hostilities agreement of 21 December 2017.

My country remains concerned about the precarious
humanitarian situation and calls on the international
community to support the efforts of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs with a view to
ensuring that funding needs are met and that people can
benefit from humanitarian assistance.

With regard to the human rights situation, my
country is concerned about allegations of massive
violations and abuses by the parties involved, including
gender-based sexual violence and violence against
children, as indicated in the report of the Human Rights
Council Commission of Inquiry on South Sudan. My
country urges the South Sudanese authorities to shed
light on those allegations, to identify the parties
responsible and to bring them to justice.

In that regard, my country joins the call by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union, at
its 751st meeting, for the South Sudanese Transitional
Government of National Unity and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union to urgently
sign a memorandum of understanding on establishing
the Hybrid Court and its swift integration into the
country's legal framework. Cote d'Ivoire remains
convinced that the setting up and operationalization
of the Hybrid Court will contribute to calming social
tensions and fostering reconciliation among the South
Sudanese people.

With regard to UNMISS, my country deplores
the obstacles to the implementation of the Mission's
mandate, in violation of the status of forces agreement,
as my delegation believes that the presence of UNMISS
contributes to stabilization and and helps protect many
South Sudanese civilians. It is therefore important
to ensure the optimal operation of the Mission in a
secure environment.

In that regard, we endorse the recommendations
of the Secretary General's report (S/2018/143) on the
renewal of the Mission's mandate and on capacity-
building for the South Sudanese Government and
its security institutions on important issues such
as violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the progress made in
the deployment of the contingents of the Regional
Protection Force and calls on the Government of South
Sudan to remove the remaining obstacles that slow
down the effective operationalization of the Force.

In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the
Secretary-General's initiative on assessing the police
and troop capacity of UNMISS, and hopes that the
results of that review will help the Mission adapt its
operations to the needs on the ground.

Cote d'Ivoire calls on all warring parties in
South Sudan to accept that a military solution cannot
be the answer to the conflict in their country. Only
political negotiations with the participation of all and
an agreement reached by all parties can put an end to
the conflict they face, which is tearing their beautiful
country apart and only serves to prolong the suffering
of the South Sudanese people.

