Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Mr. President, for scheduling this important
discussion. I would like to particularly thank the
Secretary-General for his continued engagement
and leadership on the issue of the Sahel region,
demonstrated most recently by his extensive visit to
the region in November, together with the President of
the World Bank and other leaders of key institutions
and organizations. I thank him, President Jim Yong
Kim, Special Envoy Prodi and the representatives of
the European Union and the African Union for their
important contributions to the debate this morning. The
United Kingdom welcomes the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/20l3/20, which establishes a strong
and united Security Council position on peace and
security in the Sahel.

The Sahel region is at an important moment in
its progress towards greater security, prosperity,
democratic governance and the rule of law. In recent
weeks, Mali has successfully elected a new President,
completed the first round of legislative elections and
initiated investigations by the Malian judiciary into
alleged human rights violations following the 2012
coup. Mauritania has also held parliamentary elections,
which is a positive step that we hope will help the
country return to a normal electoral cycle.

But while we have recently seen positive steps,
many challenges remain. Organized crime and drug
trafficking, the proliferation of weapons, environmental
issues and humanitarian crises continue to impede
progress in the region. Despite the successes of the
French-led international intervention in Mali, the threat
from Islamist extremists remains in many parts of the
country, and corruption among elites and institutions
prevents State structures from acting effectively to
address challenges.

That is why the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel is so important. It should be implemented
as soon as possible. The integrated strategy sets out an
organizing framework to address those challenges. It
is a useful framework not just for the United Nations,
but also for a wider set of international partners. If
the implementation of the integrated strategy is to be
effective, we must prioritize work on areas where a
tangible and lasting impact can be made. I would like
to highlight three areas in particular that the United
Kingdom perceives as critical.

First, on security, we must disrupt terrorist activity
and tackle organized crime by building regional capacity
and regional cooperation. The United Kingdom has
proposed a draft resolution tackling one aspect of that
menace - ransom payments for kidnapping that fund
terrorist activity in the Sahel region. We must develop a
clear analysis of and approach to all such cross-border
threats.

Secondly, we must focus on State-building. We
should offer long-term support for political settlements,
including local-level reconciliation initiatives and the
integration of armed groups. To ensure the provision
of basic public services, such as education and access
to justice, particularly outside urban areas, we should
embed transparent and accountable systems for service
delivery with closer tracking of progress made.

Lastly, we must focus on resilience. Regional
bodies should lead in economic cooperation and food
security initiatives, ensuring their implementation
at the country and local levels with the help of
non-governmental organizations. Alongside that local
and regional ownership, international partners should
support Governments in developing and delivering
well-targeted safety net schemes as a means of guarding
against recurrent environmental and food shocks.

In October, the United Kingdom's Minister for
Africa, Mark Simmonds, visited Timbuktu - the first
British minister to do so for many years. During the
visit, he noted the rich cultural heritage of the Sahel and
its great potential to succeed. He saw for himself how
much the region needs the international community
to help it to unlock that potential. The United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel can do just that. It is
time now to move it from the theoretical to the practical
and unlock that potential. That requires commitment
and resources, and we hope that the United Nations
assets in the region, particularly the regional office in
Dakar, can now be mobilized to begin the work that
needs to be done in implementation.

