Mr. Yiga: Ithank the Council for the overwhelming
support that has come out of this important meeting.
It has taken us to the next level as United Nations
peacekeeping police officers. The ball is in our court
now to make it work. I have three categories of answers
to the questions that have come from members.

First of all, let me make a general statement. From
what I have heard, the Council does not want us to be
any less than what it expects us to be in the field. That
has come out very strongly. We must be the United
Nations police (UNPOL) that we should be in the
field, and we therefore need all possible support that
can come our way to do our work. Sometimes we have
to be good diplomats in our role as UNPOL. We have
to be very strong professionals in terms of operations,
and sometimes we need to mix in a bit of politics to
understand host State situations.

The second point I would like to make is that
there has been a lot of support for training and
readiness to prepare UNPOL to carry out its functions.
Perhaps it is time to influence some Member States
to offer peacekeeping training at police institutions
all over the world. If training is seen as a serious
matter - whether or not someone is going to be
deployed in peacekeeping - then officers will emerge
from police training with the knowledge that the world
may require their skills in case they are chosen. I think
that would make a very big difference. I know that
police commissioners who would be willing to come as
guest speakers to police institutions.

Finally is the issue of equipment. That is very
serious. We need to be equipped. Let me give one
example. There is a lot of crime taking place now. As
police officers, we cannot afford to just look on as
crime increases every day. Moreover, we do not have
strong data bases to share with the world when stability
has been restored. We need equipment and we need
support in terms of scientific management and research
into crime. We need to be able to categorize the kind
of crime that is happening in our situations in order to
enable the Security Council to develop relevant policies.

Let me reply to the question posed by the
representative of Rwanda with regard to whether
training police offers has helped in any way. A lot of
effort was put into police training in South Sudan, but
it was all lost when the crisis began. Still, we managed
to create a sense of shame among police officers. The
Inspector General of Police belongs to the biggest
regional police organizations, and when he attends their
meetings he represents South Sudan's national police
service. When he mixes with colleagues, he is expected
to tell them what he is doing in his own country as head
of the police, which holds him to a standard that links
him to the common fraternity of policing all over the
world.

