Mr. Sharma (India): Mr. President, with true
Dutch valour, you have chosen a theme for this open
debate that goes to the heart of the problems that
bedevil peacekeeping. Your courage demands
frankness from us. I will speak frankly, but I would
speak far too long ifI went into every issue that should
be addressed. I will focus, therefore, on only some key
issues.

You have said that there should be no exit from a
peacekeeping operation without a strategy, but there is
renewed confusion over what peacekeeping is. Though
five years ago, the euphoria of "An Agenda for Peace"
was corrected, in the cold light of experience, in its
"Supplement", the Council is being invited back into
the same misty evangelism which caused havoc in
several peacekeeping operations. Influential voices
argue again that modern peacekeeping forces must be
prepared to defeat the lingering forces of violence. This
sounds plausible, but is in fact not doable, for a number
of reasons. The Council will set up peacekeeping
operations for an inevitable fall if it goes this route,
from which there is no exit without embarrassment.

As an example, the Council has just set up a
classic peacekeeping operation to monitor a ceasefire
between two countries. All of us trust and hope that the
ceasefire will hold, but if it unravels the Council will
surely not expect that peacekeeping operation to use
force against either party to coerce it back to the status
quo. Instead, as it has each time war has broken out in
the Middle East in an area where a peacekeeping
operation was deployed, the Council would authorize
its immediate evacuation. This would not mean that the
credibility of the operation or of the Security Council
or of the United Nations had been called into question.
It would simply be to accept that peacekeeping could
do no more.

However, in Sierra Leone, the Council sets
mandates that involve the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone's going into action against the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) to force it back to
the Lome Peace Agreement. In both operations, the
United Nations is interposed between parties to a
conflict. For a peacekeeping operation, there is in a
sense no difference between an inter-State and an
intrastate conflict. Impartiality and consent are as
essential in one situation as they are in the other. We
urge the Council to bear this in mind when it
formulates, and even more when it alters, peacekeeping
mandates. As any experienced troop contributor knows,
in peacekeeping it is best not to veer from classicism to
romanticism.

Throughout the first 40 years of peacekeeping,
the United Nations followed an unwritten rule in
peacekeeping, spelled out by the Secretary-General to
the General Assembly when the United Nations
Emergency Force (UNEF), the first peacekeeping
operation, was set up. As the chapter on UNEF in The
Blue Helmets, a book published by the Department of
Public Information, recalls:

"Troops from the permanent members of the
Security Council or from any country which, for
geographical and other reasons, might have a
special interest in the conflict would be
excluded." (3rd ed, p. 42)

The permanent members did not participate
because it was nominally at the end of their proxy wars
that the United Nations sent in its peacekeepers.
Neighbours and regional Powers were excluded
because, by definition, they could not be disinterested.
The United Nations understood, quite rightly, that
successful peacekeeping could be carried out only by
countries that were neutral and had no interests of their
own to pursue.

This cardinal rule has repeatedly been broken in
recent years, with the United Nations now co-opting
regional players, though it is in the nature of politics
that they are often part of the problem, not of the
solution. This has had repercussions on more than one
peacekeeping operation, but it seems that lessons have
not been learned.

Of the three case studies listed in your paper, Sir,
the United Nations experience in Liberia was studied in
depth in the book published last year by the United
Nations University, Peacekeepers, Politicians and
Warlords. That made the telling point that intrastate
conflicts almost invariably spill over boundaries.
Displaced populations crossed borders; refugees
became pawns in a larger game; warlords used
contiguous foreign territories as safe havens; and, as a
result, in these, even more than in the earlier interstate
wars, neighbouring States and regional Powers became
a part of the conflict.

It is in Africa that the Council has leaned most
towards regional solutions. The study published earlier
this year by the United Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research, tellingly named Peacekeeping
in Africa: Capabilities and Culpabilities, makes the
point that many Africans believe this is so because the
major Powers do not want to get involved in Africa.
Regionalism is a self-serving way out, but it makes
peacekeeping enormously difficult for the United
Nations and for countries like India that have
participated in almost every operation in Africa.

Africans see the problem clearly. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for instance, whose
neighbours have been drawn into the conflict, the mini-
summit of the parties to the conflict in Tripoli, held on
7 and 8 November, agreed as the first point in their
communique that "a neutral African force shall be
deployed immediately in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo". By definition, none of the regional
countries now embroiled in the conflict can be brought
into a United Nations peacekeeping operation either
and the United Nations has not, for once, made the
mistake of inviting them to re-hat their forces in the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

It is truly a pity that this eminently sensible
practice has been so unwisely ignored elsewhere in
Africa. Regional interests will force out the
disinterested; peacekeeping in these circumstances
becomes a flawed instrument.

Almost every peacekeeping operation is now
predicated on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR), but, unlike the DDR with which
we are familiar here, what it produces is often of
dubious quality. Based on the Liberian experience, the
United Nations University study asks if disarmament
should be a priority when the demobilization of
traumatized fighters into a scarred society creates its
own problems and reintegration is impossible without
economic opportunities. It argues that the insistence on
disarmament was not helpful in Liberia and was
ineffective. Without either security or employment,
young men did not give up the weapons on which their
lives and livelihoods depended. In Sierra Leone,
disarmament was what triggered the RUF's return to
violence.

The key, possibly, is for the Council to dispatch at
the very outset a peacekeeping force so large and well-
armed that it would not only provide a sense of security
to all, but be clearly so strong that no faction could
take it on. Only a force like that, on the lines of those
sent by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization into the
Balkans before the United Nations took over, would
persuade faction leaders to disarm. However, so far the
Council has not been generous at the outset, only
authorizing deployment in the numbers and the quality
needed after a crisis has set in. This has truly been a
false economy; the cost has been paid by the United
Nations, by peacekeepers and most of all by the
civilian victims of resumed conflict.

The farewell address to the Security Council a
few days ago of the High Commissioner for Refugees
highlighted the contradictions between the needs of
peacekeeping and those of humanitarian relief.

Agencies that provide relief arrive in a theatre of
conflict well before the peacekeepers do. Throughout
the conflict, they have to come to a modus vivendi with
the parties. Their operations may be skeletal, like their
beneficiaries, but they serve a vital function. Once
peace is restored, they want to expand their operations.
Why, they ask reasonably, should the local population
have a stake in peace if peace brings them no
immediate benefits? And they expect peacekeeping
forces, once they arrive, to ensure that relief operations
on a much larger scale can be carried on unimpeded.

Unfortunately, that is where problems begin. The
warlords believe that if they lose control of who gets
what in their areas of influence, their power will fade
away; they resist spurts in relief activity that exclude
them. If the peacekeeping forces are conduits for the
delivery of aid, warlords see them as adversaries. If the
peacekeeping forces decline to help, relief agencies
complain bitterly that they are of no use, and pressures
mount in the Council to issue mandates that explicitly
ask for the force to facilitate the provision of
humanitarian assistance. In either case, the
peacekeeping operation is drawn into a mire.

The Council's humanitarian impulse is natural,
but conducting humanitarian relief through
peacekeeping undermines both humanitarian relief and
peacekeeping. Indian peacekeeping units invariably
provide humanitarian relief, judging local conditions in
the light of experience. This gives them entree into
local society, makes the peacekeeping operation visible
and acceptable, and slowly weans the population away
from the warlords. However, a rush to bring in relief,
including through military convoys, usually leads to
more problems. The crises that erupt ensure that the aid
providers leave, and the peacekeepers get bogged down
with no exit in sight.

Citing the diamond embargoes in Angola and
Sierra Leone, your paper, Mr. President, asks the
Council to use all forms of leverage at its disposal to
assist peace operations implement their mandates. It is
debatable whether those decisions are within the
Council's mandate; it is also by no means settled that
they indeed assist a peacekeeping operation. What is
clear is that, in Sierra Leone, the diamond embargo
required the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) to take on unforeseen, very ambitious and
dangerous tasks for which peacekeepers are not best
suited. As the Council will have seen from the note
verbale of 16 October 2000 from the Permanent
Mission of Angola addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2000/998), conflict diamonds were
shut down there only after the Government of Angola
wrested control of the diamond mining areas from
UNITA. In Sierra Leone, it remains to be seen whether
the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) will actually
surrender control of the diamond fields; if it does not,
and if UNAMSIL is asked to take them back by force,
the peacekeeping operation will be pursuing a radically
altered objective.

In Afghanistan, the war is believed to be fueled
by the sale of illicit drugs. So too are some conflicts in
Central America. It is an odd paradox that, because
those are products that are wholly illicit, the Council
has made no effort whatsoever to proscribe them as
"conflict drugs". There is "conflict timber" in West
Africa as well, and "conflict cobalt" in Central Africa.
What will drive Council action? The Council cannot
stop all illicit economic activity believed to drive
conflict; the temptation is to fall back on tokenism. The
end result will not be to assist a peacekeeping
operation, but to lay upon it tasks that it cannot
discharge.

Your paper, Mr. President, asks the Council to so
structure peacekeeping operations that they leave a
lasting peace behind. That is a tall order. Mrs. Ogata
explained the problem very well: there is a gap, she
reminded the Council, between emergency relief and
long-term development and reconstruction
programmes, and, during that gap, societies can
unravel again and conflicts resume. Is the answer, then,
to maintain peacekeeping operations until
reconstruction is well on its way? That too is
unsustainable, for reasons also explained by Mrs.
Ogata.

Development agencies are slow to come once a
crisis has ended and once the country is no longer
fashionable. In fact, experience has shown that, in that
respect, a peacekeeping operation becomes the victim
of its own success. As peace takes hold, media
attention dwindles, and with it donor interest fades.
That was the case in Haiti, for instance, one of the case
studies in your paper, Sir.

Before peace takes hold, all donors argue,
reasonably, that they want to see a semblance of
security before they invest. But without investment
there are no jobs, therefore no demobilization or
reintegration, and therefore no real security - and in
turn no lasting peace. However, when the peacekeeping
operation creates the conditions for peace to return, the
absence of crisis leads to an absence of donor interest.
This vicious cycle has to be broken, but peacekeeping
cannot do it. Post-conflict peace-building cannot be
done through peacekeeping. It is not in the Council's
mandate, and it is much too ambitious an undertaking
for a peacekeeping operation.

Somalia best illustrates the role the media plays
in Council decisions. Gruesome television coverage
first got the United Nations into Somalia, and then
forced it out. Emotions are stirred by television, but
emotion does not make for sound policy, particularly
when, as a result, pressure mounts for quick action.
Very few members of the Security Council are major
troop contributors, and there is a tendency to throw
peacekeeping operations at any tragedy that presents
itself on screen. That is what leads to the phenomenon
of "mission creep": changes in the mandate and tasks
of a peacekeeping operation, responding to media and
political pressure, that ask it to do what either cannot
or should not be done.

On this matter, the permanent and the non-
permanent members share equal responsibility. Very
often, the non-permanent members, most of which do
not have the independent intelligence-gathering ability
of some of the permanent members, are even more
dependent on, and swayed by, overwrought media
reports, forcing the Council to act in haste, with
unfortunate consequences for peacekeeping operations.
In Bosnia, responding to media coverage, the non-
permanent members insisted on the designation of
"safe havens" which, as Srebrenica proved, were
neither safe nor havens; some realized, too late, that
they had been wrong. In Sierra Leone, earlier this year,
the non-permanent members asked for a change to a
Chapter-VII mandate as soon as the crisis erupted, even
though the troop contributors knew that this would
have unfortunate consequences.

The Council needs to consult far more widely
than it does now before it changes a mandate. The
troop contributors are key players who know the
situation on the ground better than most, who are in
daily touch with developments and who can advise on
the basis of practical experience on what needs to be
done, but they are rarely consulted by the Council, or if
they are, their advice is rarely taken seriously. In any
sensible operation run by a national Government,
policy would be changed only in the light of reports
from the field. I urge the Council to keep up a
meaningful dialogue with troop contributors. They are
the ones doing the job, and professional forces want to
make sure that they do it right, and that they leave once
they have done it. Their advice will be sound, objective
and unbiased; it will serve the Council well.

Let me say that it is also essential that a
peacekeeping operation should not be dragged out
when it no longer has a useful role to play; it should
leave before the host makes it clear that it has
overstayed its welcome. That would be an exit without
dignity. The vast majority of the operations set up over
the past 50 years have been wound up with, by and
large, the countries concerned none the worse for it.
Peacekeeping should not become a crutch or a means
of establishing that a conflict continues; it runs the risk
then of becoming a self-fulfilling prophesy.

The case histories in your paper, Mr. President,
could be usefully rounded out by the Council's
considering the lessons that should be drawn from the
winding down of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda and the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola. In both instances the Governments
concerned decided at a certain point in time that the
peacekeeping operations served no purpose. They
welcomed the United Nations presence in their
countries, but no longer headed by a peacekeeping
operation. Neither the Secretariat nor the Council
wanted that. Again, if the Council is honest with itself,
it will concede that pique had some play here.

Since the Council decides when a peacekeeping
operation will be set up and when it will be wound
down, it does not like to have a beneficiary decide
what is best for it. Pari passu, this is also the attitude
of the Secretariat. Thankfully, in both Angola and
Rwanda good sense prevailed and the peacekeeping
operations were withdrawn when the Governments
concerned made it clear that they no longer wanted
them there. This too is a lesson that the Council must
learn: exit with humility.

If a peacekeeping operation is to be brought to a
successful end, without any apocalyptic codas, we
believe the following principles will serve the Council
well. Before setting up an operation, it should satisfy
itself that the terms and the time-frame of the peace
agreements the United Nations is supposed to monitor
and help to implement are reasonable. The Council
should consult widely in the region, and within the
country, to ensure that the agreement is truly supported
by all key players. The Council should explain to all
parties just what the role of the peacekeeping operation
will be, and get their concurrence. The Council should
choose as troop contributors those without a vested
interest in the country concerned and which have
armed forces that are professional, apolitical,
disciplined and well equipped. Sending inadequate
forces is as self-defeating as sending armed forces
accustomed to usurping power at home to promote
democratic settlements abroad.

The Council should also consult closely with
troop contributors at every stage of the operation and
base its decisions on their advice. It should deploy in
sufficient force so that the operation can immediately
and visibly, through its presence, provide security
where there has been none. Only once a general sense
of security has been established and all factions are
confident that if they disarm they will not become
vulnerable, should the Council move to undertake
disarmament, demobilization and integration at a pace
with which all parties are comfortable. Through its
calming presence, the Council should create an
environment in which the delivery of humanitarian
assistance can be steadily improved, without either
forcing the pace or becoming directly involved in the
face of possible opposition to the delivery of
assistance. Once disarmament is almost complete and
confidence in the impartiality of the peacekeeping
operation has been established, it can, if needed, move
towards actions that are described as aid to civil
authority.

Either when an inclusive political arrangement is
in place or when a Government firmly in power -
with whose consent the peacekeeping operation had
been established - asks it to leave, should the
operation be wound up, although the other tasks of the
United Nations would continue. Post-conflict peace-
building would continue over many years, but the
peacekeeping operation would be its precursor. It
should normally be long gone by the time this process
gets into full swing.

We wish all success to the Council in its tasks.
We thank you, Mr. President, for being present in
person today at this debate. I presume that you are
representing all the other Permanent Representatives in
the Council today.

