Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to take the floor on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM)
at this quarterly open debate on a matter to which
we have historically attached special importance,
namely, the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, particularly at the current
international juncture.

At the outset, we would like to express our
appreciation to Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
valuable briefing.

We are living in a world facing multiple, complex
and newly emerging threats and challenges to
international peace and security. We believe that these
must be resolutely addressed through multilateralism
in the framework of international law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions. The situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, can be no
exception. In that regard, we, the 120 States members of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, in accordance
with the communique' issued on 19 April, reaffirm the
full validity of the purposes and principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations and reiterate our
unwavering commitment to the peaceful resolution of
disputes, in accordance with Article 2 and Chapter VI
of the Charter of the United Nations, as well as with
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 2625
(XXV) of 24 October 1970.

Many sombre anniversaries took place in 2017,
and 2018 seems to be no different. This year marks the
seventieth anniversary of the Nakba, the catastrophe
and tragedy that befell the Palestinian people in 1948
when they lost their homeland under the Palestine
Mandate and the majority of Palestinians were forcibly
expelled or fled in fear. Uprooted from their cities,
towns and villages, dispossessed and displaced, they
became refugees whose tragic plight continues until this
day. We take this opportunity to once again call for the
undertaking and intensification of all efforts required
to bring an end to this injustice and advance a peaceful
and just solution. We cannot allow the suffering of the
heroic Palestinian people to continue.

In this regard, NAM. reaffirms that the ongoing
Israeli occupation, and the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
as a whole, continue to pose a serious threat to
international peace and security. This requires urgent
attention and action in accordance with international
law, the relevant resolutions and, of course, the Charter
of the United Nations itself. Moreover, the Security
Council must uphold its duties in the framework of
the Charter of the United Nations and act to uphold its
own resolutions, which constitute the foundation for a
peaceful, just and lasting solution to the conflict.

Furthermore, we reaffirm that all measures and
actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the occupying
Power - such as its illegal decision of 14 December
1981 aimed at altering the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan and
its institutional structure, as well as Israel's measures
to apply its jurisdiction and administration there - are
null and void and have no legal effect. In this regard,
and in line with our principled position, we demand
once again that Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981)
and fully withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan to
the lines of 4 June 1967, pursuant to resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).

In relation to the Palestinian question, the States
members of NAM. remain ready to contribute to the
achievement of a peaceful, just and lasting solution to
the conflict. We therefore welcomed the peace proposal
presented by President Mahmoud Abbas to the Security
Council on 20 February (see S/PV.8183) and extend
our support to his call for the early convening of an
international peace conference.

In this vein, we call for the intensification of
international and regional efforts in support of this
objective, and recall the responsibilities of the Security
Council and the General Assembly in this regard, as
most recently reaffirmed in resolution 2334 (2016). We
believe that this resolution provides the most viable
path to peace, setting forth the essential requirements
and parameters for a just solution that would preserve
the two-State solution on basis of the pre-1967 lines,
with respect for the long-standing terms of reference of
peace endorsed by the international community and in
accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the Madrid principles, including the principle of land
for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map. This shall ensure the realization by the
Palestinian people of their inalienable rights, including
to self-determination and independence in their State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

We continue to call for the full respect and
implementation of all relevant resolutions in this regard,
which would establish the conditions necessary to
bring an end the occupation, justly resolve the conflict
in all its aspects and make Palestinian- Israeli peace
and security a reality for the benefit of both peoples,
the region and the international community as a whole.
It is also imperative that action be taken immediately in
line with international law and relevant resolutions in
order to redress the situation on the ground, de-escalate
tensions and foster a environment conducive to the
pursuit of peace.

The situation in Gaza remains of great concern
to the Movement, particularly the grave humanitarian
situation which, regrettably, continues to deteriorate.
NAM. therefore reiterates its call for the total lifting
of the Israeli blockade on the Gaza Strip, which
continues to impose untold humanitarian, social and
economic suffering on more than 2 million Palestinian
children, women and men. We stress once again that
the crisis in Gaza must be comprehensively addressed
in accordance with international law, including
humanitarian and human rights law and the relevant
resolutions, in the context of the overall situation of
the ongoing illegitimate and belligerent Israeli foreign
occupation of the Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, since 1967, as well as in the context of the
unequivocal calls for an end to the occupation of more
than half a century.

The recent tragic events that have taken the lives
of over 30 innocent Palestinians and injured more than
3,600 people in the Gaza Strip in under a month provide
yet another reason to direct all efforts to achieve peace
and find a peaceful resolution of the conflict, rather
than its escalation. They are also another reason to put
an end to the prolonged tragedy and suffering of the
Palestinian people.

In this connection, the Nam condemns Israel's
excessive and disproportionate use of force against
Palestinian civilians who participated in the Great
March of Return, which is a peaceful civilian protest
against Israel's illegal occupation, oppression and
dispossession of the Palestinian people, who have
endured such treatment for over 50 years. We call for
international action - particularly on the part of the
Security Council - to ensure accountability for and
a cessation of the violations being committed by the
occupying Power.

Moreover, the Movement welcomes the statements
made by the international community, including
by the Secretary-General, Governments, regional
organizations and human rights organizations,
reaffirming the right to peaceful protest and calling
for independent and transparent investigations into
the killings perpetrated by the Israeli occupying
forces against Palestinian civilians participating in the
peaceful protests.

As Israel has clearly renounced its obligation as
the occupying Power to protect the civilian Palestinian
population, in line with the Fourth Geneva Convention,
the Movement urges the international community to
ensure the protection of Palestinian civilians in the
Gaza Strip and across the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, with a view to addressing the
dire state of insecurity of the occupied population and
prevent further loss of innocent human lives.

In this connection, the States members of the
Movement express their grave concern over the lack
of accountability for all the violations committed
by Israel, which does nothing but foster impunity,
further destabilize the situation on the ground and
diminish peace prospects. We reaffirm the importance
of ensuring that the occupying Power complies with
its duties and responsibilities under international
law. It would be alarming for a country with such a
background to become a non-permanent member of
this organ, which is entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security and the implementation
of its own resolutions.

To conclude, the Movement reaffirms its
unwavering solidarity with the Palestinian people
and its steadfast support for their just cause, and
reiterates its commitment to further strengthening and
coordinating international efforts to promote a just,
lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution to the
Palestinian question in all its aspects. On the eve of the
seventieth anniversary of the tragic Nakba, we further
reaffirm our commitment to continuing to support
the heroic Palestinian people in their quest to achieve
justice and fulfil their inalienable rights and legitimate
national aspirations, including their right to self-
determination, freedom and independence in their State
of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital. Only a
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question will
allow us to achieve the long sought-after peace in the
Middle East region.

