The President: While waiting for the
representative of the United Kingdom to speak, allow
me to make a brief statement in my capacity as the
representative of the Philippines.

We attach great importance to the reconstruction
of Iraq. We are also convinced that the United Nations
is playing a role in the political process leading to the

establishment of a permanent Government in Iraq. It is
critically important that the political process for
restoring sovereignty to Iraq is fully accepted and
supported by the people of Iraq.

As many have stressed within and outside the
United Nations, Iraqi ownership of the process must be
a guiding principle in this exercise. The legitimacy of
the process in the eyes of the Iraqi people will be a key
element in ensuring that democracy and stability take
deep root in the country. We have an important role to
play in achieving this goal.

Our approaches to this objective might diverge,
but one thing is clear: Iraq requires the participation
and cooperation of the international community, the
United Nations plans and programmes, and other
stakeholders to place Iraq on track to peace and
stability. The leading role of the United Nations in this
effort will be the critical foundation of a diplomatic
consensus among all major players to extend help in
the Iraqi reconstruction. Our efforts will be futile
without the input of those who will be directly affected
by our actions: the Iraqi people themselves. The
Security Council thus benefits immensely from the
presence here today of Minister Zebari, who has
provided us with a clear presentation on the desires and
aspirations of the Iraqi people to the establishment of a
new Iraq.

Whatever action the Council may take, it should
consider the various elements that Minister Zebari
explained, especially on allowing the Iraqi people
freely to determine their own political future. There are
many issues that demand our attention. Many of them
will have to be discussed and debated in later days,
either in this forum or in other forums that we will
have on Iraq, but the Council will certainly be guided
by what the Iraqis themselves need, as Minister Zebari
told us. The points he raised and his responses to
questions by Council members are elements that we
should ponder as the Council deliberates on a draft
resolution that spells out the framework of action for
Iraq.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
