Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, first, to thank you, Mr. President, for giving us this
opportunity to participate in this meeting to enable the
Council to acquaint itself with the truth, in order that it
can adopt positive and objective resolutions. I should
like to make five points during my intervention.

My first point is that we are committed to the
peace process and negotiations to achieve a peaceful
solution to outstanding issues between us and our
brothers in South Sudan. Any allegations that the
Government in the north is seeking to carry out
military action against the south in order to occupy it
are unacceptable. We are the ones who granted the
south a peaceful transition towards independence, a
choice they exercised in complete freedom and in a
smoothly organized way.

The second point that I would like to emphasize
to the Council is that, regrettably, the Government of
South Sudan is continuing to support rebel movements.
It supervised two meetings, at Yei and Juba, which
resulted in the establishment of the Sudanese
Revolutionary Front, whose declared objective is to
topple the Government in the north through military
action. That is further confirmed by information I have
just received, to which I hope the members of the
Council will be patient enough to listen. The source is
Captain Hafez Hamza Abkar, who defected from the
Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA). He has
affirmed that General James Oshun and Major Mattur
supervised the transport of military equipment from
Serjas by plane to the Jamjam area in Southern
Kordofan. Those are confessions that we can provide to
the Council on video, with sound, from an officer of
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement.

The third point I want to share with the Council
concerns the Yida camp. For the benefit of everyone,
the camp is on a lake called Lake Abyad. Part of the
lake is in the southern part of the Sudan and the other
part is in South Sudan. The camp is in the Sudan, in
Southern Kordofan. It is not a refugee camp at all. We
should be more precise and specific, Mr. Ladsous,
when we use terms. It is not a refugee camp; it is a
6
camp of the Ninth Brigade of the SPLA. I am not used
to telling lies. I am speaking concrete facts. I am -

(spoke in English)

- dealing with the Council in all civility, according to
the dictates of diplomacy. Even if I have to differ with
anybody, I would start by saying, "I beg to differ". I
never lie. I do not lie.

(spoke in Arabic)

It is my hope that this information can help the
Council to verify the facts and not rush to accuse and
condemn the Government of the Sudan of undertaking
military activities or aerial bombardment of civilians.
As I have said, we reserve our right to self-defence and
to carry out any military actions within our national
territory. I wish to assure the Council that we never
will carry out any military actions inside the territory
of the Government of South Sudan.

To show our good will, even though many defend
false and baseless accusations about us, the same day
that we were wrongly accused of bombing territories of
the Government of South Sudan, there were more than
30 trucks carrying goods, including food, on their way
from the north to the south at the Joda crossing. That
can easily be verified. It is part of the commercial
activities that we consider a humanitarian obligation,
because of the need of our brothers in South Sudan for
those supplies. Thirty trucks have crossed the border
through the Joda crossing point into South Sudan.

I hope the Council will take into consideration
what I have said and will link it to what is mentioned
in paragraph 10 of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2011/678) about shortages of basic commodities and
inflation reaching 61.5 per cent in South Sudan. That is
the spirit in which we confront those who defend
untrue accusations; they will only expose themselves in
the final analysis, however loud their voices may be.

