Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2402 (2018), which
renews the Yemen sanctions regime. I would like to
thank the United Kingdom, as penholder, for its efforts
and commitment to seeking a consensus to renew the
sanctions regime. We regret that it was not possible to
reach consensus on the its draft resolution.

As we have repeatedly said to all our Security
Council partners, France's priority was to renew the
sanctions regime. That is why we voted in favour of
a technical renewal of resolution 2140 (2014). It was
essential that the sanctions regime be maintained and
that the Panel of Experts be renewed so that it could
continue its work in the coming year. We have already
expressed our concern at the conclusions of the report
ofthe Panel ofExperts on Yemen (see S/2018/68), which
states that Iran is in non-compliance with the arms
embargo imposed by resolution 2216 (2015). We have
also expressed our deep concern about the Houthis'
ballistic-missile launches into Saudi Arabia and the
Red Sea, which we have repeatedly condemned.

I would like to be very clear on this point. We strongly
condemn Iran's failure to comply with its international
obligations under resolution 2216 (2015), which requires
it to take all necessary measures to prevent the supply,
sale or transfer - direct or indirect - of missiles and
their components, as well as unmanned aerial vehicles,
for the benefit of individuals and entities subject to
United Nations sanctions, in particular the Houthis.
France will continue to be mobilized on the issue of
transfers of ballistic technology and equipment in the
region in the coming months.

As the report of the Panel of Experts also shows,
the humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate in a
very worrying manner. We are very concerned about the
Panel's report on the massive violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
that have been committed. Continued fighting and
strikes have resulted in the deaths ofmany civilians and
injured many others. Yemen is in a situation of extreme
humanitarian emergency, with severe food insecurity,
and lack of desperately needed basic necessities and a
severely affected health sector.

The coalition's humanitarian plan is a positive
first step that should be welcomed and put in place
in full coordination with the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations. Our priority must
remain to address the crisis, which is among the
most serious in the world, by ensuring full, secure
and unhindered humanitarian access to the affected
populations in all governorates of Yemen.

Finally, in parallel with our commitment to the
humanitarian aspect, we must remain mobilized
to launch new essential political momentum. The
appointment of the new Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General on Yemen, Martin Griffiths, provides an
opportunity for all parties to meaningfully re-engage
in the negotiations without preconditions.

Furthermore, we must continue to convey to
regional actors the message ofthe need for a responsible
and constructive role in Yemen. The goal of us all must
remain to achieve a lasting cessation of hostilities
and, in support of the United Nations mediation, to
encourage the parties to resume the dialogue with
a view to a comprehensive and inclusive political
agreement that respects the territorial integrity of the
country. The unity of the Council in that regard is
crucial. Individually and collectively, we each have a
important role to play to that end.

