Mr. Carl (Austria): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and the countries
that align themselves with this statement. I shall limit
myself to highlighting the most salient points of the
statement, which is being distributed to members.

I wish to thank you, Madam President, for the
opportunity to discuss this important issue and for the
useful paper you distributed. I also wish to express our
sincere appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Jan
Egeland for his informative briefing. The European
Union welcomes the sustained attention paid by the
Security Council to this issue, as well as the holding of
semi-annual open debates.

At the 2005 World Summit, our heads of State
and Government underlined that the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is a concern of the
international community. A number of important
decisions and commitments have been taken. Most
important was the historic agreement on the
responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity, which was reaffirmed by resolution 1674
(2006), adopted by the Council on 28 April this year.

Prevention is critical. The Security Council plays
an important role in that regard. With timely and
accurate information, the Council can and should act as
early as possible in a conflict situation in order to most
effectively protect civilians at risk. Timely briefings by
the Secretary-General, his Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Emergency Relief Coordinator and
other relevant humanitarian actors are important. We
welcome the joint initiative of various United Nations
agencies to develop a systematic data-collection
mechanism. Establishing the capacity to collate all
necessary information concerning the protection of
civilians - along with the collation of information
about protection incidents in countries of concern to
the Council - will prove essential in ensuring a clear
focus on protection that can be reflected throughout the
Council's work and deliberations.

The European Union is concerned at the denial to
humanitarian personnel of full and unimpeded access
to civilians in need of assistance, in particular when
such denial is used as a political tool and weapon of
war. We are equally concerned at the increased risks
that United Nations and associated civilian personnel
are facing on the ground. We urge all parties to allow
full and unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance
and to take all measures necessary to guarantee the
safety, security and freedom of movement of
humanitarian personnel and United Nations and
associated personnel and of their assets. We also call
upon all States and parties to armed conflict to respect
and ensure full compliance with international
humanitarian law and to respect the neutrality,
independence and impartiality of humanitarian actors.
We commend the International Committee of the Red
Cross for its efforts to promote full observance of the
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols.

With regard to protection, it is imperative that

United Nations peacekeeping, political and

peacebuilding missions be given adequately strong

mandates to that effect, as well as the necessary means
to implement them.

Protection from physical and sexual violence
remains one of the major challenges of civilian
protection. We therefore encourage the Council to live
up to its commitment to undertake to ensure that all
peace support operations employ all feasible measures
to prevent such violence and to address its impact
where it takes place. United Nations peacekeeping and
peace support operations and associated personnel have
a particular responsibility in their own conduct in that
regard. The European Union welcomes the zero-
tolerance policy that has been introduced by the United
Nations and has adopted the same standards in its own
European security and defence policy operations.

Impunity needs to be addressed more forcefully.
The restoration of law and order to prevent further
violence and tackle impunity should be a priority for
the States concerned, for the Security Council and for
all peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions. Together
with the Secretary-General, we urge Member States
that have not yet done so to ratify or accede to the
Rome Statute, as well as to the treaties of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, and to
take all appropriate measures to fully implement those
treaties within national systems, including ensuring
proper investigation and prosecution of any violations
of the relevant rules.

The special protection needs of refugees and
internally displaced persons, as well as of women and
children, need to be adequately addressed.
Peacekeeping missions need to have the mandates and
the resources to guarantee that their special needs will
be met - for example, by providing security in and
around camps for displaced persons.

The easy availability and the destabilizing
accumulation of small arms and light weapons pose a
particular challenge for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Small arms and light weapons account
for more deaths worldwide than any other type of
weapon. Our common work in this field has just begun.
That is why the European Union insists on the need for
a structured follow-up to the Small Arms Review
Conference and for renewed, concerted efforts by all
those - Governments, non-governmental

organizations, civil society and international
organizations alike - who want to put an end to the
scourge of illicit small arms and light weapons.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict has
become an increasingly complex challenge. But that
complexity cannot be allowed to diminish in any way
our collective efforts to effectively address this horrific
state of affairs.

