Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We thank you, Sir, and
the Malaysian delegation for convening this important
debate, and would also like to thank the briefers for
their valuable comments.

Indonesia associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The Hibakusha are a heartfelt testament to
the destruction of life because of weapons of mass
destruction. In the wake of the horrors of Hiroshima
and Nagasaki, and with the adoption of first General
Assembly resolution of the then new United Nations,
which sought to deal with the problems raised by the
discovery of atomic energy, it was thought that never
again would humankind be at risk of such suffering.
While the building of a multilateral structure and
machinery to control nuclear and other weapons
of mass destruction was largely successful, those
weapons, unfortunately, continue to exist and are being
modernized at an unprecedented level.

As a State partyto the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical Weapons
Convention, the Biological Weapons Convention and
the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free
Zone, and having ratified the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty, Indonesia is deeply concerned that,
while it and many other countries have steadfastly
upheld the collective global norms against nuclear and
other weapons ofmass destruction, some countries have
continued to shirk their responsibilities by retaining
such weapons or taking refuge under nuclear-security
umbrellas.

As it considers resolution 1540 (2004) to be
essential, Indonesia has supported it and will continue
to do so. Non-proliferation is one side of the coin, while
the other is complete disarmament. Both are necessary
for international peace and security.

The flawed concept of nuclear "haves" and
"have-nots" is morally indefensible and promotes the
legitimization of such weapons; as long as they exist,
proliferation risks will remain.

As highlighted in the President's concept note
(S/2016/712, annex), my delegation firmly believes in
maintaining and bolstering, where necessary, measures
to ensure that nuclear weapons, knowledge on their
manufacture and delivery and related materials will
never proliferate.

Similarly, we must remain vigilant with regard to
actions on the part of non-State groups. However, the
issue of the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction
by non-State groups must be considered by all Member
States inclusively. Our actions must flow from
multilaterally negotiated treaties.
A vital point on which to focus is capacity-building
assistance for States in establishing injunctions,
whereby no space in their territory would be available
to terrorists for engaging in their despicable activities.
Nuclear safety and nuclear security must rest with
individual States. Any multilateral norms, guidelines
or rules on nuclear security should be pursued within
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
framework.

As Indonesia detailed many of its actions in the
context of resolution 1540 (2004) during the formal open
consultations in June, I will now simply underline that
Indonesia's commitment to the issue is demonstrated
by its vigorous adherence to, among others, the treaties
and instruments I have mentioned.

Through various national laws and programmes,
we have instituted comprehensive measures against
the development, acquisition, manufacture, possession,
transportation, transfer or use of nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons and their delivery systems.
At the national level, an inter-ministerial working
group coordinates the implementation of all national
regulations on chemical, biological and nuclear safety
and security.

Our national nuclear energy regulatory agency,
known as Bapeten, continues to strengthen its
monitoring systems and control capabilities regarding
our peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In the context
of the national monitoring system, we have recently
set in place, in cooperation with the IAEA, seven
radioactivity portal monitors in our main sea ports. We
are currently also in the process of finalizing a draft
law on biosecurity. Regionally, Indonesia is actively
participating in various Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) forums on export controls and
non-proliferation.

I would like to reiterate the significance ofcapacity-
building and cooperation in the context of the various
elements of resolution 1540 (2004). The Committee
established purusant to that resolutionshould focus
more on that area. Moreover, countries and the
relevant international organizations with the requisite
capacities bear a special responsibility in the provision
of assistance, particularly technical and financial.
My delegation reiterates its call for the immediate
establishment ofa fund dedicated to supporting Member
States in the implementation of their resolution 1540
(2004) obligations.

In conclusion, Indonesia would like to underscore
that, as long as a single nuclear warhead or other
weapon of mass destruction exists, the threat to
humankind, by design or by accident, along with the
devastating humanitarian consequences, persists.
My delegation welcomes the adoption, last week, of
the outcome of the Open-ended Working Group to
develop proposals to take forward multilateral nuclear-
disarmament negotiations for the achievement and
maintenance of a world without nuclear weapons, as
mandated by General Assembly resolution 70/33, which
brings us a step closer to commencing the negotiation
of an international legally binding instrument for the
prohibition of nuclear weapons and weapons of mass
destruction, which would lead to their total elimination.

Let us move forward boldly to realize the collective
vision of a world without nuclear weapons. Present and
future generations will not forgive us if we fail in our
responsibility to prohibit and eliminate nuclear and
other weapons of mass destruction. Together, let us
exercise our political will, discharge our commitments
and work resolutely to bring peace, stability and
security to humankind.

