Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): On behalf of the
Pacific Islands Forum Small Island Developing
States- Fiji, Nauru, Micronesia, Marshall Islands,
Palau, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu,
Vanuatu and my own country - I would like to thank
you, Madam President, and your delegation for giving
us the opportunity to speak at this very important
debate in the Security Council.

The Pacific island countries are already
experiencing the effects of climate change, and they
represent some of the most vulnerable communities in
the world. According to the findings of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Pacific
island countries are facing extreme risks to their
survival as nations. Many islands are not more than a
few metres above sea level. As wave actions are
exponentially linked to sea level, an increase of half a
metre in sea level would completely inundate these
island States, putting at risk the survival of their human
populations.

Climate change is also expected to increase the
intensity of tropical cyclones. While the evidence is not
as clear in this case, the pattern of tropical storms seen
in the last few years is cause for deep concern. Prior to
1985, for example, the Cook Islands were considered
to be out of the main cyclone belt and could expect a
serious cyclone approximately every 20 years. This has
changed. Most notably, there were five cyclones within
one month - in February and March of 2005 - three
of which were classified Category 5 as they passed
through Cook Islands waters. While these recent
cyclones caused damage equal to 10 per cent of the
Government's annual budget, destroyed 75 per cent of
homes on the island of Pukapuka and caused emotional
distress, no lives were lost, due to activation of
warning systems and preparedness by the general
public. In 2004, the island of Niue was hit by Cyclone
Heta, with the ocean rising over the 30-metre-high
cliffs, causing two deaths and making 20 per cent of
the population homeless. All told, Heta caused
economic damages equivalent to 200 years of exports.
The country's only museum lost 90 per cent of its
collection.

The king tides that have struck Tuvalu and
Kiribati in recent years are further dramatic examples
of how climate change will affect our communities.
Wells and agriculture were poisoned by sea water,
house foundations undermined and graves exposed.
Those are just some of impacts that have been
observed in our region. Those are dramatic events, and
pose a significant threat to peace and security in the
Pacific, as the people may have to abandon their
traditional lands, their homes and possibly their
nations.

Climate change has several other related impacts.
Vector-borne diseases, such as malaria and dengue
fever, are increasing their range upland in Papua New
Guinea, and the incidence of dengue fever was
especially high this year in the Pacific in general. A
World Bank study on climate change and health found
that a dengue epidemic in Fiji in 1998 cost the country
about $3 million to $6 million. The World Bank also
estimated that the economic costs of a dengue epidemic
in Kiribati would be beyond the coping capacity of that
country.

Climate change is also going to have an impact
on economic activities in the region. The 1997-1998
El Nifio event saw a significant westward shift of
major tuna stocks, making some of our economies and
dinner tables suffer. That temporary warming of the
Western Pacific during the El Nifio-Southern
Oscillation is a harbinger of things to come should the
seas permanently rise in surface temperature.
Deteriorating coral reefs, the nurseries for certain fish
stocks, are being severely damaged by warming waters,
coral bleaching and ocean acidification. We fear that
there will be a major decline fish stocks as a result. We
also have to consider the overall issue of the
sovereignty of our current exclusive economic zones
under climate change scenarios, the right to fish in
those waters, and our ability to patrol and control them.

Climate change, climate variability and sea-level
rise are therefore not just environmental concerns, but
also economic, social and political issues for Pacific
island countries. They strike at the very heart of our
existence. The impacts, and in particular the related
economic and social shocks, pose serious political and
national financial management issues for Pacific island
countries. Climate change, climate variability and sea-
level rise adversely affect gross domestic product,
balance of payments, budget deficits, foreign debt,
unemployment and living standards.

Therefore, climate change is undermining the
very basis for the existence of 12 independent Pacific
island countries, as well as seven Pacific island
territories. Climate change is an overarching threat,
and all of its impacts are and will be detrimental to us.
We know and understand many of the impacts, but
there is still much more knowledge that is necessary.
We also need to ensure that our communities are well
briefed on those impacts and that they are empowered
with the capacity to plan for mitigation and adaptation.
Our Governments will establish overall climate change
policy, but it is the communities that will have to agree
to and implement appropriate measures.

We in the Pacific islands are not standing idly by.
Together with our development partners, some steps
are being taken. For example, as a means of adapting
to present climate variability and climate change, in
2006 the village of Lateu in Vanuatu was relocated
further inland in order to avoid storm surges, frequent
inundation, coastal erosion and flooding. The Canadian
Government funded the relocation, and the new
settlement has been made more resilient through
improved water storage, new agricultural practices and
better-constructed houses, but many Pacific
communities have no higher ground to move to.
Moreover, most of our economic activities - such as
tourism, shipping and infrastructure - are located in
the coastal zones. Even in the higher islands, there are
limits to what can be physically moved. There are also
limits to what our Governments can afford.

In some areas of the Cook Islands, such as
Manihiki Atoll, where 3 per cent of the island's
population was killed by eight-metre waves washing
over the island during cyclone Martin in 1997, more
concrete preparedness or adaptation measures are
required. That is sensible from a risk-management
perspective, and through projects such as the Global
Environment Facility and the Pacific Adaptation to
Climate Change, such things as cyclone shelters and
communications equipment, as well as the
incorporation of climate proofing, where possible, in
infrastructure design, will be implemented in the
Pacific in the coming years.
Individuals and communities should be
empowered to adapt by ensuring that they possess a
water tank to better deal with drought or floods,
allowing setbacks or building on poles if homes are in
coastal areas. Risk assessments to see which
communities are vulnerable, and taking steps to
address those risks, are essential.

Our Pacific ancestors living on those islands and
voyaging across the Pacific dealt with a great deal of
climate variability and adapted to new environments.
They often did so by learning and understanding the
natural system, using existing traditional knowledge, or
else by sailing on to new islands.

Traditional knowledge in the region is passed on
verbally and is particularly important for increasing
understanding and awareness of climate risks at the
community level and in the local language. Traditional
knowledge by necessity fills a gap in small islands,
where pure science data collection is sparse. In terms
of managing climate risks, our traditional leaders have
clear roles to play in our risk-management
programmes, in mobilizing community response, and
in increasing ecosystem resilience through indirect
methods, such as defining traditional marine protected
or no-harvest areas for reefs that are vulnerable to sea-
level rise, coral bleaching, and run-off sedimentation.

Many of our island communities have begun
strengthening the resilience of natural systems in that
manner in order to protect themselves against waves.
Coral reefs and mangroves are the first line of defence
against storm surges and erosion, and those are being
protected through marine parks and coastal zone
management. But coral reefs exist within a very narrow
band of temperatures and are very sensitive to sea-
temperature increases, as shown by the numerous
bleaching events in past years. Mangroves, on the other
hand, are very sensitive to sea-level changes, and their
capacity for inland migration may be obstructed by the
settlements they currently protect. Our best protection
against extreme climatic events is thus being
undermined by climate change.

It has been said that, for the Pacific island
countries, all areas affected by climate change are
priority areas. In order to build a shared and
sufficiently robust understanding of what needs to be
done, Pacific island countries see the need for progress
in a number of mutually supportive areas. We need to
continue to build a stronger and more comprehensive
international climate change regime within the
Framework Convention on Climate Change that uses
the best scientific knowledge and assesses its
implications.

The negotiations on future commitments for the
international community as a whole should be based on
the following priorities: to give equal priority to
adaptation and mitigation; to slow the rate of warming
and sea-level rise; to avoid positive climate feedbacks
and their destructive consequences; to convince
developing countries that industrialized countries are
serious about addressing climate change and finding
ways to reduce emissions in all countries; to maintain
public credibility in the climate Convention; to stop
further delays in taking action; to minimize the
economic costs to developing countries of preventing
dangerous climate change; to stop investment by the
developed world in long-lived carbon-intensive capital
equipment and infrastructure; to promote a massive
worldwide expansion of renewable energy; to provide
greater flexibility to future generations; and to send
strong signals to industry that climate change is a
serious issue and that it needs to find solutions.

Within other multilateral processes, there is also
scope for some of those issues to be addressed to
increase international cooperation in finding solutions.
All the impacts that I have enumerated are considered
in different forums, such as the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, the
Commission on Sustainable Development, the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the World
Meteorological Organization and the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea.

This debate in the Security Council suggests that
there are additional avenues for discussing one of the
most critical issues for the survival of our Pacific
island communities. The Security Council and the
General Assembly have accepted the principle of the
responsibility to protect. The dangers that small islands
and their populations face are no less serious than
those faced by nations and peoples threatened by guns
and bombs. The effects on our populations are as likely
to cause massive dislocations of people as past and
present wars. The impacts on social cohesion and
identity are as likely to cause resentment, hatred and
alienation as any current refugee crisis.
Pacific peoples have inhabited their islands for
thousands of years and have rich and vibrant cultures.
We are likely to become the victims of a phenomenon
to which we have contributed very little and which we
can do very little to halt. We are taking action on
renewable energy and energy efficiency and in seeking
to avoid deforestation, but our primary focus is on
adaptation and preparing for the worst. The Security
Council, charged with protecting human rights and the
integrity and security of States, is the paramount
international forum available to us. We do not expect
the Security Council to get involved in the details of
discussions in the Framework Convention on Climate
Change, but we do expect the Security Council to keep
the matter under continuous review so as to ensure that
all countries contribute to solving the climate change
problem and that their efforts are commensurate with
their resources and capacities. We also expect that the
Security Council will review particularly sensitive
issues, such as implications to sovereignty and to
international legal rights from the loss of land,
resources and people.

