Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The Senegalese
delegation would like to thank the Spanish presidency
for organizing today's briefing, and to welcome
Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda. We are grateful for her
report and her briefing on the progress of her Office's
investigations and proceedings in Darfur, in compliance
with resolution 1593 (2005). Senegal would like to
reiterate to her its unwavering support.

Senegal recognizes the role and importance of the
International Criminal Court in a world where millions
of victims of atrocious crimes long for justice. The
fight against impunity and respect for the rule of law
are fundamental principles in which we firmly believe
and that are anchored in the Constitutive Act of the
African Union. We consider respect for human rights
and their universal nature to be particularly important.

In our view, not only are the requirements of peace
and of justice not incompatible, they actually go hand
in hand. That is why we work to satisfy the demands of
the victims in Darfur forjustice and reparations, while
also aspiring to achieve peace through dialogue. And
that is why my country, while upholding the principles
of responsibility and justice, believes firmly that it is
essential to go through dialogue and reconciliation if
a comprehensive and lasting peace is to be achieved.
Incidentally, that is the position of the African Union
when it calls for the restoration of peace and justice
in Darfur.

The Prosecutor's report that we are considering
today describes alarming levels of attacks, including
sexual and gender-based crimes, on civilians in Darfur.
My country condemns all acts of Violence against
civilian populations and urges all stakeholders to take
the measures needed to ensure that those responsible
for such acts are punished. Senegal remains deeply
concerned about the restrictions that the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur is
dealing with in carrying out its mandate.

On another subject, we believe it will be difficult
for the Office of the Prosecutor to fulfil its mandate
without an adequate budget. That is why my country
will continue to work to ensure that the Assembly of
States Parties to the Rome Statute provides the Court
with the means necessary for its efforts to succeed. My
delegation would also like to recall that it is the Security
Council's duty to ensure that the United Nations makes
the proper financial contribution for the cases that the
Council refers to the Court.

There is no need to recall that the situation in
Darfur continues to be a significant challenge for both
the African Union and the rest of the international
community, and that it requires greater efforts on
the part of all of us. A definitive solution to the
crisis requires participation by the Sudanese parties
themselves, who are called on to create the conditions
for lasting stability in an open, comprehensive dialogue
involving every sector of society. It is incumbent upon
us to work to create security and political conditions
that can enable the Sudanese to take charge of their
peace process themselves. But the role and place of
justice in that settlement cannot be ignored, for a sense
of injustice is the principal source of instability. While
the primary responsibility for ensuring access to justice
belongs to the State, when justice is not to be found
there, the victims are free to seek it wherever it may
be found.

