Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank the Republic of
Korea and you personally, Mr. President, for holding
this high-level debate, and for the Republic of Korea's
leadership on resolution 1540 (2004) and efforts to
promote global non-proliferation. I also thank the
Deputy Secretary-General.

As we all know only too starkly, the threat of
terrorist groups acquiring and using weapons of mass
destruction is not a hypothetical or abstract one. In the
years leading up to our adoption of resolution 1540
(2004), international terrorist networks, particularly
Al-Qaida, had unmistakably shown their intent and
ability to commit mass casualty attacks and had
signalled their intent to acquire weapons of mass
destruction. Clandestine networks had significantly
increased the prospect of non-State actors acquiring the
materials and means to follow through on their intent.

The Security Council's response through resolution
1540 (2004) is still decisive for the international
non-proliferation regime. Our adoption of resolution
1977 (2011) in order to further instrumentalize the
global norm against the proliferation and use of such
weapons has been essential, and we have made progress
towards the universal implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), but the threat persists and has assumed new
forms. Between 1993 and 2013, almost 2,500 incidents
were reported to the International Atomic Energy
Agency's nuclear and radioactive material Incident
and Trafficking Database, including 16 incidents of
illegal possession or attempts to illegally trade highly
enriched uranium or plutonium. Others may have gone
undetected.

With today's increasingly complex landscape of
international trade, technology and financial linkages,
new avenues for non-State proliferation are opening
daily. As we have just been reminded by the previous
speaker, measures to prevent deadly pathogens from
falling into the wrong hands must keep pace with
expanding medical research and biotechnology. Control
regimes and multilateral counter-proliferation efforts
must remain relevant, capable and equipped to succeed.

So how can we continue to strengthen the
implementation of the resolution and tackle existing
and emerging gaps? There are a number of steps we
should take.

First, in an environment where funding and
resources are hard to come by, it will become ever
more vital to leverage links with other United Nations
instruments and multilateral non-proliferation and
export control regimes. By inviting the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to
participate in the workshop for Pacific island States
that Australia is co-hosting with the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in May, the
Pacific region is strengthening the implementation of
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction and controls on other materials
and technology related to weapons of mass destruction
more broadly. As Chair of the Australia Group, a
multilateral export control regime, we welcome closer
engagement between the 1540 Committee and the
Group. The Group has now formally offered to the
1540 Committee assistance to interested States on the
implementation of export controls related to dual-use
chemical and biological agents and related equipment.

Secondly, leveraging the role of industry and the
private sector in preventing proliferation is crucial.
The relevant sectors of industry must be made aware
of the threats surrounding the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons. Industry must be a
genuine partner in our efforts to inform and strengthen
export controls, in controlling access to intangible
transfers of technology that could be used for the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and in
helping prevent proliferation financing. Together with
Germany, we have submitted an effective practices
paper to the 1540 Committee on our common strategic
approach to engaging industry in national export
controls, which we hope will be useful to others looking
to strengthen their export controls.

Thirdly, we need to overcome the challenges faced
by developing countries in implementing resolution
1540 (2004). Part of the solution is to better harness the
link between security and development. For instance,
export and border controls to detect and combat illicit
trafficking in weapons of mass destruction can also
aid in the prevention of small arms, drugs and wildlife
trafficking. It can enhance a State's disease surveillance
network, support trade expansion and generate
Government income. The case of Kenya leveraging
1540 Committee assistance to develop a comprehensive
border management plan to prevent the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and arms and wildlife
trafficking is an example of establishing synergies
that will reinforce the relevance and sustainability of
non-proliferation programming.

There are also opportunities to better coordinate
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) with
other Security Council obligations. Developing
States, especially small developing States, need more
coordinated guidance from the Council so that efforts
to enact legislation and improve law enforcement helps
them fulfil the range of Security Council measures to
prevent terrorism, strengthen non-proliferation and
implement relevant sanctions. Today's presidential
statement (S/PRST/2014/7) recognizes the need to
enhance cooperation between the non-proliferation
and terrorism Committees, and there is certainly an
appetite among States for that, as shown by the first
open briefing held in 2013 by those Committees with
the Financial Action Task Force on counter-proliferation
and counter-terrorism financing issues.

Regions are themselves driving better
coordination - and we need to leverage that and
benefiting from it. The Caribbean Community's focal
point for resolution 1540 (2004) is now supporting
Caribbean States in identifying and filling gaps in their
legislation in order to enable them to implement all of
the Security Council non-proliferation, terrorism and
sanctions obligations.

 

To conclude, we have identified just a few
proposals to realize the universal implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) in the years ahead. Those are
not new, comprehensive or easy options to pursue. This
is why the Committee, as called for in the presidential
statement we adopted today, should develop a precise
strategy for effective implementation as part of the
comprehensive review due in 2016. It is essential that
we both close gaps in implementation and stay ahead of
technological advances, to ensure that weapons of mass
destruction materials do not end up in the wrong hands.

