Mrs. Albright (United States of America): The United
States Government joins other members of this Council in
expressing deep sorrow and regret at the loss of life during
these past few days in the West Bank, Gaza and Jerusalem.
We offer our condolences to the families of the victims. We
extend our sympathies to the injured.

Our focus today should be on how to stop the
violence. That violence is an unfolding tragedy not only for
the victims, but also for the hopes invested in the peace
process. We want to restore that process, as it is the best
way to end the continuing sorrows, not only now, but for
the future as well.

Our first objective is to restore calm. Our second
objective is to accelerate the negotiating process. That
process is the way to resolve key outstanding issues for
implementation of the Interim Agreement. Implementation
must go forward. Tangible results must be seen.

To be effective, both sides must reach out to each
other as real partners. Partners take into account the needs
of others. Both sides must feel a heightened sense of
mutuality which underscores partnership and enables it to
work. Both sides should keep that reality in mind as they
consider their actions.

We are working intensively with both sides to
achieve a restoration of calm and forward movement to
produce tangible, positive events on the ground. The
members of this Council should focus on how to help,
how to restore calm, how to encourage the peace process,
and how to make and consolidate real gains.

Words here are no substitute for action in the region.
Only through such action can we restore that essential
component to the peace process: a sense of hope. Hope is
what sustains progress and the process in the Middle East
is such that it cannot stand still.

During the past few years, we have seen the dawn
of high hope and promise in the Middle East. It is a cause
of great sadness that this era is mixed with moments of
deep sorrow. Innocent victims, Palestinians and Israelis
alike, have suffered senseless violence. Rhetoric offers
them no comfort. It does not advance the cause of peace.
It does not bring closer the day when the people of the
Middle East can live in safety and lead normal lives.

Instead, such rhetoric encourages extremism and
diverts attention from the task at hand: restoring a
situation in which we can return to progress towards a
comprehensive and lasting peace. Let us turn our attention
not towards condemnation, but towards encouraging the
parties to restore the peace process and return to efforts
to achieve concrete progress.

