Mr. Campbell (Ireland): Let me, too, offer you my
congratulations, Mr. President. My delegation warmly
welcomes the decision to convene this special meeting of
the Security Council.

My delegation wishes firstly to associate itself with
the statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Argentina, Ambassador Cardenas, outlining a number of
suggestions put forward by various troop-contributing
countries, including Ireland, on how the existing
consultation procedures might be developed. We
appreciate very much this initiative taken by the
delegation of Argentina.

As a troop-contributing country of long standing,
Ireland believes that it is only right and appropriate that
Member States which contribute military and civilian
personnel to United Nations peace-keeping operations
should have an input into vital decisions concerning those
peace-keeping missions in which their personnel
contribute.

The need for an effective process of consultation is
also evident in the light of recent peace-keeping and
peacemaking experience. The operations in Somalia,
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia have shown the need

 

for new procedures to ensure greater political support and
confidence within Member States for the peace-keeping and
peace-building role and activities of the United Nations.
This can only be achieved through improved information
flows and greater transparency as to the rationale and
purposes of United Nations peace-keeping missions.

Ireland has also supported the strengthening of
consultation procedures in the context of efforts to reform
and improve the working procedures of the Security
Council. There has already been considerable progress in
making the Council's working methods more transparent.
We believe that this could be further facilitated and the
Council's overall relationship with the general membership
strengthened through additional measures to develop the
troop consultation procedures which exist.

My delegation warmly welcomed the initiative taken
by the Security Council in November last year to place the
then existing consultation procedures on a more assured
footing. We supported this initiative as an important first
step towards meeting the concerns of troop contributors and
putting in place an institutionalized series of arrangements
for such consultation.

In reviewing the operation of the consultation
procedures instituted in November last year, it is difficult
to avoid the conclusion that, while they have brought
improvements, they have not worked as effectively as one
would have hoped. The responsibility for this situation
cannot solely be attributed to any one of the participants in
the process. The success of any consultation procedures can
only be guaranteed if there is active and full involvement
by all who are given the opportunity.

At the same time, insufficient account appears to have
been taken of the fact that the existing consultation
procedures were not intended to cover every single situation
where it is necessary for troop contributors to be consulted.
Operational-level meetings, chaired by the Secretariat, still
have a part to play in the consultation process. Part of the
difficulties experienced in the past year might have been
avoided with a better balance in the form of consultation
procedure employed.

My delegation also feels, like others, that troop-
contributing meetings are too frequently convened at a stage
when the process of informal consultations within the
Council has virtually been completed. It follows that views
expressed are unlikely to have a significant impact on the
decisions eventually adopted by the Council. This does not
appear to be in conformity with the intention stated in the
presidential statement of 4 November 1994 that such
meetings should be held "in good time" (S/PRST/J 994/62, p. 1) before the Council moves to take action.

Nor has the scope for meaningful input by troop
contributors into the decision-making process, through the
provision of views at an early stage in the informal
consultation process, been facilitated by the lack of
documentation provided at troop-contributor meetings.
This again is hardly consistent with the commitment made
in November 1994 to make available an informal paper,
including relevant background documentation, to troop
contributors well in advance of meetings.

It is in part for these reasons that my delegation
believes that there should be a review of the existing
consultation procedures by the Council, with a View to
seeing how they could be further strengthened to allow
for a more meaningful input by troop contributors into the
decisions the Council takes on the conduct and purposes
of United Nations peace missions. In this regard, as I
have said, we fully support the series of proposals and
ideas developed in the earlier statement by the Permanent
Representative of Argentina. We believe that these
proposals are fully in line with the type of pragmatic
development of the existing procedures foreshadowed at
the time they were instituted. My Government has also
noted and welcomed the valuable proposals which the
Government of Canada has recently made on how troop-
consultation procedures might be improved and believes
that these proposals are also worthy of serious
consideration.

My delegation believes that the ultimate objective of
efforts to enhance the process of communication and
consultation between troop contributors and the Security
Council should be the establishment of a specific
subsidiary organ of the Security Council for this purpose.
This would provide a more orderly and effective
framework for dialogue. With proper channelling of
information, it would facilitate greater Security Council
awareness of troop contributors' views. It would offer
troop contributors more systematic opportunities to
convey their views on policy formation with respect to
peace operations, in terms both of the definition of
general goals and of the provision of direction for specific
operations. We believe that the establishment of such an
organ would be fully consistent with the Charter since it
is provided for in Article 29. Nor do we believe that the
establishment of a subsidiary organ would impinge in any
way on the existing competencies or prerogatives of the
Council. On the contrary, we feel that it would greatly

 

assist the Security Council to better fulfil its ultimate
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security, through ensuring a greater level of political
support for and understanding of the Council's actions
among Member States.

To conclude, Ireland hopes that this meeting, and the
ideas emerging from it, will encourage the members of the
Security Council to conduct a full review of the procedures
provided for in the presidential statement of 4 November
1994 and come forward with some new proposals on how
they might be further enhanced. New Zealand's procedural
proposal today in this context is also worth considering. As
an active troop contributor, we are anxious that the dialogue
between troop contributors and Council members on this
subject should be positive and constructive. We are
convinced that if such is the case the end result will be a
more effective Council as well as a more effective
implementation of its mandates.

