Mr. Salam (Lebanon): At the outset, I would like
to thank Mr. Pascoe for his briefing.

Allow me to join my colleagues in extending my
condolences to the Government and people of Turkey
on the victims of yesterday's earthquake, and to the
Government and people of Saudi Arabia on the passing
away of His Royal Highness Crown Prince Sultan Bin
Abdulaziz Al-Saud.
It is clear that there can be no final and durable
solution to the Palestine question without real and
genuine negotiations on final status issues, such as
Jerusalem, refugees, settlements, water and security.
That was repeatedly emphasized by President
Mahmoud Abbas before and after submitting the
request of the State of Palestine for membership in the
Organization. That request should continue to be dealt
with by the Council solely on the basis of its objective
merits, in accordance with the 1948 advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice on the admission
of new Members.

The examination of the request by the Security
Council should therefore in no way be linked to the
Quartet activity, or subordinated to the course of the
negotiation process and its vicissitudes. More
fundamental, the question of the recognition of
Palestinian statehood cannot and should not be
subjected to the outcome of negotiations between
Palestinians and Israelis. Otherwise, Palestinian
statehood would be made dependent on the approval of
Israel. In other words, the occupying Power would be
granted a right of veto over the right to self-
determination of the Palestinian people, a right that the
General Assembly has recognized as inalienable since
1974.

Despite all its shortcomings, let me now welcome
the Quartet's statement of 23 September. Since the
Quartet reiterated the obligations of both parties under
the Road Map, it might be warranted to recall that,
with regard to security, the Road Map provides that the

"Government of Israel takes no actions
undermining trust, including deportations, attack
on civilians, confiscation and/or demolition of
Palestinian homes and property, as a punitive
measure or to facilitate Israeli construction".

As for settlements, the Road Map provides that
"the Government of Israel immediately dismantles
settlement outposts erected since March 2001," and
provides that "consistent with the Mitchell Report, the
Government of Israel freezes all settlement activity
(including natural growth of settlements)".
Furthermore, the Quartet statement of 23 September
calls upon the parties to refrain from provocative
actions if negotiations are to be effective.

On 29 September, less than a week after the
Quartet statement was issued, Israeli authorities
approved a plan to build 1,100 housing units in the
settlement of Gilo, on land originally expropriated
mainly from the Palestinian village of Beit Jala. Is this
not clearly inconsistent with their Road Map
obligations? Is this not clearly provocative?

On 14 October, Israeli authorities approved a plan
for the construction of 2,610 units in the settlement of
Givat Hamatos, on land illegally annexed from Beit
Safafa and Bethlehem, further inserting East Jerusalem
and cutting it off from the rest of the West Bank. Is that
not clearly inconsistent with the Road Map
obligations? Is this not clearly provocative?
Since 23 September, Israel has unrelentingly
continued to blockade Gaza, severely restricting the
access of goods and limiting the movement of people,
in addition to launching air strikes against its suffering
people. Is this not clearly inconsistent with the Road
Map obligations? Is this not clearly provocative?

Since 23 September, Israel has demolished
Palestinian residences and farms in the regions of
Qalqiliya, Kafr ad-Dik and Tubas. The Israelis have
also uprooted and burned hundreds of olive and
almond trees in Ramallah, Bethlehem and Hebron. In
addition, armed settlers have physically assaulted and
injured Palestinian civilians, including many children,
as documented by reports of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Again, is this
not clearly inconsistent with the Road Map
obligations? Is this not clearly provocative? Should we
also add that the erection of the wall continues
unabated, despite the Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice and the Road Map
obligations?

It would not be enough for the Council to
recommend to the General Assembly the admission of
the State of Palestine to the United Nations; the
Council also has the duty to ensure an end to
Palestine's occupation. Likewise, it would not be
enough for the Council to agree that Israel is the party
undermining the possibility of a resumption of
effective negotiations, as called for by the Quartet; the
Council also has the duty to hold Israel and its leaders
accountable for not abiding by their international
obligations, for disregarding Security Council
resolutions and for systematically violating
international law and international humanitarian law.
