Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Our
meeting today is taking place shortly after the very
important meeting that the Security Council organized
in mid-November (see S/PV.7819). Today's meeting
clearly highlights the importance that the Security
Council attaches to the latest developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We acknowledge
the impact of the events in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo on the stability of the Great Lakes region
and the region as a whole. I would like to make a few
comments in that regard.

It goes without saying that the upcoming elections,
as outlined in the Constitution, are of special and indeed
historical importance for the fate of the country. They
will enhance stability, the constitutional order and the
country's institutions. In that light, Egypt insists on the
importance of the political agreement that was reached
thanks to the mediation oer. Kodjo, paving the way for
free and peaceful elections. We welcome the measures
that have been taken to implement the agreement,
particularly the nomination of a new Prime Minister.
The credibility of the agreement naturally depends on
its appropriate implementation without further delay,
including preparations for the elections, ensuring their
transparency, adopting confidence-building measures,
protecting the fundamental freedoms of citizens, and
ensuring the freedom of the press, within the framework
of the law.

In addition to the implementation of the agreement,
all political actors must work to build a broad
consensus in order to ensure the stability necessary
for the organization of the elections in accordance
with the Constitution. We welcome the efforts being
undertaken to that end, in particular those of the
Conference episcopale nationale du Congo. We call on
all political actors to contribute to those efforts and to
demonstrate flexibility. We urge them to seek ways to
overcome their differences and conflicts in order to
preserve and guarantee the stability and security of
the country. In that context, Egypt strongly welcomes
presidential statement S/PRST/2016/ 18, adopted by the
Council today, which refers to our ongoing support for
those efforts.

I would like to say a word on the very important
role played by the African Union and other regional
organizations, in particular the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region under the leadership of
Angola, which has played a very important role in what
has been achieved so far. We need to step up our efforts
to overcome the remaining difficulties.

I further note that the future of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must be decided solely by its
own people and institutions country. Respect for the
Constitution is incumbent on all national actors, while
the international community must also respect the
sovereignty, independence and Constitution of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. That is indeed an
essential factor for preserving peace and security there.

I would like to very briefly focus on the situation
in the east of the country. I have made two visits to the
country over the past few months, first with the Council
and also within the framework of the Committee
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), which Egypt has the
honour of chairing. On both occasions I was able to see
first-hand the suffering of the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the horrible living conditions
they endure in that part of the country.

In the context of the cooperation between the
Congolese army and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, military operations have been bolstered, which
has enabled significant progress against armed groups.
Unfortunately, those efforts have not prevented those
groups from committing crimes and violence against
the civilian population, not to mention an increase in
ethnic tensions, such as the attack on a camp in North
Kivu. That, of course, has contributed to a deteriorating
situation in the east of the country.

Furthermore, in order to find a lasting solution it is
important to make progress on the issue ofreconciliation.
Tensions need to be eased and the grievances of the
local population heeded, including those of refugees
and displaced people. It is also important to combat
impunity, ensure the rule of law and expand the
authority of the Government. We also need to improve
the living conditions of the citizens. Lastly, we need to
find a solution to the crisis characterized by the illegal
export of natural resources, because it threatens the
economic development of the country.

