Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, in turn, to convey to Deputy Prime Minister Covic
our sincere gratitude for his presence and for his
statement, although we deeply regret the circumstances
that have brought him to the Council.

France condemned immediately and in the
strongest terms the hateful crime committed on
Wednesday 13 August against a group of Serb
teenagers in the Village of Gorazdevac, which claimed
the lives of two of them. The following day, the
Security Council held consultations on this question
and the President read out a statement to the press
reiterating the condemnation of all its members of this
act.

We wish once again, here and in the presence of
the Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia,
Mr. Covic, to restate France's sympathy for the sorrow
of the families. France supports the steps that were
swiftly taken to apprehend the perpetrator or
perpetrators of this crime and hopes that they will be
arrested and brought to justice as soon as possible.

Another shooting incident involving children
apparently took place on Sunday afternoon, this time
without casualty. If the report is confirmed, this new
outbreak of violence shall elicit the same unequivocal
condemnation from us. These crimes, which are totally
unjustifiable, damage the image of Kosovo within the
international community. They must strengthen our
resolve to move forward in establishing the rule of law
in a modern, democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo. The
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, which
have pledged to work for inter-ethnic reconciliation,
have a special responsibility in this respect.

We listened carefully to the statement made by
Mr. Covic. Naturally, we agree with the objective of
reducing violence. It is up to the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), together with the Kosovo Force and in
consultation with local actors, to determine which new
measures will be necessary to that end. Opening direct
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, if it is
constructive, should also help reduce tension on the
ground.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm France's full
support of and confidence in the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Harri
Holkeri, in the daunting mission just entrusted to him.

