Mr. Timerman (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Julie Bishop,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Australia, for the
invitation to participate in this debate and to thank
the Secretary-General for his informative briefing.
Likewise, I would like to greet my colleague from
Luxembourg and the high representatives of Rwanda,
the Republic of Korea and Lithuania.

We all agree that today we are facing a proliferation
of terrorist acts that share with terrorist acts of the
recent past a common condition of being resounding
manifestations of extreme violence, radicalized
fundamentalism and an absolute and cruel devaluation
of human dignity. However, today, we are also facing
innovative modalities, ifI may use that expression, that
combine the reality of cruelty with virtual horror. The
images ofdecapitations circulated by the networks place
us, in real time, before what we might characterize as
the virtual globalization of horror, a phenomenon that
universalizes fear, uncertainty and alarm in a tangible
manner.

The normalization of horror in the media and the
acceleration of extreme violence cannot bring us to
see the military response as the only, or preferred,
option for combating terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. That approach has already shown its
limitations and failings. We have a responsibility, in
the light of a humanity that seems paralysed by terror,
to work for the full rule of law in each of our countries,
assuming the imperative need to build a balanced and
fair world order based on real multilateralism and
cooperation.

In the recent past, no country could consider
itself immune from the possibility of falling victim to
terrorist acts. However, today the threat is more clear
than ever, and the implementation and strengthening
of mechanisms for effective cooperation based on
mutual respect are more necessary than ever. Although
the international community has still not reached a
universally agreed definition of terrorism, it is possible
to identify what acts the international community
condemns. We join the condemnation of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, as it is one of
the most serious threats to international peace and
security and to human dignity, peaceful coexistence,
the consolidation of democracy, and the economic and
social development of nations.

Argentina is one of the many countries that have
suffered terrorism directly.

First, from 1976 to the end of 1983, our society
suffered from terrorist acts perpetrated by the State
and with the State apparatus by the most savage
civil-military dictatorship that we have experienced.
It was responsible for heinous crimes and crimes
against humanity. The persecution of individuals
who had ideologies considered subversive, potentially
subversive or simply dangerous led to a systematic plan
for exterminating and annihilating more than 30,000
people for their political or social activism, religious
beliefs, class, ethnic identity or sexual orientation.
They were victims of the genocidal violence of a
fundamentalist conservativism, inspired by the
doctrine of national security and trained by important
centres of power that, during the Cold War, prevented
the advance and consolidation of democracy, pluralism,
tolerance and peace.

Secondly, we experienced in our own flesh the
dehumanizing and terrible actions of foreign terrorist
groups that, motivated by hatred, fanaticism and
destruction, committed terrorist attacks in 1992 and
1994 against the Jewish community centre, AMIA,
and the Israeli Embassy in Buenos Aires. As the
President of the Argentine nation said in the Security
Council in September (see S/PV.7272), the Argentine
Republic and the United States of America are the
two countries on the American continent to have been
the object of savage terrorist attacks. Those painful
experiences and the numerous terrorist acts carried out
since then have reaffirmed Argentina's conviction that
the response to terrorist acts should not and cannot be
exclusively military. Rather, they should be based on a
comprehensive approach, such as that reflected in the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

I also wish to express my country's conviction that
terrorism must be fought within the framework of the
rule of law and respect for due process. Indeed, the
measures adopted by States to combat terrorism must
fully respect international law, in particular international
human rights law, international humanitarian law and
refugee law. Those measures should also respect the
purposes and the principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, such as the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence of States and the
principle of non-intervention in domestic affairs.

Likewise, Argentina advocates respect for due
process in the work of this Council. The creation of the
Office of the Ombudsperson represents a significant
step forward in that regard, but the Members of
the Organization continue to raise concerns about
procedural guarantees. One of the major concerns is
that the mandate of the Ombudsperson covers only
those individuals included in the Al-Qaida sanctions
list. Argentina calls for broadening the mandate of
that Office to all of the Security Council sanctions
committees.

Argentina is a party to the 13 legal instruments that
have been established to combat terrorism and has taken
internal measures to implement them and the Council's
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). Furthermore,
together with your country, Madam President, and
many others, Argentina helped to initiate the Arms
Trade Treaty, which comes into force on 24 December.
One of the Treaty's purposes is to prevent the transfer
of arms to human-rights violators and perpetrators of
crimes against humanity, as well as to reduce the risk
of weapons being diverted to the illegal market, with
the possibility that they might end up in the hands of
terrorist or criminal groups. We therefore encourage all
States Members of the United Nations, especially the
members of the Council, to ratify the Treaty, since it
will contribute significantly to our countries' security.

I should mention that during the Treaty negotiations,
Argentina, like a significant number of delegations,
also proposed banning the sale of arms to unauthorized
non-State actors. Regrettably, no consensus was reached
on including such a ban at the time of the Treaty's
adoption, but Argentina is hopeful that the parties to
the Treaty will approve it as one factor in preventing
arms transfers that could help to fuel conflicts in
various parts of the world. Reality has shown us that
when some countries decide today to arm those calling
themselves freedom fighters, tomorrow those freedom
fighters may be the terrorists we are trying to combat.

It is clear that the 13 conventions on combating
terrorism oblige us, among other things, to prevent
terrorist groups from having access to resources and
funding for their activities. It is also clear that the
Council's resolutions oblige us to prevent individuals,
groups and entities associated with Al-Qaida from
having access to weapons and related material.
Argentina maintains that States should also refrain
from sending weapons to areas of conflict, which only
helps to increase such conflicts' intensity and duration
and to endanger civilians.

Argentina believes firmly that the United Nations,
as a cornerstone of the multilateral system, should
be the Organization directing States' actions to
combat terrorism. While we value the contribution
that other forums or initiatives can make, ours is the
body with the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. Moreover, the
universal representation it provides ensures both the
participation of all States Members on equal terms, as
well as the legitimacy of decisions that are reflected
in standards, guidelines and good practices. Argentina
believes that multilateral action through the United
Nations, in accordance with the principles of the
Organization, Will enable us to address the threat of
terrorism and achieve a safer world for all.

