Ms. DiCarlo: The previous Security Council
meeting on the situation in Ukraine took place five
months ago on 29 May (see S/PV.8270). As I stated then,
the United Nations has been consistent in its strong
support for the lead role of the Normandy Four, the
Trilateral Contact Group, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and other key actors
to find a peaceful settlement to the conflict in Donbas.
The Secretary-General has also repeatedly called for
revitalizing efforts in those negotiation formats and
bilateral channels. We therefore welcome presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/l2, of6 June, which encouraged
all the parties to recommit to the peace process,
recalled the centrality of the Minsk agreements and
urged scaled-up support for humanitarian efforts. We
also note the ll June meeting in the Normandy format,
the first at the ministerial level in over a year. Despite
those efforts, however, there has been little progress
in talks to end the fighting. The conflict in eastern
Ukraine, now in its fifth year, remains an active threat
to international peace and security.

On the ground, continued and unpredictable
escalations of hostilities aggravate the climate of
insecurity and breed uncertainty about the parties'
intentions. As negotiations on different tracks
continue to search for points of convergence, effective
implementation of any agreements is still lacking.
It is noteworthy, nonetheless, that the incidence of
violence this summer was the lowest of any equivalent
period since the conflict broke out in 2014. The
so-called harvest ceasefire and the back-to-school
ceasefire - two recommitments to the ceasefire
negotiated by the Trilateral Contact Group - were
instrumental in reducing shelling and fire from small
arms and light weapons, in turn resulting in the relatively
low, although still tragic, figure of four civilian deaths
from 1 June to 31 August. Clearly, with sufficient
political will and genuine commitment to agreements,
it is possible to stop the Violence on the ground and
drastically reduce the impact of the conflict on the
civilian population. Regrettably, however, over the past
six weeks, ceasefire violations have once again increased
and casualty levels have risen. In September alone, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights recorded 20 conflict-related civilian
casualties. More than half of the civilian casualties
in September were the result of mines or explosive
remnants of war.

The United Nations continues to call on the parties
to ensure the full and immediate implementation of
the ceasefire agreements and exercise the utmost
restraint in order to protect the civilian population in
the conflict-affected areas. The priority of the parties
should be, without delay, to withdraw heavy weapons
from populated areas, disengage forces and protect
civilian infrastructure. The United Nations is also
following reports of increased tensions in the Sea of
Azov, which negatively affect the overall atmosphere in
the region. We underline the need to avoid any risk of
escalation, provocation or miscalculation.

The Minsk agreements, endorsed by the Security
Council in its resolution 2202 (2015), form the
only agreed framework for a negotiated peace in
eastern Ukraine. Echoing the Security Council's
expectations, expressed through presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/12, the United Nations calls
for swift progress in the implementation of the Minsk
agreements. We welcomed the most recent extension
by the Ukrainian Parliament, on 4 October, of the
law on special order regarding the local governance
of certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions,
consistent with Ukraine's commitments under the
Minsk agreements.

The United Nations urges all parties to avoid any
unilateral steps that could deepen the divide or depart
from the spirit and letter of the Minsk agreements.
On 7 September, the de facto entities in Donetsk and
Luhansk announced the holding of so-called leadership
elections scheduled for 11 November. Despite Ukraine's
objections, media report that preparations are still
going ahead. As we understand, two separate ballots
in both Donetsk and Luhansk are reportedly being
planned - one for the Head of Republic and one for the
People's Councils. Those will reportedly be voted in for
terms of five years. I wish to recall that election-related
matters are addressed in the Minsk agreements as
part of a comprehensive package, and they are under
consideration in the existing negotiating mechanisms. I
therefore caution that any such measures, taken outside
Ukraine's constitutional and legal framework, would be
incompatible with the Minsk agreements.

On this occasion, I wish to acknowledge the tireless
work of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission on the
ground in the face of extremely challenging conditions.
I reiterate our call on all to ensure the safety and the
freedom of movement of the monitors. As the Council
will hear from Assistant Secretary-General Mueller,
the human cost of the conflict for the people of Donbas
continues to increase. The United Nations spares no
effort to fulfil its responsibilities in the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and the monitoring of human
rights. It is essential, however, that that role not be
politicized or instrumentalized by any side.

It is time for renewed and constructive action by
all concerned to overcome the apparent impasse in
diplomatic negotiations. The United Nations underlines
the need to fully respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine, within its internationally
recognized borders, in accordance with the relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions.
Once again, we urge all the parties to display the
necessary political will and to recommit to the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements to ensure
the earliest possible end to the conflict and help bring
about peace and stability to all of Ukraine.

