Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Alain Le Roy, Valerie Amos and the charge d'affaires
of Haiti for their statements.

Since the earthquake in January 2010, Haiti has
been shaken by other trials - Hurricane Tomas and the
cholera epidemic. This series of disasters explains why
there is still a need for urgent humanitarian aid. We are
therefore keenly aware of the importance of
coordination, especially given the exceptionally high
number of agencies and non-governmental
organizations at work in Haiti.

Against this backdrop, the role of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is crucial to
ensuring aid effectiveness. However, unless Haiti has
strong and stable institutions, all these efforts will be in
vain. By agreement with the Haitian Government, the
Organization of American States sent a mission to
evaluate the results of the first round. It exposed
numerous acts of fraud and, as expected, has produced
a series of recommendations.

France calls on the Haitian authorities to stand by
their commitments to the international community and
to take action on the recommendations. The country
cannot be allowed to remain mired in paralysis or to
sink back into violence. The will of the people must be
respected, and new authorities must quickly take
control of the country's future, with the support of the
international community. In this difficult situation, I
would like to commend the unwavering commitment of
the staff of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti, starting with Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Edmond Mulet.

France continues to lend its support, both through
the United Nations and bilaterally. Thanks to French
support, the main hospital in Port-au-Prince has been
able to keep its doors open. It will be rebuilt through a
French-American partnership with the Haitian Ministry
of Health and Population. We have expanded our
technical cooperation in various areas, particularly
education, governance and policing. Looking to the
future, our educational institutions have been training
almost 500 Haitian students as future magistrates or
officials. We have allocated financial aid amounting to
€326 million for 2010-2011.

France will maintain its commitment to the
people and Government of Haiti, in coordination with
the United Nations. We hope that, for their part, the
Haitian authorities will take the decisions necessary to
offer their country and their people a better future.
