Mr. van den Berg (Netherlands): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania and
Turkey, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Montenegro and
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the
European Free Trade Association countries Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the European
Economic Area, align themselves with this statement.

Since its recognition as an independent State, on
20 May 2002, Timor-Leste has faced several challenges
that, to put it mildly, have not been easy. But the
Government of the 191st State Member of the United
Nations has had the courage and the determination to
rise to those challenges, and several of them have been
dealt with effectively. The European Union therefore
commends the people of Timor-Leste for their
tremendous achievements, which have given rise to
upward social and economic development, increasingly
functioning institutions, a consolidating civil
administration, a growing legal framework and several
branches of security forces, which we hope will
succeed in defining their roles and responsibilities and
in adhering to a culture of transparency and
accountability.

Moreover, the European Union congratulates the
Governments of Timor-Leste and Indonesia for the
record time in which they were able to agree on most
of their common border. The European Union
encourages both Governments to achieve sustainable
cooperation on possible ways to address that sensitive
issue, and we hope that an agreement beneficial to both
parties will soon be signed.

The European Union is aware that all the
achievements in Timor-Leste could not have been
made at the current pace without the unwavering
commitment and support of the United Nations. The
European Union would like to reiterate its admiration
for the men and women who have contributed to the
success of the missions under the able leadership of
former Special Representative Kamalesh Sharma and,
currently, of Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa. The European
Union is confident that the United Nations will
continue to have a pivotal role in strengthening the
capacity-building of the Timorese and in the
formulation of policy frameworks.

Despite the clear successes in most fields and the
cautious advances in others, the European Union
regrets to state that it still identifies an area of serious
concern. Ending impunity and promoting a culture of
accountability and transparency is one of the key tasks
of post-independence Timor-Leste. The European
Union has always supported all efforts to bring to
justice the perpetrators of the serious crimes committed
in the then-East Timor in 1999. Several efforts have
been made, and, with a view to giving the processes the
benefit of the doubt and a chance to observe
international standards in the trials of suspected human
rights abusers, the European Union has generally
refrained from overly explicit public observations so
far.

However, the European Union now considers the
process towards justice and impunity to have gone
awry. The serious-crimes process - although it is
being conducted competently - has not resulted in
bringing all perpetrators to justice, given that many of
the indicted are still believed to be outside Timor-
Leste. The European Union therefore calls on States
Members of the United Nations to extend their full
cooperation, as called for by the Secretary-General, to
ensure that those responsible for serious crimes do not
enjoy impunity. This issue is gaining urgency, as, in
conformity with the current mandate of UNMISET, the
Serious Crimes Unit will be terminated in May 2005.

The European Union has noted with concern the
recent overturning of convictions by the Ad Hoc
Human Rights Tribunal of Indonesia in Jakarta. The
European Union expected the trials to be conducted
according to international standards, to which the
Government of Indonesia is itself deeply committed.
We hope that the Indonesian Government will do its
utmost to ascertain the credibility of the judicial
process. In that regard, the European Union intends to
support any future action in that regard by all
concerned, including the Secretary-General.

