Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Five years after the
adoption of resolution 1701 (2006), the Lebanese
Government, as I just said, remains committed to the
full implementation of said resolution in its entirety
and calls upon the United Nations to put an end to
Israeli violations and threats to Lebanon's sovereignty
in order to allow the implementation of the resolution
3
and to move from the precarious situation of a
cessation of hostilities to a permanent ceasefire. This
commitment was reiterated by the Prime Minister of
Lebanon during his visit to southern Lebanon on
16 July.

We believe that the objective and terms of
resolution 1701 (2006) are constantly undermined by
Israel's every violation of our airspace, every
encroachment of our national waters, and every
obstacle to marking the Blue Line. Time and again,
Israel has exploited allegations of arms smuggling to
systematically violate Lebanon's sovereignty. Time and
again, we have called for evidence to be presented to
the Lebanese authorities and the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), through the
tripartite mechanism, for verification and immediate
action. Once again, the Secretary-General's reiterates
in his most recent report on the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) the well-known fact that "[t]o
date, UNIFIL has neither been provided with, nor
found, evidence of the unauthorized transfer of arms
into its area of operations" (S/2011/406, para. 27).

Need I remind the Council of the disproportionate
use of force by the Israeli army against civilians in
southern Lebanon? Let me just refer to the
demonstrations that took place on 15 May. It is
indisputable that every single victim of Israeli bullets
was an unarmed civilian. These unarmed civilians
might have tossed stones across the Blue Line, yet they
were met with bullets, rendering the lethal Israeli
response grossly disproportionate. Some may well have
reached the technical fence, but it is unquestionable
that those unarmed civilians who were shot were all
shot on Lebanese territory, which makes the Israeli
response indefensible once again. Suffice it here to
quote yet again from the Secretary-General's report:

"The firing of live ammunition by the Israel
Defense Forces across the Blue Line against the
demonstrators, which resulted in the loss of
civilian life and a significant number of
casualties, constituted a violation of resolution
1701 (2006) and was not commensurate with the
threat to Israeli soldiers." (ibid., para. 9)

Let me also remind the Council that 10 months
ago Mr. Michael Williams informed us about the
decision of the Israeli Cabinet to, in principle,
withdraw from Al-Ghajar. We then said that seeing is
believing. Here we are again 10 months later, and all
we see is what the Secretary-General himself saw and
clearly states in his report, to the effect that Israel
"continued its occupation of the northern part of
Ghajar village and an adjacent area of land north of the
Blue Line, in violation of resolution 1701 (2006)"
(ibid., para. 12). Not only the chapter of Al-Ghaj ar, but
also the chapters of the Shab'a farms and the Kfar
Shuba Hills, should be closed once and for all. We
encourage the Secretary-General to intensify his
diplomatic efforts to ensure that Israel withdraws from
these areas.

Let me now touch on the delimitation of the
borders of Lebanon's territorial waters and exclusive
economic zone, which are another source of tension. I
wish to stress here that my Government has dealt with
this sensitive matter with utmost responsibility and in
conformity with its rights and obligations under
international law.

As members of the Council are aware, more than
a year ago Lebanon delimited its southern and south-
western maritime borders in accordance with its
obligations under the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, and deposited its charts and
coordinates with the Secretary-General, in full
compliance with international norms and procedures.
One year after Lebanon's deposition, Israel, which is
not a party to the Convention, is claiming to assert its
alleged right over offshore areas that include a
significant portion of Lebanon's exclusive economic
zone, thereby once again encroaching upon my
country's sovereign rights.

Let me conclude by stressing that Lebanon, as a
host country, considers the safety and security of
UNIFIL and United Nations personnel to be a priority.
That is why the Lebanese authorities not only
condemned the attacks on UNIFIL of 27 May and
26 July, but also launched investigations to bring the
perpetrators to justice. In the same spirit, the Higher
Defence Council stressed, in its statement issued on
12 August, its coordination and cooperation with
UNIFIL and the protection of its movements in
Lebanon.

