Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends Angola for its initiative in convening today's
open debate. We are pleased to see Angolan Minister
for Foreign Affairs Chikoti here in New York, presiding
over today's meeting. I thnk the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Said Djinnit,
the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, Mr. Smail Chergui, and the representative of the
World Bank, Mr. Vijay Pillai, for their briefings.

The Great Lakes region, which is in the heart of
the African continent, is steeped with a long history
and rich cultural heritage and blessed with tremendous
potential for development. However, for a long time, the
Great Lakes region has been troubled by frequent armed
action and instability in the security environment, giving
rise to underdevelopment and a grim humanitarian
situation. China welcomes the Secretary-General's
visit to Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo towards the end of February during which he
attended the first private sector investment in the Great
Lakes region, which speaks volumes about the level of
attention and support the United Nations accords to
peace and development in the region.

The States of the Great Lakes region are an
interdependent community of common destiny and
shared interests. The interests of all countries in the
region are best served by ensuring common security,
realizing shared development and promoting win-win
cooperation. China supports the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region in actively
facilitating the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes Region,
working hard to resolve regional conflicts through
good offices and promoting general security and
common development in the region on all fronts. China
applauds the active efforts of the countries of the Great
Lakes region and would like to see all parties in the
region build confidence and consensus in line with
their shared interests as countries in the region, commit
to eliminating the root causes of disputes and conflicts
and realize lasting peace and common development in
the region. In this vein, I would like to highlight the
following four points.

First, the Framework should be unswervingly
implemented to achieve the shared goals. China
encourages countries in the region to respect each
other's sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity, actively promote political trust among the
parties and reinforce good-neighbourliness. We hope
the international community will, in support of the
wishes of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, actively help it to intensify security
sector reform, strengthen governance in the eastern
part of the country and promote national reconciliation,
while lending robust support to the Regional Oversight
Mechanism and Technical Support Committee of
the Framework. China welcomes the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General Djinnit's proposal on the
nine priorities for the period 2015-2017 and supports
the continued positive, constructive role he has been
playing in assisting the States ofthe Great Lakes region
to implement the Framework.

Secondly, regional security capacity-building
and cooperation should be strengthened to achieve
common security. China welcomes the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo's positive
endeavour to build up its national armed forces
(FARDC) and neutralize armed groups, and appeals to
the international community to step up the training of
and support for the FARDC so that it can take on the
role of defending national security as soon as possible.
We hope that the States of the region will actively
implement the Nairobi Declaration and work together
on the repatriation of former Mouvement du 23 mars
fighters and on jointly neutralizing such armed groups
as the Democratic Liberation Forces of Rwanda and the
Allied Democratic Forces.

We hope that the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic ofthe
Congo (MONUSCO) will assist and support the FARDC
in addressing the threats posed by armed groups
within the purview of its Security Council mandate.
China welcomes the decision of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO to
resume joint military operations against armed groups.
We hope that strategic dialogue between the two parties
will continue, and that such issues as the MONUSCO

drawdown and exit will be properly resolved in the light
of the wishes and practical needs of the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Thirdly, investment in the region's development
should be scaled up to achieve common development.
Poverty and underdevelopment are among the root
causes of the chronic conflicts in the Great Lakes
region. China welcomes the drafting by the United
Nations country teams in the Great Lakes region
of the Regional Strategic Framework to support the
region's economic integration, boost cross-border trade
and promote the sustainable management of natural
resources. We appeal to the international community
to make greater investments in the agriculture, energy,
infrastructure, communications and tourism sectors of
the countries of the region in order to create more jobs
and facilitate regional trade and connectivity, so that
those countries can all partake of the peace dividend
and achieve economic prosperity. We hope that the
World Bank will actively implement the Great Lakes
region initiative, honour its $1.4 billion pledge to the
region and make it available as soon as possible, so
as to offer strong support to the region's economic
development and employment improvements.
Fourthly, the functions of regional and subregional
organizations should be leveraged to build synergy
and draw on each other's strengths. The African
Union, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, the East African Community, the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and other
regional and subregional organizations have their roots
in Africa and are therefore knowledgeable about and
in tune with Africa. They enjoy prominent advantages
and have played an important role and accumulted a
wealth of experience in addressing such issues as those
concerning Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and South Sudan.

China supports the ongoing joint efforts of the
regional and subregional organizations concerned
to work to resolve hot issues in the region through
dialogue, mediation and good offices. The United
Nations and the international community at large
should strengthen coordination with the regional and
subregional organizations concerned and work together
for a peaceful and stable Great Lakes region.

China attaches great importance to developing our
relations with Africa. At the Johannesburg summit
of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, held
in December 2015, His Excellency Mr. Xi Jinping,
President of China, proposed five pillars for China-
Africa relations: political equality and trust, win-win
economic cooperation, mutually enriching cultural
exchanges, mutual assistance in security, and solidarity
and coordination in international affairs. China is ready
to enage in practical, results-oriented cooperation with
Africa in the following 10 areas: industrialization, the
modernization of agriculture, infrastructure, finance,
green development, trade and investment facilitation,
poverty reduction, public health, culture, and peace
and security. China is ready to work with the entire
African continent to implement the outcomes of the
Johannesburg summit, improve livelihoods in Africa
and continuously support African States in building
their independent development capacities in the light of
Africa's actual needs.

China has been consistently supportive of the
peace process in the Great Lakes region and sent a
special Government representative on African affairs
to the countries of the region on multiple good offices
missions. China is an active player in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, supports Africa in addressing
its own problems in the African way, contributes to the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the East African Community, and helps the regional
organizations concerned to promote regional peace. We
stand ready to work with the countries of the region and
the international community in unremitting efforts for
the peace, stability, prosperity and development of the
Great Lakes region.

