Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's open debate.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing. We also thank the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay, for
her presentation. We would like to take this opportunity
to express our deepest appreciation for her prominent
role as a defender of human rights principles during the
six years of her service. We wish her all the best for the
future.

As you, Mr. President, and other colleagues have
pointed out, prevention costs much less than reaction.
At the same time, however, proactive measures are
much more difficult to take when there are still
potential threats. It is therefore important that early
warning signs should be accurately assessed and
analysed on the ground. South Sudan is a case where
full-fledged United Nations engagement could not
detect the sign of an imminent crisis. Interacting
closely with all stakeholders, including civil society,
field-based peacekeeping and special political missions
should sensitize their antennae and sound the alarm to
the Council. Early warnings should then be channelled
into concrete preventive action. Sometimes different
interpretations among Security Council members lead
to a delayed response and a lost opportunity. Serious
human rights violations are one important early
warning sign for the Council. The Republic of Korea
fully supports the Secretary-General's Rights Up Front
initiative in that regard.

The Secretary-General's good offices and
mediation roles can be further strengthened on the
basis of the united voice of the Council. Sometimes
early action is obstructed by the reluctance and
resistance of the Government in question. As is often
the case, intra-State tension feeds on and deepens the
lack of inclusivity. Refusing outside support for an
inclusive political process does not therefore bode well
for prevention. A balance should be struck between the
national prerogative to deal with domestic crises and
international efforts to maintain international peace
and security. The standard for engagement needs to be
clear, reasonable and coherent.

We believe that the horizon-scanning process
at the Secretariat and the Security Council is one
effective tool of preventive diplomacy. In that regard,
the Security Council and the Secretary-General need
to regularly take stock of their efforts for conflict
prevention. That will help them in exploring the most
effective United Nations system-wide strategy to fully
utilize conflict prevention tools under Chapter VI, in
particular Articles 33 and 34, of the Charter of the
United Nations.

The Security Council's inaction due to political
divisions often disappoints people who look forward
to the Council's action. As such, we believe that the
Security Council should make further efforts to meet
the high expectations of the international community
in the maintenance of peace and security.

