Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal) (spoke in French): At the outset, let me commend you, Madam President, for convening this open debate. Portugal attaches particular importance to transitional justice and endorses the statement that will be delivered by the observer of the European Union. In my national capacity, I would like to make a few additional remarks. Transitional justice mechanisms play a crucial role in implementing peace agreements, preventing the recurrence of conflicts and maintaining peace in societies undergoing reconstruction. In that regard, transitional justice enables communities to address the legacy of large-scale violence and human rights violations, ensure accountability, secure justice and achieve reconciliation. In that regard, it should be stressed that, without prejudice to international law, those processes should always take into account the specificity of different post- conflict contexts. To achieve that, the judicial system of each State must function effectively and independently, thereby enabling the International Criminal Court to assume its complementary role to national jurisdictions. It is therefore of the utmost importance that all relevant actors be involved, as well as civil society, which can play a major role in facilitating efforts to sustain peace. From that point of view, Portugal believes that young people are fundamental actors in reconciliation processes, as well as in the overall maintenance of peace and security. Transitional justice mechanisms must be victim- centred in order to meet the specific needs of victims. We must also keep in mind that armed conflicts directly affect the most vulnerable, especially women, children and youth. Portugal is concerned about the issue of children in armed conflict situations, particularly concerning the recruitment and use of child soldiers. In that regard, we wish to reiterate the importance of the 2017 Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. In addition, we must give priority to children when planning demobilization, disarmament and reintegration efforts. Transitional justice mechanisms should also take into account the decisive role and full participation of women in conflict prevention and resolution, as well as their status as victims of sexual and psychological violence. In that connection, and in line with the women and peace and security agenda, it is essential that women be included in all stages of the peaceprocess, in particular in mechanisms for the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts. In conclusion, it is important that the link between security and development guides the transitional justice process, as it plays a crucial role in the pursuit of Sustainable Development Goal 16.
