Mr. Lal (India): The situation in the Middle East
region remains of serious concern and is becoming
increasingly fragile and unpredictable. The growing
threat of terrorism and radicalism has added to the
complexities of the situation in the region, which is
mired in protracted conflicts. The most long-standing
of these conflicts involves Israel and Palestine and
remains strained, with the peace talks suspended for
more than two years now, with no signs of resumption,
at least in the near future. The situation appears to be
getting worse, with escalating Violence on both sides and
lack of restraint and moderation. The dire humanitarian
situation in the Palestinian territories and violence in
Israel demand urgent and sustained efforts on the part
of the global community to resume peace talks.

We welcome the recent visit of the Secretary-
General to Israel and Palestine. As the Secretary-
General has said, courageous steps are necessary for a
negotiated two-State solution in order to bring lasting
peace, security and dignity for the people of both Israel
and Palestine. A two-State solution is the only Viable
option for sustaining peace in the region. It is the
responsibility of the two sides to ensure that they move
closer to a solution rather than farther away from one.
In that regard, we stand with others in emphasizing that
the international community must be firm in its resolve
to assist the people on both sides wherever required.
The Security Council must take a lead in this endeavour.

In that context, we welcome the first report of the
Middle East Quartet on the impediments to a lasting
solution and its recommendations to advance the two-
State solution through negotiations. We also welcome
the French peace initiative and the international
conference held last month in Paris aimed at reviving
the peace talks. We hope that the efforts by the
international community can lead to building some
common ground and generate mutual understanding
and a common political horizon, on which the two sides
can start the talks again. We are of the firm belief that
there can only be a politically negotiated solution to
this issue for a lasting and durable peace.

India has a long-standing record of solidarity with
the Palestinian people, support to the Palestinian cause
and assistance for Palestine's nation-building, human-
resource development and capacity-building efforts.
A just solution to the issue must result in a sovereign,
independent, viable and united State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, living within secure and
recognized borders, side by side and at peace with
Israel, as endorsed in the Quartet road map and relevant
Security Council resolutions.

Our continued commitment to the Palestinian
cause and our friendship with the Palestinian people
are reflected in the ongoing engagement with the
Palestinian leadership and the recent high-level
exchanges, including visits to Palestine by Indian
leaders, including at the level of President and Minister
of External Affairs.

On Yemen, we welcome the announcement of the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy, Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed, last week about an agreement on the guiding
principles for the Yemen peace talks. We hope that the
United Nations-supported talks, which will enter a new
phase in the coming weeks, will lead to a consensus-
based solution.

On Syria, India welcomes the briefing by United
Nations Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura.
We hope for a comprehensive political resolution of
the conflict with the participation of all parties. We
further hope that the intra-Syrian talks under United
Nations auspices will ensure a Syrian-led and Syrian-
owned inclusive political transition, bringing an end to
the violence in Syria, and contribute to stabilizing the
country and the region. The humanitarian situation in
Syria remains a serious concern and has to be addressed
effectively. India remains committed to providing
bilateral humanitarian assistance to Syria.

