Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): We
welcome you, Sir, and are honoured to see you in the
Chair for our debate today. We commend your
delegation for the initiative you have taken to organize
this open meeting on a very important topic, given the
gravity of the situations to which it refers.

The statement just made to the Security Council
by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, Mr. Jan Egeland, shows how great our
challenge is in this area. We would like to thank
Mr. Egeland for again having been up to the task of
defining the tribulations that civilians face in situations
of conflict throughout the world.

States have the major responsibility to protect
their populations that are under their sovereign control.
It is a major principle of international law. That
responsibility implies that appropriate measures must
be taken to ensure the security of people and property
on the territory that the State controls. That
responsibility is often flouted by the defiant behaviour
of non-State armed groups, who launch attacks and
commit atrocities against civilians, revealing the
difficulty that some States have in meeting their
governmental responsibilities.

The Security Council has adopted many
resolutions examining this issue from different angles,
the last one being resolution 1566 (2004), which
condemns all attacks against civilians. Protection of
civilians in time of conflict is no longer considered a
subsidiary element of the Security Council's mandate,
which is to guarantee international peace and security.
Protection of civilians is an integral and essential part
of this mandate. The ultimate goal of the Council's
work is, in fact, to protect the security of people
throughout the world, not only those in the States
where they live.

Since 1999, the Security Council has recognized
the complex nature of contemporary conflicts and the
more obvious need to take into account, in a consistent
and comprehensive fashion, the situation of civilians in
all international interventions that seek to end a
conflict. Last year, during this same period in
December, and in June of this year, the Council dealt
with this question. Among other actions contemplated,
the Council decided to give preponderance to the aide-
memoire and the ten-point plan of action, also known
as the humanitarian road map. To be effective, these
instruments must be regularly updated.

We are pleased that the protection of women,
children and the elderly, as well as displaced persons,
is seen as an important issue. In treating these issues, it
is necessary to give pride of place to gender-specific
and gender-related measures that will help to better
define the mandate of peacekeeping operations, as well
as support programmes for reconstruction. And we
should, as well, establish refugee camps for displaced
persons far away from borders to ensure their civilian
character. Increasing the effectiveness of the response
of the international community in terms of protecting
civilians can be accomplished by means of three
priority actions.

First, prevent human rights violations and gross
abuses. To do that, the Council should reaffirm the
need to prevent excesses against civilians. Wherever
civilian populations are threatened, the Council must
be up to the task of deciding quickly on the measures
needed to ensure their protection. The mandate of
peacekeeping operations must allow them to intervene
effectively to stop massacres and other massive
violations of human rights.

Secondly, compel the parties to conflicts to
strictly respect international humanitarian law and
human rights. The Council could take measures that
would increase the penalities for misconduct on those
who engage in it. Sanctions targeted against those who
commit such violations could serve as a deterrent.
Blocking access to populations who need humanitarian
assistance and attacks on humanitarian staff should be
included among the acts that trigger the imposition of
international sanctions.

Thirdly, put an end to impunity. Repeated
massive violations of human rights and humanitarian
law during conflicts result from the fact that the
perpetrators of these heinous crimes still have a great
deal of room to manoeuvre and freedom to commit
those crimes. The mere creation of international
criminal tribunals seems no longer to be sufficient. It is
necessary to help apprehend and bring before those
bodies those who infringe upon the universally
recognized norms. This could be accomplished by
giving peacekeeping operations the power to refer to
international jurisdictions those who have committed
crimes in their areas of competence. To do that, the
Council would have to speak with one voice.

What about United Nations staff who are engaged
in reprehensible conduct in the exercise of their
functions within peacekeeping operations and in
various situations where the population needs their
help to ease suffering? My delegation welcomes the
measures taken by the Secretary-General, in particular,
Secretary-General's Bulletin (ST/SGB/2003/13) on
special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse. We support the content
of that Bulletin, being of the view that the staff of the
Organization should be above reproach and must fulfil
their obligations and responsibilities with the dignity
appropriate to functions of that nature.

Above and beyond these considerations, the
Council must give more attention to the prevention of
conflicts and make sure that the efforts of
peacebuilding following conflicts will recognize the
crucial role that women and civil society can play in
the consolidation of the processes of normalization and
in national reconstruction.

Finally, we support the draft presidential
statement that has been tabled by the French
delegation.

