We would like to thank Mr. James Swan and Ms. Zainab Hassan for their briefings, as well as Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose Madeira. The Dominican Republic applauds the ending of the political impasse between the Federal Government and the federal member states. We commend the efforts of the Special Representative and international partners to promote collaborative relationships, thereby contributing to advancing the implementation of national priorities. In the same vein, we welcome the agreement on, and ratification of, the electoral model and hope that it can be implemented in a peaceful, transparent and inclusive manner. However, we remain concerned about the delays in the constitutional review process and hope that the stalemates can be overcome in order to conclude that important process. We recognize the Federal Government's commitment to allocating women- only seats in order to ensure the 30 per cent quota for women. We also appreciate the efforts being made to train women by the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), UN-Women, the Ministry of Women's Affairs and civil society organizations. Despite those advances, we regret the removal of the quota for women from Somaliland's draft electoral law by the House of Representatives. We understand that greater participation by women in the various spheres of public and political practice is vital. In that regard, we would like to acknowledge the efforts being made to raise awareness on the need to include young people in key decision- making processes and in formal and informal civic spaces in Somalia. We commend the fact that the Somali-led transition plan is under way and that efforts are being made to establish the necessary security conditions. We hope that the transition will be carried out in line with all of the required parameters and ensuring that the authorities have the necessary tools to shoulder the responsibilities that will be transferred to them. However, all of those efforts could be affected by the serious security situation in Somalia, and we wish to take this opportunity to condemn once again the attacks perpetrated by the terrorist group Al-Shabaab against civilians, Government officials and security forces, some of which were carried out using improvised explosive devices. We would also like to express our concern about the humanitarian situation, which has been aggravated by factors such as political and economic instability and the climate crisis, further marked by the threats posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the desert locust infestation and flooding. All of those factors have resulted in a worrisome deepening of the humanitarian needs in the country, where more than half of the population is in need of aid. Somalia is also one of the countries most vulnerable to the effects of climate change, with very limited capacity, owing to the conflict, to effectively combat the challenges it represents. We encourage the international community to contribute to the humanitarian assistance fund for Somalia in order to save lives and alleviate the needs of the most vulnerable. In conclusion, we would like to highlight the role that the United Nations Support Office in Somalia, the African Union Mission in Somalia and UNSOM have been playing. At the same time, we recognize all of the actors whose actions promote peace and stability in the country.
