Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): On behalf
of France, I thank Lebanon for having taken the
initiative to bring us together under its presidency of
the Security Council to discuss the contribution of
intercultural dialogue to peace and security. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement. As French President Nicolas Sarkozy
stressed on his most recent visit to Beirut, Lebanon is
for us, the French, a glorious crossroads of
civilizations and religions, a symbol of openness and
diversity. Lebanon, a country that unites life and
Government in dialogue and the continuing quest for
concord for the benefit of all and of different
communities, embodies what peace can owe to
6
tolerance, respect for others and the acceptance of
differences.

Since 11 September 2001, dialogue among
cultures and civilizations has been on the international
agenda, for better or for worse. No one can deny the
benefits of dialogue between individuals and groups in
a globalized world where cultural identity has assumed
increasing importance. Intercultural dialogue can be a
tool for preventing conflicts, resolving crises and
building peace, but it cannot be an end in itself.
Cultures are not homogeneous, autonomous or frozen
entities that we can bring together around a table.
Every individual can legitimately claim several cultural
identities, or choose not to have one at all. Intercultural
dialogue, then, should not lead to the political
instrumentalization of cultures, which belong to no
one, are neither fixed nor exclusive, and are bridges
rather than fortresses or weapons.

Tolerance and mutual respect are at the heart of
the mandate of the United Nations, and we can
therefore only welcome the fact that initiatives on
intercultural dialogue are developing under its
auspices. Since its creation, UNESCO has worked for
rapprochement and understanding among peoples, to
promote peace and cultural diversity. The Universal
Declaration on Cultural Diversity and the Convention
on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of
Cultural Expressions are essential instruments.
UNESCO is therefore by its nature the right place for
such matters.

For our part, States members of the Security
Council have the responsibility to act to prevent or put
an end to conflicts. This requires us to take into
account the many factors that can raise tensions
between communities, one of which is culture. But the
cultural factor is rarely the direct or single cause of
conflict; in reality, more often than not it is exploited
by radicals of all stripes.

It is in this context that France supports dialogue
among cultures, because cultural diversity is at the
heart of the French national identity: Atlantic and
Mediterranean France; maritime and continental
France; Mediterranean and African France. France is
made up of a multitude of traditions, customs and
beliefs. Our secularism seeks, within the French
national community, to organize the peaceful
coexistence of all beliefs and non-beliefs, which must
remain in the private sphere in order to make public
life a place where all can gather around the values of
the Republic. We are neither Catholics nor atheists;
neither Jews nor Muslims; we are French citizens, sons
and daughters of the nation.

Furthermore, diversity, a fact of life today in our
towns and cities, is at the heart of the European
project. We must recognize that diversity. Old countries
with Christian traditions must now allow their Muslim
citizens to practice and live their religions, just as
Muslim countries must do for Christians and Jews. The
successful establishment of the Union for the
Mediterranean, which France co-chairs with Egypt,
illustrates this determination to build a concrete,
common future in a world of broad human, religious
and cultural diversity. Our activity in the area of
Francophonie, committed to promoting human rights,
democracy and peacebuilding, also demonstrates our
resolve to pursue our common political objectives
through dialogue in respect for cultural diversity.
Finally, France is a member of the Group of Friends of
the Alliance of Civilizations, whose projects we
welcome as instruments of preventive diplomacy. In
that regard, we look forward to the forthcoming
ministerial Forum of the Alliance on 28 and 29 May.

Respect for the values and universal principles of
human rights is the indispensable foundation on which
intercultural dialogue should be built and reinforced.
That dialogue cannot exist outside civil society; it must
encourage the participation of women; it must include
representatives of every religion and every spiritual,
philosophical and humanistic tradition in all their
diversity and multiplicity; it must not permit any
discrimination, be it on the basis of religion, public
opinion, sexual orientation, gender or nationality. In
order to have dialogue, one must be able to listen to
contrary and critical opinions. The exercise of freedom
of expression is a sine qua non for intercultural
dialogue.

This freedom of expression is indivisible; it is
either there or it is not. To limit it in any way, shape or
form would be to deny its very existence. It is in the
context of its unshakeable and resolute attachment to
liberty that France will continue to be devoted to the
dialogue between cultures and civilizations.

