Mr. Biorn Lian (Norway): Allow me first of all to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November, and to thank your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria, Ambassador Ibrahim Gambari,
for the excellent manner in which he discharged his duties
last month.

After almost four years of bitter warfare, the people
in Bosnia and Herzegovina may at last be able to enjoy
peace. Norway welcomes the fact that the parties to the
conflict have finally decided on a negotiated settlement.
We sincerely hope that this will bring an end to the
tremendous hardship that the civilian population in the
region has suffered, the thousands of deaths and the
millions of refugees and displaced persons.

The Peace Agreement initialled by the three
Presidents at Dayton yesterday is a historic breakthrough
after more than three years of intensive international
mediation efforts. The United States Government deserves
great praise for seizing the initiative and pursuing the
negotiations with determination to a successful
conclusion. Norway would also like to stress the key roles
played by the European Union, by Russia and by the
United Nations with its mediator, Thorvald Stoltenberg,
in achieving this result.

We now have peace on paper. The challenge will be
to put it into practice. The common task of the
international community is now to secure and strengthen
the fragile peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Norway
therefore supports the three draft resolutions submitted to
the Security Council today. The Basic Agreement on
Eastern Slavonia, the suspension of sanctions, and the
gradual lifting of the arms embargo in the context of the
Agreement on Regional Stabilization and arms control are
important steps in the process towards normalization of
relations between the States in the region and the
international community.
 

Norway will continue to play a significant part in the
international efforts to ensure the return of peace and
normalcy. Since the beginning of the war, Norway has been
one of the largest contributors to the United Nations
operations in the former Yugoslavia. Today, we participate
with close to 1,000 personnel on the ground, three quarters
of which are serving in the Nordic peace-keeping battalion
in Tuzla. Several Norwegian non-governmental
organizations have engaged in considerable efforts. We are
contributing a major portion of the drivers and trucks
carrying humanitarian aid to the civilian population in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have so far provided a total
of $160 million in humanitarian assistance and plan to
provide another $70 million for 1996. We intend to
contribute about 1,000 Norwegian troops as part of the
multinational force, led by the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), which will be deployed to monitor
implementation of the Peace Agreement. And we will
contribute to the enormous and urgent reconstruction work
which lies ahead.

But the main responsibility for achieving peace and
stability lies with the parties themselves. Ordinary citizens
in the area are longing for a return to normalcy. The
responsibility lies largely with their political and military
leaders. We therefore strongly urge the parties to
demonstrate their willingness to contribute to the process by
implementing the Agreement in good faith. This means,
among other things, that the parties must ensure respect for
fundamental human rights and rights of minorities, they
must allow refugees and displaced persons to return to their
homes, and they must cooperate with the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.

Finally, I would like to pay a tribute to the negotiators,
peace-keepers, aid workers and all the other women and
men who have sacrificed so much, in some cases their
lives, to make possible the return of peace to the former
Yugoslavia.

