Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's meeting and
for your leadership in the presidency throughout this
month. I would also like to thank the Russian Federation
for its work last month.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

The Movement has vehemently expressed its
condemnation of the latest aggression against the
Palestinian people. The Movement, made up of the vast
majority of the international community, has once again
raised its voice to ask that the rest of the international
community, in particular the Security Council, take
strong and immediate measures to prevent Palestinian
men, women and children from dying, to immediately
stop the aggression and end the genocidal slaughter
that has been carried out by Israel against the civilian
population in the Gaza Strip.

The Security Council should condemn in the
strongest terms the aggression and massacre of more
than 650 Palestinians, mostly women and children, and
the more than 3,700 injured people to date.

As we have said on countless occasions, the
Nicaraguan people feel as if it were their own the pain
and suffering of the Palestinian people, particularly
at this time when that heroic people are victims once
again of Israeli terrorist attacks by air, sea and land,
in violation of all provisions of all international
conventions and resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council itself, in open violation of the
most basic rights of that fraternal people - their right
to life, to live without military occupation, without
a criminal blockade, without the suffocation of the
settlements and without the horror of ethnic cleansing
and collective punishment.

In the face of so much death and destruction,
of such genocide, there is no justification for the
Security Council to continue to fail to comply with
its responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. It should impose an immediate ceasefire and
condemn Israel and hold it responsible for the genocide
committed. The Palestinian people continue to be the
victims of the double standards of a permanent member
of the Security Council.

We know that the main threat to peace and security
in the Middle East is Israel's refusal of peace itself and
of peaceful coexistence with the State of Palestine.
Nicaragua, through our President, has once again made
an appeal in that regard:

"We have no choice but to call upon the international
community. And from this Plaza La Fe we call on
the international community to put a stop to the
acts of war against the civilian population in the
Gaza Strip and eventually reach a final settlement
between the Palestinian and Israeli peoples that
will enable those two fraternal nations, who are
both children of God, to live as God intended: in
peace."

It is time for the Security Council to fulfil its
historic responsibility and not allow one of its members
to continue to cover Israel's impunity and blackmail
and approve the admission of the State of Palestine as
a full Member of the Organization, in accordance with
the decision of the vast majority of the international
community when it decided through the General
Assembly to grant Palestine the status of non-Member
Observer State to the United Nations.

There will be no peace in the Middle East until this
historic injustice at the root of the conflict is rectified,
namely, when the Palestinian people's right to a free
and independent State within the borders established
in 1967 with East Jerusalem as its capital is fulfilled.
Only a viable Palestinian State can guarantee peace and
security in the region.

Before concluding, we would like to reiterate our
concern over the developments in the Middle East and
North Africa, where we have seen that imposing the
policy of regime change, the funding of recognized
terrorist groups, the promotion of warmongering
policies at the expense of dialogue and negotiation,
and interference and intervention in the internal affairs
of sovereign States have all been a constant in recent
years, especially for the people and the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic. Such illegal acts and policies,
which are the cause of conflicts and tremendous refugee
flows, are in fact the real threat to international peace
and security, the very thing we say we most want to
preserve.

We hope that the Security Council will know how to
act in the face of those acts and policies consistent with
its responsibility in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

In conclusion, I wish to share a thought from our
fondly remembered Brazilian colleague Paulo Freire,
which will serve guide us: "Nobody 'is' if they prohibit
others from 'being"'. In the end, the Security Council
should thus allow the State of Palestine to "be" a reality.

