Mr. saenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): On behalf of my delegation, allow me to
convey to you, Sir, our sense of satisfaction on seeing
you presiding over our work on this occasion. Costa Rica
appreciates and pays tribute to the leadership of Gabon,
in particular President Omar Bongo, for the promotion of
regional agreement on issues affecting international peace
and security in central Africa.

On several occasions we have expressed here the
importance we attach to the leadership shown by the
African countries in achieving appropriate solutions to
political and security problems affecting their continent.
In that regard, we especially emphasize the role rightly
played by the Organization of African Unity and various
subregional organs, which are participating actively and
creatively in the resolution of conflicts and the
maintenance of peace in Africa. We express our
appreciation to all of them.
Against this background, the case of the Central
African Republic should and deserves to be emphasized,
because there the countries of the subregion, in the
framework of the International Committee for the Follow-
up of the Bangui Agreements, have made a huge and
invaluable effort of preventive diplomacy and peace-
building. This work, of course, has depended and still
depends on the important political and material support of
France, which, due to its traditional ties to the region, has
made a major effort in support of peace in the Central
African Republic.

Peace and security in the Central African Republic
are based on the specific features and conditions of the
country. As with other conflicts that occur in the
developing world, this conflict is rooted in the economic

 

and social difficulties affecting the security of the
population. Therefore, from Costa Rica's perspective, an
essential condition for the resolution of the problems of the
Central African Republic is the ability of the country to
overcome the grave economic and social problems affecting
the development process. This situation should be urgently
addressed by the international community, and we are
therefore pleased at the comprehensive approach with which
our Organization, through the United Nations Development
Programme, supports and backs the International Follow-up
Committee. However, in this connection, we are of the
View that a new approach should be taken by the Bretton
Woods international financial institutions, on a special and
exceptional basis, to aid in the economic and social
reconstruction of the country.

The work being done by the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(MISAB) in the Central African Republic is essential for
the maintenance of peace and security in the country. In
particular, we wish to stress the role it has played in
promoting the security of the population. For this reason,
we believe that this great effort should continue. My
delegation thus supports the draft resolution before us. We
feel certain that the continuity of MISAB's presence will be
of major importance for the continued implementation of
the Bangui Agreements.

We say this while fully recognizing that, undeniably,
it is for the Central Africans themselves to put the
Agreements into practice. We therefore commend the
willingness of President Patasse, as well as of all the
political parties, to strive for this goal, in particular as
regards support for national reconciliation.

Finally, I wish to state that Costa Rica attaches the
greatest importance to the deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the Central African Republic in
the near future. We shall support this deployment when it
is discussed in the Council.

