Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): I again have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the European
Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia - and the associated countries Cyprus and Malta,
as well as the European Free Trade Association countries
members of the European Economic Area, Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway, align themselves with this
statement.

This debate is another important milestone in the
discussions also initiated under the Canadian presidency of
the Security Council in February 1999 on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The European Union would like
very much to thank you, Mr. Minister, as well as the
Canadian delegation and Ambassador Fowler, for
organizing this debate today and for having chaired the
informal working group established pursuant to resolution
1265 (1999).

We hope that a concrete framework of action will
emerge from this debate and that, based on the
recommendations and proposals contained in the rightly
commended report of the Secretary-General on this subject,
that framework will establish clearer guidelines for the
response by the United Nations system to the growing need
to protect civilians in armed conflict. The European Union
sees the work currently being undertaken on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict as an ongoing process and
looks forward to the next report by the Secretary-General
on this subject.

In recent times, conflicts have most often been of an
intra-State nature. In his report to the Millennium
Assembly, the Secretary General wrote that such conflicts
"have violated, not so much borders, as people" (A/54/2000, para. 193) living within those borders. We are increasingly
confronted with the need to protect individuals and
communities against armed conflict in their immediate
neighbourhoods.

Safe and unimpeded access to those in need of
assistance is an obligation under international humanitarian
law and one which national authorities are legally bound to
ensure. This obligation also extends to all other parties to
a conflict. We know, however, that in many instances this
legal obligation is deliberately flouted. The European
Union believes the Council should make clear in its
relevant resolutions that civilian populations must have
unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance and that
there should be full cooperation with the United Nations
in providing such access. The safety and security of those
entrusted with the delivery of assistance and supplies
must also be ensured.

While men account for the largest number of
combatants, women and children are disproportionately
represented among civilians affected by conflict. Women
also constitute the majority of refugees and internally
displaced persons. The specific needs of women, children,
the elderly and the disabled should be taken into account
in camps for refugees and internally displaced persons, in
the mandates of peacekeeping and peace-building
operations and, whenever possible, during the negotiation
of peace agreements. The situation of children in armed
conflict is an area of particular concern.

The humanitarian character of camps and settlements
for refugees and internally displaced persons should be
strictly enforced, and the deployment of international
military observers or other personnel should be envisioned
when it has become evident that these camps are being
used to achieve military purposes.

The dire situation of some 25 million persons who
have been forced to leave their homes due to the outbreak
of conflict is receiving increased attention on the part of
the international community. The Secretary-General
recommends in his report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict that the States concerned follow the legal
guidance afforded by the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement. We most definitely support that
recommendation. The European Union would also like to
encourage the Council to contribute to an increased
awareness among Member States of the importance of the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement and to
examine what possible role it could play with regard to
the protection of internally displaced persons and in the
dissemination of those Principles.

We also welcome the decision adopted by the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee earlier this month to
the effect that the Emergency Relief Coordinator, acting
in his own capacity or on suggestions from the
humanitarian or resident coordinators, should bring to the
attention of the Security Council issues concerning

 

internally displaced persons whenever that is deemed
appropriate.

The legal protection of civilians in armed conflict can
also be enhanced. The European Union fully supports the
call of the Secretary-General for the ratification of the
major instruments of international humanitarian law, human
rights law and refugee law, for the withdrawal of those
reservations which weaken the protection of civilians, and
for the taking of all appropriate legislative, judicial and
administrative measures to implement those instruments.

The Security Council could play an active role in
convincing Member States that have not yet done so to
ratify the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations
and Associated Personnel. Serious consideration should be
given to expanding the scope of the Convention to include
locally recruited personnel, who are essential to the
functioning of peacekeeping and humanitarian missions.

Furthermore, the activities of the two existing ad hoc
Tribunals should be fully supported by all Member States,
especially with regard to complying with their orders and
requests for the arrest and surrender of accused persons. In
this context, the International Criminal Court will be
crucial. The European Union urges those who have not yet
signed the Rome International Criminal Court Statute to do
so and all States to proceed to ratification as soon as
possible. Our common persistent efforts to combat impunity
for war crimes is also an important contribution to the
prevention of renewed armed conflict.

The first step to be taken in the protection of civilians
is, of course, to prevent conflicts. The link between the
prevention of armed conflicts, the facilitation of the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the protection of
civilians during armed conflict, in particular the protection
of human life, has been well established by this organ, most
recently in its presidential statement of 30 November 1999.
The European Union stresses the importance of a
comprehensive approach to conflict prevention extending
from early warning to post-conflict peace-building. This, in
turn, requires the promotion of a culture of prevention
within the international community. It also entails paying
attention to an expanded view on security.

However, it should be reiterated that conflict
prevention is based on respect for the Charter of the United
Nations and other provisions of international law, including
human rights. When this fails, the international community
has an obligation to act. It has at its disposal a plethora of
measures that, if used judiciously and in a timely manner,
can be powerful tools in the prevention of full-fledged
conflicts.

The European Union would like to encourage the
Secretary-General to resort more often to the prerogative
conferred on him by Article 99 of the Charter. Both the
Secretary-General and Member States should be invited
to bring to the attention of the Council any matter which,
in their opinion, may threaten peace and security. The
establishment in the Council secretariat of an
early-warning mechanism for coordination and systematic
dissemination of reliable early-warning information,
including human rights information, could be one way to
support and facilitate the work of the Secretary-General.

The early deployment of preventive missions should
also be considered whenever possible. Because conflict
situations evolve quickly, the United Nations must be
ready to plan and deploy its operations accordingly. They
must be placed on the ground as soon as possible, with
sufficient resources to achieve the mandates entrusted to
them by the Security Council.

At that early stage a number of measures could be
envisioned, ranging from the use of fact-finding missions,
special envoys and monitors to preventive diplomacy and
a more consistent use of information and analysis made
available by independent treaty body experts and
mechanisms of the United Nations Commission on
Human Rights in order to determine potential conflicts
and to act preventively. Improvement of the capacity of
the Secretariat in terms of expertise and resources could
also be contemplated upon the identification by the
Secretary-General of any additional requirements needed
to fulfil his capabilities.

The European Union supports proposals to expand
the scope of the United Nations standby arrangements
system, including by increasing the number of civilian
police and specialized civil administration and
humanitarian personnel. We also support the proposal that
peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel be trained in
human rights and international humanitarian law,
including child- and gender-related provisions.

With regard to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes, these can be essential
to a peace process and should be included early in the
relevant peace agreements and mandated by the Security
Council with sufficient resources. A successful DDR
programme can break the cycle of violence.

 

There are about 500 million small arms and light
weapons in circulation and considered responsible for
roughly 90 per cent of all deaths in contemporary conflicts.
Their easy availability has aggravated too many conflicts,
whose ruthlessness is hardly understandable at the dawn of
the twenty-first century. Stopping the illegal traffic of these
weapons must be a priority for the international community.
A greater use of embargoes is one of the tools at the
disposal of the Council and one it should use more often,
but embargoes per se can be of little value if they are not
respected and enforced by all States, not least by the
neighbouring countries.

As the Secretary-General recommends, the Security
Council can also use targeted sanctions to deter and contain
those who commit grave violations of international
humanitarian law or human rights, including those parties
to a conflict which do not refrain from attacking civilians.
In this context, it is very much linked to the other debates
we had under your presidency, Sir.

The European Union had the occasion to further
elaborate on the subject of sanctions in a statement
delivered before this Council on 17 April, and again on 18
April on the occasion of the consideration of sanctions
against UNITA.

The Secretary-General has identified, in his report on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, a
comprehensive set of preventive measures that, if followed
through, could have a positive impact on enhancing the
security of civilians in conflicts. General pronouncements
alone will not change much, even if they do, importantly,
raise awareness of the plight of civilians in conflicts.

As the Secretary-General has himself stated:

"We know what needs to be done. What is now
needed is the foresight and the political will to do it".

