The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat at
the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/594, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of members to
document S/2004/551, which contains the text of a
letter dated 15 July 2004 from the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Security Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/2004/594) before it. If I hear no objection, I shall
put the draft resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Benin, Brazil, Chile, China,
France, Germany, Pakistan, Philippines,

Romania, Russian Federation, Spain, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1552 (2004).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 6p.m.

