Mr. Amolo (Kenya): The delegation of Kenya is
pleased to see you, Sir, the Foreign Minister of the
Gabonese Republic, presiding over the work of the
Security Council today, when the Council is discussing an
issue of great importance to Africa. As an African
country that has employed regional initiatives to resolve
some of its political and security problems, Kenya is
proud of the impressive leadership role played by
President Bongo of Gabon - and indeed by the whole
nation of Gabon - in the situation prevailing in the
Central African Republic. We also wish to pay tribute to
all the countries currently involved in ensuring that
relative stability continues in the Central African
Republic. In that regard, the contribution made by the
Government of France is particularly laudable. Finally, we
commend the Secretariat for its continued focused
cooperation with regard to the valiant efforts of those
nations.

The Secretary-General's report of 23 January 1998
gives a clear picture of the current situation in Bangui and
an indication of the shape of our future involvement in
that country. We support his efforts and welcome his
recommendations. We in Kenya are painfully aware of
the fragility of the current situation and its implications
for regional stability and international peace and security.
The Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation
of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) has without doubt
done an exemplary job under very difficult circumstances,
and we are encouraged that it is willing to continue to
assist the Central African Republic in consolidating what
is still a fragile peace. We are also happy to note that the
long-expected National Reconciliation Conference, with
the participation of all political groupings, has been
scheduled for the week of 23 to 28 February 1998. We
think that this is an important step in bringing together
the people of the Central African Republic, who are tired
of conflict.

However, the anticipated withdrawal by mid-April
1998 of French logistic and financial support, on which
MISAB is fully dependent, would disrupt MISAB's
operations and would undoubtedly reverse the progress so
far achieved and destabilize the fragile peace in the

 

country. It is precisely for those reasons that we are in
agreement with the conclusion set out in the Secretary-
General's report that

"Bold and far-reaching measures have therefore to be
taken without further delay to redress the current
situation in the Central African Republic". [S/1998/61,
para. 24]

My delegation considers that the draft resolution
before us seeks to address these concerns by extending
MISAB's mandate until 16 March 1998 and that it
expresses the Council's intention to take a decision on the
establishment of a peacekeeping operation that would be
critical in moving the peace process in the Central African
Republic forward. Kenya will therefore vote in favour of
the draft resolution.
In conclusion, we would like to put on record the
warm appreciation of all the African delegations in the
Security Council for the excellent spirit of cooperation and
goodwill that was clearly demonstrated by all delegations
during our discussions on the draft resolution. It is our
fervent hope that this spirit will be extended to our
continued appeals for contributions to the Trust Fund
established for the Central African Republic.

