Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
I, too, would first wish to welcome the President of
Timor-Leste, without whom none of the spectacular
progress we are witnessing today in Timor-Leste would
have been possible.

The Permanent Representative of Austria will
soon be making a statement on behalf of the presidency
of the European Union, and I fully associate myself
with that statement. I, would like to make a few brief
comments.

First, I am delighted at the impressive progress
made by Timor-Leste four years after it gained
independence. State institutions have been created and
continue to gain strength. Democracy is taking root.
Observance of human rights is increasing. The country
is developing its cooperation and enhancing its
international outreach, particularly in Asia and in the
South Pacific. That success belongs first and foremost
to the Timorese. It is also the outcome of the
commitment of the international community and, in
particular, of the United Nations. Here, I should like to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa.

Secondly, I should also like to note with
satisfaction the strengthening ties between Timor-Leste
and its neighbours, particularly Indonesia. The
settlement of border issues seems to be on track,
despite some incidents, which would be of concern if
they recur. This situation, in any event, requires
continued vigilance.

Thirdly, stabilization is today well under way. But
we believe that major efforts are still needed to make
this stabilization durable in the run-up to the general
elections scheduled for 2007. As the Secretary-General
has emphasized, major bilateral and multilateral efforts
will still be necessary following the completion of the
mandate of the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL), which expires in May 2006. We encourage
the handover of some UNOTIL activities to competent
United Nations agencies or to other organizations that
are present in the field, as well as to bilateral donors.

We have taken note of the request of the
Timorese authorities that a United Nations political
structure be maintained following the end of
UNOTIL's mandate. It seems to us that, given the
newness of Timorese institutions and the persistence of
fragility in some elements of the stabilization process,
that request is perfectly legitimate. The structure, in
any event, needs to be appropriate and functional. We
would be grateful to the Secretary-General if he could
make some proposals about this in his next report.

We would also like to stress the importance of
national reconciliation for the stabilization of Timor-
Leste and its importance as an example for the entire
region. This reconciliation should not be based on
impunity, since justice alone can make it possible to
establish lasting peace. We note here that President
Gusmao has submitted to the Secretary-General the
report of the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation on human rights violations in Timor-
Leste between 1974 and 1999.

We also note that the Commission of Experts
appointed by the Secretary-General has identified
deficiencies in the manner that prosecutions have been
conducted to date against those who committed serious
violations of human rights in 1999. We therefore look
forward to the Secretary-General's recommendations
on that matter, especially his recommendations
concerning the bilateral Commission for Truth and
Friendship, on the basis of the report of the
Commission of Experts and the views expressed by
Indonesia and Timor-Leste.

