Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): On behalf of my delegation, I
wish to congratulate Pakistan on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, as
well as to thank it for choosing this important subject
for today's debate.

My delegation associates itself with the statements
delivered earlier by the representatives of the Islamic
Republic ofIran and Egypt on behalfofthe Non-Aligned

Movement and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
respectively.

The fight against terrorism, especially the Boko
Haram menace, remains a very high priority for Nigeria.
The complexity and evolving nature of the threat and
the diversity of conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism will require a comprehensive, multifaceted
and sustainable response at the national, regional and
global levels. Terrorists are exploiting instability in
some parts of the world and taking advantage of new
technologies, including using mobile telephones and
the Internet to expand their networks, raise funds,
recruit new members and propagate their ideals. The
world must rise to the challenge.

Nigeria has taken certain measures aimed at
effectively countering the Boko Haram menace and
other terrorist-related threats in our country. The 2011
Prevention of Terrorism Act and the Money-laundering
Prohibition Act of the same year were introduced not
only to stem the tide, but also to neutralize terrorist
threats in Nigeria. The laws establish measures for the
prevention, prohibition and combating of terrorism,
including terrorism funding. The terrorism prevention
amendment bill of December 2012 strengthened the
sanctions regime and the legal framework and provided
useful tools for defending human rights while fighting
the menace.

We also adopted a three-pronged counter-terrorism
strategy that involves the following. First, it addresses
social and economic grievances, promotes political and
religious dialogue and enhances the capacity of law
enforcement agencies to combat all terrorist threats.
Secondly, it restructures the banking sector and
strengthens institutional bodies, including the office
of the national coordinator for counter-terrorism and
the national intelligence unit, as front-line agencies
in combating terrorism. It also involves the signing of
regional counter-terrorism treaties.

Against that background, in March, Nigeria
will host a regional workshop of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF) on the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy in West Africa and the Sahel. That
subregional project is expected to galvanize Member
States, international organizations, civil society
organizations and other regional stakeholders to work
in concert towards the attainment of the common
objective of tackling the threat of terrorism. We are
also a member of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum,
as well as the CTITF. We will work within those
frameworks to reach the common objective of blunting
the dangers and threats caused by terrorist movements
and organizations.

It is evident that close cooperation is required among
Member States as a prerequisite and effective strategy
in tackling terrorism. The overarching challenge is to
find ways to sustain international cooperation, despite
the divergence in the perception of threat by various
countries. My delegation recognizes the unique and
invaluable contributions of the United Nations to the
global efforts to combat the scourge of terrorism.

At the same time, we would like to highlight the
nexus between terrorism and extremism, illiteracy,
poverty, maladministration and human rights
violations, and to emphasize that those factors should
always be taken into consideration when formulating
counter-terrorism strategies. My delegation therefore
calls for the formulation and adoption of long-
term strategies based on subregional, regional and
international cooperation to support national measures
and to assist individual Governments facing threats of
terrorism to deal with the scourge effectively, while
observing established best practices, including respect
for fundamental human rights. We therefore believe
that the fight against terrorism should, as much as
possible, take into account the peculiar contexts and
environments in which such struggles are being waged.

Nigeria will continue to collaborate with the United
Nations with respect to the terrorist challenge in our
country. In that regard, we will work with the relevant
United Nations agencies and the Security Council
to coordinate activities and ensure that, in the end,
a successful campaign to eradicate extremism and
terrorist violence is achieved.

