The President: I thank Mr. Chergui for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Deputy Foreign Minister of Sweden.

I would like to begin by thanking the Special
Representative and Commissioner Chergui for their
very important briefings to the Security Council
this afternoon.

As we have heard, recent developments in Africa
give us cause for optimism. The joint declaration of
peace and friendship signed by the leaders of Eritrea
and Ethiopia represents a courageous step towards a
new beginning of peace and cooperation for the people
concerned, neighbouring countries, the region and
neighbouring regions.

Sweden remains a steadfast supporter of an enhanced
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
regional and, no less, subregional organizations in
Africa. The emerging security challenges that we are
facing are shared and increasingly interconnected. They
require a collective response. Regional actors have a
thorough understanding of the issues at stake on the
ground. They are invested in resolving crises in their
neighbourhood, and they have established relationships
at the local level. We commend the African Union (AU)
and its subregional partners for all that they do. They can
serve as an inspiration for other regions lacking regional
security and cooperative arrangements. They work in
environments in which the United Nations is unable or
cannot deploy with sufficient speed. We must not forget
that, when African countries respond to increasingly
complex and interconnected challenges, they do so on
behalf of all of us. The partnership between the AU and
the United Nations with regard to more efficient peace
operations constitutes an important part of our ongoing
discussions on the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.

We therefore welcome the renewed momentum
and concrete steps being taken to advance the United
Nations-AU partnership, not least, thanks to the
commitment and dedication of the leadership in both
organizations. We just heard about the second United
Nations-AU annual conference, held in Addis Ababa,
where the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of
the AU Commission announced their commitment to
further deepening the partnership. We welcome the
move towards more structured cooperation between
the two organizations over the past 18 months through
the two important agreements mentioned earlier. The
joint visit by Under Secretary-General Lacroix and
Commissioner Chergui to the Sudan and the Central
African Republic was another tangible example of
closer cooperation. We received the note that that will
happen again as very welcome news.

The need for the flexible, predictable and
sustainable funding ofAU peace operations is clear. We
commend the African mobilization of funding within
the AU Peace Fund. The conversation that we are
presently leading on alternatives and modalities is truly
urgent. Sweden views positively access to assessed
United Nations contributions for AU-conducted peace
operations. We welcome the agreement on fiduciary
reporting as an important and concrete step in the right
direction. We also note progress in the development of
the compliance framework. In addition to enhancing
our cooperation concerning peace operations, we also
need to invest time and energy into United Nations-
AU cooperation in the area of conflict prevention
and resolution. The annual consultation with the AU
Peace and Security Council tomorrow will provide an
important opportunity to explore both issues further.

Yesterday in Brussels, Sweden, together with the
European Union and President Farmajo of Somalia,
hosted the Somalia Partnership Forum. The United
Nations and the AU had important roles at the
Forum. Successful AU-United Nations cooperation
in Somalia - where the United Nations provides
operational support to the AU-led African Union
Mission in Somalia, in turn operating on a United
Nations mandate - is a precondition for continued
progress in Somalia's State-building process.

The joint United Nations-AU mission to the Sahel
two weeks ago, which we heard about earlier and in which
the Swedish Minister for Foreign Affairs participated,
is an encouraging sign of the much-needed cooperation
to advance the women and peace and security agenda.
As we said then, missions like this should become a
regular occurrence. We are also encouraged by the work
carried out by the African Women Leaders Network to
build on and harness women's participation throughout
the region in peace and conflict resolution. Women's
participation is not a women's issue; it is a peace and
security issue.

I am confident that tomorrow's joint meeting
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council will contribute to deepening ourjoint
cooperation. Such meetings are critically important for
building the relationship between the Councils, and
we would welcome more opportunities for informal
interactions between the two Councils. I look forward
to the adoption of the joint communique that has
been discussed, which will serve to signal our joint
commitment. Peace is best pursued in partnership.
Moving forward on this agenda will require our
substantial and sustained political investment, and we
look forward to doing our part.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

