Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I would like
to begin by echoing the Ambassador of Japan in paying
tribute to the President on his last day as President of
the Council, which he has led with great precision and

authority, the last day of his time as Permanent
Representative of Turkey to the United Nations, and
the last day of a very distinguished and long
international career. We shall all miss him, and
international diplomacy will be the poorer for his
departure. We wish him a long and very rich
retirement.

On the issue of the day, Afghanistan, let me begin
by thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/323) and Special Representative Kai Eide for
his briefing today. These reports are a very important
part of our engagement with the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
In the last six months, we have seen UNAMA's role
grow. We applaud its plans to move into more
provinces, which will be key for delivering increased
Afghan capacity at the subnational level and for
delivery of international contributions well beyond
Kabul and country-wide.

I said in March that this year will be decisive for
Afghanistan. Both the report and today's briefing only
serve to underline that view. The challenges facing
Afghanistan remain serious, but we are moving
forward and we applaud the progress made by the
Afghan Government in areas such as agriculture and
police reform.

The preparations for elections are on track,
thanks in large part to the efforts of the Independent
Election Commission of Afghanistan in concert with
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
and UNAMA.

We welcome the progress on donor coordination,
but we recognize that there is further progress to be
made. We have long argued for consolidated support
for the Government of Afghanistan closely aligned to
the national development strategy. Ambassador Tanin
has repeated this call again today, and we should heed
1t.

On counter-narcotics efforts, by continuing to
support the Afghan Government's national drug control
strategy, we are also making a difference. Over half of
Afghanistan's provinces are now poppy-free, nation-
wide poppy cultivation decreased 19 per cent last year,
and significant investment is being made to deliver
alternative livelihoods. All these are areas of progress,
and we have seen coordination among regional
countries also intensifying, which is welcome.

In April, the United Kingdom released an updated
policy on Afghanistan and Pakistan, and Prime
Minister Gordon Brown set out the United Kingdom's
three objectives. The first objective is to prevent the
return of Al-Qaida in Afghanistan and reduce violent
extremism. The second objective is to help Afghanistan
to become an effective and accountable State that is
increasingly able to handle its own security and deliver
basic services to its people. The third objective is to
provide long-term, sustainable support for the Afghan
national development strategy, particularly on
governance, rule of law, human rights and poverty
alleviation.

In all of these areas, UNAMA has a central role
to play. We will not defeat extremism and defeat the
insurgency if we cannot improve the daily lives of
ordinary Afghans. UNAMA's work is vital to
improving governance and helping build an effective
Afghan State.

The presidential elections in Afghanistan are less
than two months away. The security situation indicates
that organizing the elections will be difficult, but, for
the first time in over 30 years, the will of the Afghan
people will be expressed through an elections process
organized and delivered by the Afghan people
themselves. We are working to help the Afghan
Government ensure that those elections are credible,
inclusive and secure. We encourage all the presidential
candidates to set out their proposals clearly so that
Afghans can make an informed choice.

I would also remind partners of the need for
timely preparations for next year's parliamentary,
council and district elections as well. UNAMA has
shown commendable political leadership in the run up
to the August elections, and we must all support
Special Representative Eide and his team's work to
deliver these preparations, not just this year but also in
2010.

We welcome the arrival of new troops in
Afghanistan, especially in the south, as it will improve
security, and, with a significant number of troops
dedicated to training, it will help strengthen the Afghan
national security forces. The key to lasting success in
Afghanistan is to build up Afghan security forces so
that they can take lead responsibility for delivering
security to the Afghan people.

We must all continue to protect non-combatants
from the effects of military action. We all deeply regret
any civilian casualties; each and every innocent life
lost is a tragedy. Reducing civilian casualties remains a
high priority for the NATO force. We welcome General
McChrystal's early attention to these issues. Protecting
the Afghan population is at the core of our
international mission, which is in stark contrast to the
Taliban-led insurgency, which, as the Special
Representative has made clear, continues deliberately
to target and kill Afghan civilians.

UNAMA's work is at the heart of the
international effort in Afghanistan. We fully support
the Mission as it uses the increased resources agreed
last year to deliver its objectives more effectively and
more widely. As UNAMA takes on an increasingly
important role, the Council needs to pay attention to
how we match the demands we make of the Mission
with the resources it needs to deliver them. That will
require clear decisions on the right priorities.

We look forward to seeing the work that UNAMA
is doing to introduce benchmarks into its reporting. I
was glad to hear from the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General that that task is being taken
seriously. It should not be seen as a bureaucratic chore.
Benchmarks are a vital tool to target their work,
measure the progress made and explain to the Afghan
people and the international community what UNAMA
is achieving. We are content to allow more time for
that, on the understanding that we will see the results
in the next report, in September.

The clear focus that benchmarks will provide will
also help us to consider the merits of further requests
for more resources, which the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General has told us are in the pipeline.

May I close by saying how much the United
Kingdom appreciates the work of Kai Eide and all of
UNAMA's dedicated staff. The United Kingdom will
continue to support them and the Afghan people and
authorities as we collectively tackle the major
challenges ahead.

