Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (Spoke in Spanish): Let me at the outset welcome and thank High
Representative Valentin Ink for his presence here, and
express the support of the Government of Spain for his

work and for his Office. We wish also to welcome the
new Ambassador of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Milos
Vukasinovie, to whom we express the full readiness of
the Mission of Spain to cooperate in any consultation
he might wish to engage in on all issues relating to the
Security Council. We also wish to associate ourselves
with the statement to be made later by the delegation of
the European Union.

We have read attentively the quarterly report
(S/2015/84l) and listened carefully to the presentation
of the High Representative. Progress has been made
over the past six months in the implementation of
the five objectives and two conditions necessary for
the conclusion of the mandate. Achieving all five
objectives and both conditions as quickly as possible
would without a doubt be the best way of marking the
twentieth anniversary of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
However, in order to be successful, it must be supported
by all of those involved.

We deem important the fact that we have just
unanimously adopted resolution 2247 (2015) renewing
Operation Althea of the European Union military
operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, whose executive
mandate remains unchanged. I wish in that respect to
note the positive role played by the mission, both in
support of the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and in the very important role of training and capacity-
building.

Since the Council met six months ago (see S/PV.7440), Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
characterized by a positive political environment,
given that progress has been made on the path towards
Euro-Atlantic integration, which was the choice of the
citizens themselves. Indeed, the entry into force of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement in June and
the adoption by the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina
of the Reform Agenda in July are steps in the right
direction. However, it is vital that every effort be
focused on translating into reality, without delay, the
commitments made.

We remain concerned at the divisive rhetoric of
certain political leaders and at certain initiatives, such
as the announced referendum in the Republika Srpska
on the applicability of the judicial power of the State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Spain unconditionally and unreservedly supports
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina as well as the need for political leaders
to respect the rule of law and the principle of legality in
all of their undertakings.

