Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Mr. President, in taking the floor for
the first time here in the Council this month, allow me
at the outset to discharge the pleasant duty of
congratulating you on your presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November. I would also like
to join in the unanimous praise for the Chinese
presidency of last month. I would like to thank most
sincerely Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
tireless efforts on behalf of the restoration of peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and above all
for having appointed President Obasanjo as Special
Envoy for eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the presence with us of Mr. Karel De Gucht,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of
Belgium. His Excellency is most welcome in New
York. Finally, this meeting allows me also to welcome
a friend, Mr. Alan Doss, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. I am grateful for his presentation of
the fourth special report (S/2008/728) and recognize
the crucial importance of his statement.

I shall begin by referring to Mr. Tony Blair,
former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. Council
members will recall that, on 2 October 2001, in his
statement to the annual conference of his party, he
referred to a moral duty to provide military and
humanitarian international assistance to any country in
need and emphasized that

"If the world continues to ignore the sufferings of
African nations, like in the war-ravaged
Democratic Republic of the Congo, it would
breed anger and frustration which would threaten
global stability."

I would endorse the remarks of the British Prime
Minister. I have always affirmed the need for serious
and intensive thinking on the long-standing and
immediate underlying causes of the present conflict,
which could help the international community to take
all measures required to restore normalcy to the Great
Lakes region as a whole and to root out chaos and
3
desolation. There have been 300,000 dead in Burundi,
nearly 1 million dead in Rwanda, 5 million dead in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - enough is
enough.

How long must this horror last and what is its
justification? Today, the entire world is hailing the
decision of the Security Council to follow up the
request of the Secretary-General for a temporary
increase in the authorized military and police personnel
for the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). That is
important to strengthen the Mission's capacity to offer
genuine protection to the Congolese civilian
population, the victim of an obvious humanitarian
disaster, as Mr. Doss emphasized, and of mass
violations of human rights, in particular acts of
violence directed against women and children. The
person directly responsible is a warlord who, through
some undoubtedly stately footwork, continues to defy
in all impunity the entire international community
more than six years now after being designated by the
international community as a war criminal. That
gentleman is behaving as if he were preparing for the
definitive occupation of the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, unfortunately with the
complicity of some of my compatriots. Others in the
region are also responsible. Their responsibility is
more important than his direct responsibility, but less
than others that are even more global still.

Regarding regional responsibility, our relations
with Rwanda have perhaps not yet yielded the results
we had hoped for. A great deal remains to be done.
However, talks are highly instructive from all points of
view and are encouraging enough to allow us to see,
despite difficulties, signs of a possible exit from the
crisis. For us, that means finding a good balance
between Rwandan claims and the legitimate concerns
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I would like to return to the remarks made by
former Prime Minister Tony Blair. I asked why the
international community continues to wish to humiliate
all the peoples and ethnic groups that make up the
mosaic of the Congolese nation because of a crime in
which no one from Zaire or the Congo ever
participated. The question has been raised.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo needs
peace. We need peace to tackle other gigantic
challenges as well. We have established balances, but
they no longer exist. We need to restore a State that can
perform, that can restore the most fundamental rights
of its citizens and do so on healthy and democratic
bases - a State that can provide for lasting peace,
accompanied by sustainable development, both for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and for the entire
Great Lakes region.

Finally, this must be a State that is marked by the
highest goals of humankind - namely, peace, justice
and prosperity.

