Mr. Feltman: Throughout the conflict in Ukraine,
and repeatedly in recent weeks, the Secretary-General
has called for de-escalation, restraint and the protection
of civilians. We deeply regret that these calls appear to
have fallen on deaf ears.

In just five days since we last met on 21 January
(see S/PV.7365), close to 50 civilians have been killed
and nearly 150 have been seriously wounded. On
22 January, over a dozen civilians died when rockets
hit their trolleybus in Donetsk city. The same day, at
least 10 civilians were killed amid heavy fighting in the
city of Horlivka. On Saturday, 24 January, a barrage of
attacks with multiple rocket launcher systems hit the
city of Mariupol, destroying buildings and impacting
a market filled with civilians. Dozens of people lost
their lives, including women and children, and over 100
were wounded. The Special Monitoring Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
reported, based on crater analysis, that the rockets
originated from territory controlled by the so-called
"Donetsk People's Republic".

Mariupol lies outside of the immediate conflict
zone. The conclusion can thus be drawn that the
entity that fired these rockets knowingly targeted a
civilian population. This would constitute a violation
of international humanitarian law. We must send an
unequivocal message - the perpetrators must be held
accountable and brought to justice.
On 23 January, the leader of the so-called Donetsk
People's Republic announced a boycott of future
consultations with the trilateral contact group, a
unilateral withdrawal from the ceasefire and threatened
to seize further territory, with a plan that includes
pushing the front line all the way to the borders of
Donetsk oblast. As the Secretary-General stated on
24 January (SG/SM/l6485), this constitutes a Violation
of their commitments under the Minsk accords. We
call directly on the rebels to immediately cease their
provocative and violent actions, to abide by international
law and to make good on their commitments. We also
urge the leadership of the Russian Federation to use
its influence to call on the rebels to cease hostilities
immediately. This will be a critical step in stopping the
bloodshed.

The Ukrainian leadership has been vocal about its
commitment to the Minsk accords and has asserted that
it remains in a defensive position. However, we note
the recent emergency measures adopted by the National
Security and Defence Council, particularly those in
relation to "strengthening counter-terrorism measures",
and appeal for the application of maximum restraint.
In light of the just-declared state of emergency in
Donbas, it has never been more important to guarantee
humanitarian workers and goods full and unhindered
access. Bureaucratic hurdles on both sides of the
conflict line are impeding humanitarian access and
must be eased. We also call on the Government of
Ukraine to ensure that humanitarian operations are free
from taxation.

We recognize the difficulty of diplomatic discussions
aimed at finding a peaceful resolution to this conflict,
given entrenched positions. Nonetheless, efforts to find
a political solution must urgently be redoubled. President
Poroshenko's announcement that an agreement has been
reached on the necessity of holding negotiations in the
Geneva format, with the participation of the European
Union, the United States, Ukraine and Russia, is
welcome.

Before I close, let me share our assessment of the
way forward, with an emphasis on reviving the Minsk
accords. As agreed at Minsk, all sides must immediately
cease hostilities, with the onus particularly on the rebels
to recommit to the ceasefire and back down from their
offensive. We sincerely hope that the trilateral contact
group will reconvene in consultations with rebel
leadership, as envisaged this week, to work towards
a sustainable ceasefire and the implementation of the
broader Minsk accords. Most importantly, all sides
must commit to the protection of civilians and letting
assistance reach those in need.

Finally, there must be full political recommitment
to a peaceful and lasting solution to this conflict
at the highest levels. I reiterate our encouragement
of a convening of the Geneva format at the earliest
opportunity. The United Nations also remains ready to
support the consolidation of a sustainable and lasting
peace process, as may be required. Over 5,000 lives
have already been lost in this conflict. We must find a
way to stop it, and we must do so now.

