Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his sobering briefing.

The United States strongly condemns the rocket
attack on Israel from Gaza yesterday that injured
seven innocent civilians, and we reaffirm Israel's right
to defend itself. I think that we can all agree on the
need for Israelis and Palestinians to work together,
with the support of the international community, to
improve conditions in Gaza and the West Bank, but this
malicious and insidious violence is a clear signal from
Hamas and others in Gaza who see such cooperation
and progress as counter to their aims.

Every one ofus around this table has a responsibility
to condemn the rocket attacks, but we must also
recognize that, in addition to terrorizing Israeli
civilians, Hamas has failed to provide for Palestinians
in Gaza and, most recently, has cracked down violently
on Palestinian protesters. Over the past few weeks,
thousands of Palestinians in Gaza have come out to
protest against Hamas and the dire economic and
humanitarian situation in Gaza. Hamas security forces
responded with sweeping arrests of and violence against
protesters, including women and children. Journalists
were brutally beaten, and 15 local journalists were
jailed. According to Amnesty International, "[t]he
crackdown on freedom of expression and the use of
torture in Gaza have reached alarming new levels".

We agree that many factors have contributed to the
situation and Gaza, but the international community
needs to shine a light on Hamas's injustices, such as
rocket attacks into Israel and encouraging and praising
violence against innocent Israelis, and also how it treats
its fellow Palestinian brothers and sisters.

As Council members are aware, yesterday
President Trump signed a proclamation recognizing
the Golan Heights as Israeli territory - a decision of
critical strategic and security importance to the State of
Israel. To allow the Golan Heights to be controlled by
the likes of the Syrian and Iranian regimes would be to
turn a blind eye to the atrocities of the Al-Assad regime
and the malign and destabilizing presence of Iran in
the region. The United States Administration has made
clear that there can be no peace agreement that does
not satisfactorily address Israel's security needs in the
Golan Heights.

