Mr. Maradiaga (spoke in Spanish): We thank you,
Madam President, for your leadership in placing the
situation in Nicaragua on the agenda.

Few nations of the world have had such a difficult
history of seeking peace as Nicaragua. The armed
conflict that we suffered in the 1980s, which caused
thousands of deaths and destabilized all of Central
America, is still fresh in our memory. In that cyclical
history of conflicts, Nicaragua has enjoyed the help
of the international community when too much blood
has already been spilled. I come before the Council
to convey the urgency of a situation that threatens
the peace and security of an entire region, as can be
clearly deduced from the more than 23,000 Nicaraguan
refugees who, in less than four months, have had to
leave for neighbouring Costa Rica .

I know from my own experience the consequences
of a conflict that spins out of control and expands
throughout a region when it could have been prevented
using the instruments allowed by the Charter of the
United Nations and the inter-American system. When I
was 12 years old, I lived in a refugee camp in the state of

Texas, after having crossed alone, as an undocumented
person, the border between Mexico and the United
States of America, trying to escape the armed conflict
in Nicaragua. I returned to Nicaragua in 1990, full of
enthusiasm for the reconstruction of my country.

The experiences of my childhood defined my
commitment to human rights, disarmament and
non-violence. It was thus that, in 2003, I became
a Disarmament Fellow thanks to a United Nations
programme here at Headquarters. A short time later,
I returned to Nicaragua and started an academic
programme to train emerging youth leaders in the
principles of the culture of peace in my country.

It was through my contacts as a university professor
that, on the night of 20 April, I received desperate calls
from several of my students. One of those calls, with
the noise of firearms in the background, still tears at
my heart. They said to me: "Professor, they are killing
us - help us". That day, hundreds of young university
students sought refuge in Managua Cathedral after
Nicaraguan police shot at protesters indiscriminately.
That afternoon, Alvaro Conrado, a 15-year-old boy,
who went out to give the students water, died from a
gunshot wound to the neck.

Over the next few weeks, I watched in awe as tens
of thousands of people peacefully took to the streets to
protest for their civil rights. In April, like thousands
of Nicaraguans, Ijoined several ad hoc groups to help
the wounded who had not been admitted to public
hospitals. I do not have time today to talk about the
pain of seeing the bodies of so many young people shot
by snipers. On 30 May, at the Mother's Day march, I
saw a teenager's brains blown out by a bullet before my
very eyes. I personally managed to survive an attack
on 28 May, when paramilitaries tried to shoot me a few
yards from my office.

One of the most worrying aspects of this crisis
is the criminalization of civil protest through the
enactment of an anti-terrorism law that classifies
any civic act of protest as terrorism. I was one of the
first to be officially denounced, on 3 June, when the
police apparatus that serves the Government accused
me of terrorism and organized crime while I was in
Washington, DC, meeting with the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights. That accusation has
been a kind of death sentence for me, because since
then I have received hundreds of death threats, police
and paramilitaries have surrounded my home and
office, and my family members have been intimidated.

On 11 July, a group of at least 20 paramilitaries
stopped my car. When they recognized me, they made
me get out and detained me and my companions,
keeping AK-47 rifles and other high-calibre weapons
trained on me the whole time. They asked me ifI was
ready to die. In a video that they recorded themselves,
which went viral, they released me unharmed, saying,
"Thank Commander Ortega that you are still alive."
They said they had not yet been given permission to kill
me. However, on 13 July, while I was meeting privately
with students in the city of Leon, more than 30 people
broke into the meeting room and beat me up, leaving me
with several fractures. As I was being attacked by these
Government-associated groups, I felt the same agony
that I had experienced at 12 years old when I swam a
freezing river to cross the border, with the feeling that
I had lost the right to live peacefully in the country of
my birth.

Despite the pain, I now have the opportunity to
tell the Council my story, while the voices of hundreds
of other Nicaraguans have been silenced forever.
More than 300 people, which is a highly conservative
estimate, have been murdered, including a friend of
mine, the journalist Angel Gahona, who was shot in
the head at the beginning of the crisis. My colleagues
Cristhian Fajardo and his wife Maria Adilia are in
jail, as are the leaders of the Movimiento Campesino,
Medardo Mairena and Pedro Mena, as well as Irlanda
Jerez and the university leaders Levis Rugama, Yaritza
Mairena, Victoria Obando, Edwin Carcache and
Alejandro Centeno. Another 240 other activists have
been imprisoned for participating in the protests, and
the number of political prisoners continues to rise.

Today Nicaragua has become a huge prison that
pretends to be under control. However, an atmosphere
of terror and indiscriminate persecution reigns every
day. Masked gunmen, accompanied by police, burst
into private Nicaraguan homes without a warrant. They
consider possessing a blue-and-white national flag
to be a crime. Human rights defenders and religious
leaders of all denominations are being persecuted and
threatened with death. Paramilitary groups have been
invading private homes, arresting citizens at random
and taking away their mobile phones. The slightest trace
on a phone of an anti-Government tweet or message
means imprisonment and serious forms of torture, such
as genital amputation or the forced anal penetration of
men and women using objects such as guns and rifles.
There are doctors in Washington, DC, today who are
testifying under oath about the diagnoses that they have
made ofthat type of violation. Nicaragua is becoming a
country without hope.

I realize that there are many crises in the world and
that the international community must prioritize its
efforts, and I sympathize with that. However, for more
than a decade, Daniel Ortega's regime has benefited
from being under the international radar. We are
currently facing a situation that, in addition to causing
unprecedented widespread atrocities within Nicaragua,
is creating dangerous instability in a volatile region of
the world. This is not just another human rights crisis
that can be resolved internationally. This is a State
policy of mass and systematic violence against unarmed
civilians. A time bomb is ticking in Nicaragua. Crimes
against humanity are taking place every day, creating
an environment conducive to an internal conflict of
major proportions that we still have time to prevent.
That will require the engaged attention of the United
Nations if we are to ensure peace and security before
it is too late.

With regard to the Security Council's mandate, I
call on it to consider adopting a specific resolution on
the critical situation in Nicaragua. I ask the members to
allocate resources and create monitoring mechanisms
for Nicaragua and for disarming the paramilitary
groups. I recommend that the United Nations support
the process of restoring the rule of law in Nicaragua.
I leave the Council with the cry of a country that
while small in size is huge in its desire to have a new
opportunity for peace andjustice.

