Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation takes note of the
progress made in the Bougainville settlement and
supports efforts to implement the Bougainville peace
agreement. We welcome the commitment to a political
settlement by the Government of Papua New Guinea
and the Bougainville communities.

We are pleased to note that the peace process has
entered the constitutional phase as a result of the
successful conclusion of the second stage of the
weapons collection plan. We welcome the decision in
principle of the parties of Bougainville to destroy the
collected weapons, and we call for the speedy
implementation of that decision.

We commend the activities of the authorities of
Papua New Guinea to implement the tasks of the peace
agreement, including the efforts made, together with
the Bougainville Constitutional Commission, to
advance the constitutional process in Bougainville. Of
great importance is the inclusion in the Constitution of
Papua New Guinea of a new, 14th section on peace-
building in Bougainville on the basis of the
Bougainville peace agreement.

We welcome steps to strengthen the local police
including by delegating to it substantial powers and
functions.

We call upon all those who have refused to join
the peace process in Bougainville to do so now. We
commend the work done by the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville, headed by
Mr. Sinclair, in advancing the peace settlement. We
take note of the usefulness of regional efforts, inter
alia, those undertaken within the group established by
Australia, New Zealand, Fiji and Vanuatu for the
transition in Bougainville, which has been effectively
facilitating the advancement of the peace process.

However, despite the positive steps we observe in
the settlement in Bougainville, many tasks in the peace
process remain unfulfilled. In order to carry them out,
the further support of the international community will
be required. In that regard, the Russian delegation
favours the extension of the United Nations presence in
Bougainville and is prepared to engage in a
constructive discussion in the Security Council on
concrete modalities for future United Nations efforts to
advance the peace process there. We also think it is
important to continue and to increase, with the support
of the regional organizations, assistance from the
United Nations Development Programme and other
United Nations agencies to the processes of post-
conflict rehabilitation and peace-building in
Bougainville.

