Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of America): We thank Mr. Martin for his presentation
and would like to express our appreciation for his
efforts to bring about reconciliation in Timor-Leste. We
also welcome Foreign Minister Gutteres to today's
proceedings.

The recommendations of the Secretary-General
take a comprehensive and detailed approach addressing
the root causes of the crisis in Timor-Leste. The United
States particularly appreciates the recommendation that
United Nations advisors work closely with the
Timorese Ministries of Defence and Interior to ensure
that there is an integrated approach to the armed forces
and police. That will be critical in building a
democratic security sector.
We remain unpersuaded that there is a need for
United Nations troops. Security concerns in Timor-
Leste are internal. The international force is in place, is
well equipped and well staffed, and is prepared to
respond if there should be any need for military action.

The United States supports a strong United
Nations police operation in Timor-Leste, engaged both
in law enforcement and in training. That is a critical
issue, both for security and to build a police force
which respects the rule of law and is responsible to the
elected Government. We note that credible policing is
only one element in restoring tranquillity and creating
an atmosphere in which people feel safe to return
home. The social and political issues which underlie
the violence must also be addressed.

We fully agree that there must be accountability
for the crimes committed in Timor-Leste during the
violence last spring. The United States appreciates the
work being done by the Special Commission of
Inquiry. We hope that the Special Commission will
address both individual and institutional accountability,
as well as factors contributing to the violence,
including allegations of illegal arms distribution by
former and current officials.

We strongly support reactivation of the Serious
Crimes Unit to complete investigation of the atrocities
of 1999. The United Nations and the international
community should also consider what assistance they
might give to the judicial systems of Timor-Leste and
Indonesia to bring to trial those arrested since the
Special Panels for serious crimes were closed, or who
may be brought to trial in the future.

The judicial and legal sectors in Timor-Leste
need our support, and we urge Timor's partners to
respond to that need. We support the Secretary-
General's recommendation that reconciliation be a key
element in responding to such crimes. Timor-Leste's
own institutions should be the primary planners and
implementers of reconciliation efforts, with the United
Nations facilitating and lending its good offices.

The critical work of the expert advisers placed in
key ministries and offices of the Government must
continue so that Timor-Leste's friends and partners can
help the Government to develop the expertise it
requires.

Finally, the work of the electoral unit will be a
vital element in assisting the Government and people
of Timor-Leste to hold free, fair and transparent
elections in 2007. The Electoral Assistance Division
should lead that effort.

