Mr. Umemoto (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
thank Ambassador Eugene-Richard Gasana, Permanent
Representative of Rwanda, for his leadership in
convening this open debate. I would also like to express
appreciation to Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his briefing.

Japan has long understood the Palestinians'
aspiration to build an independent State and has
supported the right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination. Japan thus endorses a two-State solution,
under which Israel and a future independent Palestinian
State would coexist, side by side, in peace and security.
In the light of that position, Japan voted in favour of
General Assembly resolution 67/19 regarding the status
of Palestine at the United Nations in November 2012.

Japan once again calls upon Palestine to
immediately resume direct negotiations with Israel
and not to use its non-member Observer State status,
granted in accordance with the General Assembly
resolution, to act in a way that might negatively affect
or hinder direct negotiations with Israel. We ask for
prudence with respect to its conduct, such as applying
for membership in international organizations, an
action that might negatively affect prospects for the
resumption of negotiations.

Israel, for its part, should freeze its settlement
activities in East Jerusalem and the West Bank. The
transfer of tax revenues, which Israel collects on behalf
of the Palestinian Authority, is a necessary task that
Israel should conduct for the fiscal stability of the
Palestinian Authority. In that regard, Japan appreciates
Israel's resumption of the transfers in March.

With respect to the issue of Palestinian prisoners,
Japan worries that that issue could worsen Palestinian
sentiment and thus negatively affect the peace process.
We hope to see the new Israeli Administration create
conditions for a resumption of meaningful negotiations.

As for the situation in Gaza, Japan is concerned
by the sporadic rocket fire into Israel that occurred
recently, despite the ceasefire brokered by Egypt
in November 2012. We urge all parties concerned to
respect the ceasefire with a view to realizing a durable
calm in Gaza.

The entire international community should mobilize
the political and economic means at its disposal to help
Israel and Palestine overcome their differences and
realize substantial progress this year. Japan welcomes
the renewed commitment by the United States to the
peace process following President Obama's visit to
the region in March 2013. At this critical juncture, we
need to engage with key stakeholders in Arab and other
regions in a more effective manner. In that context,
Japan renews its commitment to making an active
contribution - in cooperation with the United States,
Arab countries, the Quartet and other partners - to
that end.

Japan has been committed to assisting Palestinian
State-building efforts since the Oslo accords. During
the past fiscal year, Japan provided assistance in the
amount of approximately $85 million, including budget
support for the Palestinian Authority and contributions
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East. We have also been
addressing the needs ofsocially vulnerable communities
in East Jerusalem, Area C, and Gaza by implementing
various projects in fields such as job creation and the
social participation of youth, child education, health
services and hygiene.

Japan has been promoting regional cooperation. Our
initiative "Corridor for peace and prosperity" has been
making steady progress since 2006. In addition, Japan
launched a new cooperation framework among East
Asian countries to assist Palestinian development by
co-hosting, together with Palestine, the first Conference
on Cooperation among East Asian Countries for
Palestinian Development in February 2013 in Tokyo.
As a follow-up, a meeting among participant countries'
aid agencies and a business leaders' meeting are each
scheduled to take place during the course of this year.
We believe that synergetic effects can be generated with
the new United States initiative that Secretary of State
John Kerry recently announced on business expansion
in the West Bank.

Allow me now to touch upon the question of
Syria. Japan is deeply concerned by the serious and
deteriorating situation in Syria and profoundly deplores
the death of many thousands of people as a result of
the continued violence. The briefing to the Council
by United Nations humanitarian organizations last
week (S/PV.6949) was yet another occasion to listen to
appalling accounts of the tragic incidents taking place
on the ground there every day.

As an active member of the Group of Friends of the
Syrian People, Japan reiterates its call on all parties in
Syria to immediately halt the violence and abuses of
human rights, and condemns the Syrian authorities for
not keeping their own commitments and responsibilities
to protect their own citizens.

It is hardly realistic to expect a smooth political
transition with President Al-Assad remaining in power.
At the same time, we need to deal with threats posed
by extremists. From that standpoint, Japan supports
the diplomatic efforts of Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States for Syria, and hopes that
the Syrian National Coalition, widely acknowledged
by the international community as the legitimate
representative of the Syrian people, will consolidate its
base to play a major role in advancing the process of a
Syrian-led political transition.

We regret to see that the Security Council has failed
so far to take necessary action to bring about a political
transition in Syria, despite its primary responsibility
in maintaining international peace and security in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. In
such circumstances, Japan will favourably consider
Qatar's initiative to seek the avenue of the General
Assembly to underscore the urgent necessity to stop
violence and explore a political solution based on the
Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex).

With regard to chemical weapons, Japan urges
the Syrian authorities to refrain from using them
or transferring them to non-State actors in any
circumstances. Supporting the Secretary-General's
investigation into all alleged use of the weapons, Japan
also demands that full and unfettered access be granted
to his investigation team by the Syrian authorities.

Lastly, there is an urgent need to address the rapidly
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Syria. Japan
urges all parties in Syria to ensure rapid and unimpeded
access for aid organizations to those in need, and to
cooperate fully with the United Nations and relevant
organizations to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. The funding situation also needs to be
improved. I would like to announce that Japan has
already disbursed a total of about $65 million that it
pledged at the high-level international humanitarian
donor conference for Syria, held in Kuwait City in
January. As a result, Japan's assistance has now totalled
$80.5 million. We remain committed to significantly
contributing to international efforts and encourage
other donor countries to do so as well.

