Judge Byron: I would like to begin by
congratulating the representative of the United States
on her country's presidency of the Security Council for
the month of December. I wish her all the best for a
successful tour of duty.

I am pleased to present to the members of the
Security Council the fourteenth completion strategy
report of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (see S/2010/574). I would like to express the
gratitude of the entire Tribunal to the Governments
represented here and to the Secretariat for their
continued trust and support on all levels over the past
six months. I would also like to say a special word of
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of
Austria for his important work during the past two
years as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals. It would be beneficial if that
work soon led to an agreement on the structure and
location of the residual mechanism to facilitate a
smooth transition process.

Since my last report in June (6342nd meeting) the
Tribunal has rendered five trial and two appeals
judgements. The number of remaining judgements to
be delivered at the trial level is now down to 10. We
expect judgements in four trials, with respect to 15
accused, in the first half of 2011. We aim to deliver the
remaining six judgments, with respect to seven
accused, before the end of 2011.

We have recently requested authorization for
three judges, whose terms of office has not been
extended, to be allowed to complete their assignments,
which will spill over into early 2011. I ask for the
Council's support in approving the short extension of
those judges in order that they may complete their
judgements.

Four trials are currently ongoing, and we expect
evidence to be completed in the first quarter of next
year. In January 2011, the last new trial under current
projections will begin. As additional judicial workload,
we also anticipate one or more proceedings for
contempt of court and the hearings for preservation of
evidence in the cases of three fugitives under new rule
71 bis.

Council members may have read that the
Prosecutor has recently submitted three requests for
transfers of cases to Rwanda for trial - one in the case
of Jean Uwinkindi, who is in pretrial detention in
Arusha, and the other two in cases of fugitives. Last
week, I assigned the benches to rule on those requests.
The outcome of that judicial procedure will impact
upon the completion date for our trial work. I would
like to use this occasion to call on Security Council
members to consider accepting referral cases under
their home jurisdiction, as Rwanda is willing to do.

Of course, given the unpredictability of certain
factors, the judicial calendar can only provide
estimates of expected judgement delivery dates. For
example, it is difficult to foresee when fair trial
requirements may necessitate provision of additional
time to the parties. Nevertheless, we believe, based on
the current workload, that our goal of completing the
first instance trials within the next year can be
achieved, with a small caveat for the new trial, which
will commence only in January and for which the goal
of completion by December might seem ambitious.

The target date of the end 2011 means, for the
appeals, that we maintain the goal of completion by the
end of 2013. However, depending upon the staffing
situation - which I will address shortly - we cannot
exclude further delays in judgement delivery.
As evidenced by the graphs presented in the
completion strategy report (S/2010/574), our trial
management initiatives have resulted in more
expeditious trials and pre-trial over the last years,
while upholding the highest standards of fair trial
rights. However, those advances cannot be maintained
if the pressing staff retention issue is not addressed.

I want to highlight to this Council yet again the
very difficult staffing situation at the Tribunal and the
fact that that if left unaddressed the problem will lead
to significant additional delays. In 2010, Tribunal lost
almost 100 staff members. For Chambers alone, the
number is 19, which is a high percentage of our
staffing level.

In order to stem the tide of departures and to
facilitate new recruitments, the Organization must
continue to be innovative in administering the Staff
Rules. We cannot ignore that the circumstances of a
downsizing institution are specific, and that creates
particular challenges. The Tribunal's human resources
should not be treated like any standard staffing
situation in a permanent United Nations agency. For
example, rules such as the compulsory six-month break
for former consultants before a new appointment can
impact significantly on our ability to meet the
judgement delivery deadlines if they prevent the
speedy recruitment of experienced candidates, in
particular of former staff members.

After mine and President Robinson's speeches in
June, the Council adopted two resolutions (1931 (2010)
and 1932 (2010)), which noted the importance of the
Tribunals being adequately staffed and called upon the
Secretariat to work with the Registrars of the Tribunals
to find practicable solutions to address that issue.

The resolutions also urged the Tribunals, once
more, to complete their work expeditiously. We are
indeed doing everything possible to complete our work
without undue delay. However, as staff continue to
leave at an alarming rate and our recruitment efforts
face significant obstacles, further delays in judgement
delivery are inevitable. We call upon Member States to
recognize the unique circumstances of a downsizing
institution such as ours and to encourage the
responsible bodies of the Organization to be flexible in
the application of the Staff Rules while preserving their
principles.

With respect to the terms and conditions of
service of the ad litem judges, I thank the members of the

Council and the General Assembly for their consideration
of the Secretary-General's recommendations. The ad
litem judges have made and continue to make a
significant contribution to the work of the Tribunal. In
the interests of the completion strategy, I trust that the
General Assembly will acknowledge that contribution
in an appropriate way.

I turn now to another important point: the issue of
State cooperation.

I intend to render decisions on the transfer of four
convicts to a Member State for the enforcement of their
sentences within the next weeks, and I would like to
thank all States that have concluded agreements with
the Tribunal to receive convicts for their cooperation.
Only two weeks ago, the Tribunal signed an additional
agreement with Senegal.

Despite significant efforts by the Registrar, three
acquitted persons have still not been resettled and
remain in safe houses in Arusha, As I stated in my last
speech, for one of them, Andre Ntagerura, it has now
been four years since the confirmation of his acquittal
by the Appeals Chamber.

Additionally, the issue of the relocation of
convicted persons who have served their sentences
needs urgent attention. Those persons are in a legal
vacuum, as we can currently see in at least one of those
cases. There will be many persons in that position in
the coming years. If the problem is not dealt with
through a comprehensive, long-term approach, the
interests of justice and the rule of law will not be
served. That is especially true as the problem will also
affect the International Criminal Court in the future.
The Tribunal therefore calls upon the international
community to urgently commence a review process to
develop a lasting mechanism for dealing with that
problem.

Ten fugitives still remain at large. The last arrest
of a fugitive was made over five months ago. The
Tribunal depends on the cooperation of Member States
for the tracking, arrest and transfer of fugitives.
Following resolution 1932 (2010), which called on
States, especially those in the Great Lakes region, to
cooperate to bring indictees of the Tribunal to justice,
Kenya recently met with representatives of the
Tribunal. I am sure the Prosecutor will provide you
with a more comprehensive briefing on that matter.

I want to thank the Council for the commitment
and support it has shown the Tribunal and to me
personally over the last years. As a citizen of a small
nation - Saint Kitts and Nevis - it is a special
honour for me and my country to serve the
international community.

The International Tribunals the Council created in
1994 established international criminal justice as an
essential tool in challenging impunity for the most
horrendous crimes. We should not forget, in our focus
on the completion strategy, the significant contribution
the Tribunals have made to international law and to the
acceptance of justice as an indispensable element of
international peace and stability. As our Tribunal, in its
current form, draws to a close, we should all redouble
our efforts to ensure its lasting legacy as a beacon for
international justice.

