Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
and by offering my best wishes for your term of office.
Let me also applaud your initiative in convening, so
early in your term, this open debate on peace-building.
We welcome the opportunity to discuss this important
subject at an open meeting of the Council.

In the Council's open debate on this issue in
March last year, my predecessor noted that the
complexities and challenges of peace-building
deserved thorough consideration in this forum. It is
reassuring that the Council remains actively seized of
this issue.

There is growing recognition that peace-building
is an essential part of the work of this Organization,
and, indeed, the level of participation in this debate
attests to that. But we also acknowledge the Secretary-
General's call this morning to further increase the
profile of peace-building. Half, or more than half, of
United Nations peacekeeping operations now involve
an element of peace-building; indeed, in many cases,
trying to keep the peace without taking further steps to
cement peace and reduce the chance of the conflict
resuming would simply fail to address the problem and
would be an inefficient use of scarce resources. Peace-
building is currently playing an essential role in peace
operations in my own region: in East Timor; in the
Papua New Guinea island of Bougainville, where the
United Nations maintains a Political Office; and in
Solomon Islands, where an International Peace
Monitoring Team has been deployed under the terms of
the Townsville Peace Agreement.

New Zealand welcomed the fine work of
Ambassador Brahimi and his Panel, including their
focus on peace-building. The Panel noted that for
peace-building to be effective, active, multidimensional
engagement with local parties is essential. Meaningful
interaction with civil society, instituting and upholding
democratic norms, the effective use of United Nations
civilian police and the protection and promotion of
human rights are all required if peace-building is to be
effective. The Brahimi Panel's recommendations on
these issues are extremely useful.

We were also heartened by the support of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations for
exploring the Panel's recommendation that a small
percentage of a peacekeeping mission's first-year
budget be made available to heads of mission to fund
quick impact projects targeted at enhancing peace
mission effectiveness. The importance of such projects
in achieving support among local communities for
peace operations and reconciliation cannot be
overestimated. We also support the Committee's
recommendation that programmes for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration be provided with
adequate and timely resources.

We welcome the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET). The East Timor operation clearly
demonstrates the complexity of peace-building in
practice, and the relevance of the Brahimi Panel's
findings. While a great deal has been achieved in the
humanitarian and security fields, further progress is
needed in the peace-building side of the operation -
for example, the greater transfer of authority to the
East Timorese themselves, the establishment of the
East Timor Defence Force and the effective functioning
of the legal and judicial systems. New Zealand
encourages UNTAET in its continuing efforts to build
upon its achievements and address these areas, and
stands ready to provide ongoing assistance. The
granting of greater flexibility in the use of the
UNTAET budget to the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Vieira de Mello, would facilitate
progress in these areas.

Recent days have brought news of positive
developments in negotiations between the Papua New
Guinea Government and the people of Bougainville.
New Zealand welcomes these wholeheartedly. The
success so far of the Bougainville peace process not
only demonstrates goodwill on the part of the former
parties to the conflict and the importance of
communities taking responsibility for working together
to resolve their differences, but also underlines the
importance of peace-building, through the
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants,
the restoration of civil authority and the focusing of
donor efforts on rebuilding Bougainville's economy.
Efforts in the these areas have been crucial in
establishing the foundations for a lasting peace. It is
worth noting that local and international non-
governmental organizations have played key roles.
New Zealand and other donors have been able to
support peace-building efforts through the targeting of
assistance to quick impact projects, including New
Zealand Volunteer Service Abroad's work in retraining
former combatants.

In Solomon Islands, the provision of an
international team to assist with disarmament has
resulted in some progress with regard to the return of
weapons. Nevertheless significant challenges remain,
and the will of the combatants themselves to support
the peace process is of critical importance.

The work of the Brahimi Panel, the report
(A/C.4/55/6) of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the continuing focus on
this topic in this forum present the international
community with opportunities to reflect on the way we
address post-conflict situations with a view to
improving the outcomes for those involved in and
affected by the conflict, and also for peacekeeping in
general. Last year, New Zealand non-governmental
organizations organized a seminar entitled "Peace and
Security in the New Millennium: How Can New
Zealand Contribute?" The seminar proceedings covered
a wide range of relevant issues and noted that

"Prevention of war is a multi-faceted exercise,
and it requires patience and collaboration across
sectors in our own society, within our region
and internationally".

Despite our best efforts at conflict prevention -
and we could always do better - there will be times
when the international community has to pick up the
pieces following war. When this happens, we should be
prepared not only to preside over newly arrived-at
peace, but we must also continue to be prepared to
adopt a broad, multidimensional approach to ensure
that the peace arrived at is sustainable and that the
resumption of the conflict is prevented.

We encourage the Organization to continue to
find innovative ways to enable peacekeeping
operations to address the broader needs of peace-
building. We believe this will require the General
Assembly to grant greater authority and more
flexibility to heads of peacekeeping operations so that
they can administer their budgets in a way that
maximizes their responsiveness to local needs, thus
enhancing the prospects for lasting peace.

