I would like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Niels Annen, Minister of State at the German Federal Foreign Office, to today's meeting. I would also like to thank Mr. Pedersen for his insightful briefing and Ms. Mustafa for sharing her story and information. The current precarious situation in Syria in all socioeconomic and security domains presents a renewed demand for a comprehensive and long-lasting political solution. It also shows that such a solution can be achieved only through Syrian- led and Syrian-owned dialogues, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and in full accordance with international law. No solution can be legitimate or lasting if it does not respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. Viet Nam welcomes the readiness of the relevant parties for engagement within the framework of the Constitutional Committee and calls on them to seize this opportunity to put an end to the protracted conflict. We look forward to the successful conduct of its next session in Geneva as soon as the situation allows. We will continue to support the good offices of the Special Envoy in that regard. Our delegation is gravely concerned over the recent flare-up in the north-west as well as other violent incidents in other parts of Syria in the past few days. Of particular concern is the attack on 19 July in the north, which resulted in casualties - dozens of civilians, including women and children. We strongly condemn all attacks against civilians and would like to express our deepest condolences to families of the victims. Once again, we urge all parties to exercise the utmost restraint. Further deterioration of the security situation may severely impede efforts towards a political solution to the decade-long conflict in Syria. We believe that it remains absolutely crucial to maintain the ceasefire agreement in Idlib and would like to reiterate our support for a nationwide ceasefire as called for by the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy. Our delegation is also troubled by the information on the activities of various terrorist groups in Syria and would like to stress the importance of counter-terrorism efforts in line with obligations under international law. With the current impacts of the coronavirus disease pandemic (COVID-19) and the severe economic crisis, the livelihoods of millions of Syrian people remain extremely vulnerable. The renewal of the cross-border humanitarian assistance mechanism in Syria is crucial. We welcome the adoption of resolution 2533 (2020). We will follow closely the implementation of the resolution and look forward to receiving reports on how this mechanism works vis-a-vis the needs of the people. Our delegation urges the Syrian Government, which has the primary responsibility to resolve the humanitarian issues in the country, to step up its cooperation with all relevant parties, including the United Nations, to enhance the humanitarian response in various parts of Syria. The most favourable conditions possible for sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access must be created by all relevant parties. We also call on the international community to continue to improve humanitarian support for Syria to address the needs of people on the ground. In the light of the impacts of the current pandemic, it essential to ensure that Syria's COVID-19 response capability is not affected by any type of sanctions, in keeping with the appeal made by the Secretary-General. We also encourage the parties in Syria to cooperate in order to settle the reported situation of detainees and missing persons as well as to create favourable conditions for the return of internally displaced persons and refugees to their homes.
