I, too, would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his insightful briefing. On behalf of France, I would like to emphasize two points in particular. First, we still have room for progress in strengthening the performance of peacekeeping operations. That presupposes sufficiently trained and equipped personnel, appropriate financing and evaluation tools. There has been progress on predeployment visits, which ensure the operational level of troops, but also with regard to trainers who can be sent to the field if necessary. Finalizing the integrated performance policy framework should consolidate such progress. France will remain particularly mobilized in supporting the training of troop-contributing countries from French-speaking countries, with a special focus on training in the area of international humanitarian law. In order to perform well, peacekeeping operations must also be capable of adapting to changes on the ground. That requires the development of rapid deployment battalions, as was done in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in order to react as quickly as possible to increased tensions. It also involves improving equipment, filling capacity gaps, improving casualty evacuation procedures and adapting deployments on the ground, as was done in the Central African Republic and Mali in the context of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) adaptation plan. Intelligence-haring and innovative technologies also need to be developed. Finally, performance is also based on the posture and the mindset of the troops, as well as their leadership. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has shown that peacekeeping operations can be sufficiently flexible to adapt to changing circumstances and undertake new actions, be it support for host States, awareness-raising or the sharing of expertise. Such efforts should be credited to peacekeeping operations and should be continued. However, performance is only one aspect of the peacekeeping initiative, which France supports. That initiative should be implemented in all its components. That is my second point. The effects of the initiative are real. Operations further integrate the priority given to political solutions, mandates are clearer and given clearer priorities, and the training and equipment needs of the Blue Helmets are better defined. But we need to go even further. Like others before me have said, as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the women and peace and security agenda this year, it is necessary to strengthen women's participation in order to have a greater impact on the ground. In that regard, we commend the adoption of resolution 2538 (2020), on women and peacekeeping operations, which should help us to make some concrete progress in that area. The Security Council must also be able to plan for an effective transition between peacekeeping operations and the structures that will replace them, such as peacebuilding. The mandate on human rights that we entrust to peacekeeping operations should be an integral part of that strategy. The concept of partnerships with regional organizations, especially the African Union, should also be at the heart of our considerations. The security of peacekeepers operating in increasingly volatile environments should be further improved. As others before us have done, we pay tribute to those who have fallen in the cause of peace, more recently within MINUSMA, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As was underscored by the representative of Indonesia in particular, crimes committed against peacekeepers should not go unpunished. To conclude, today more than 150 States have signed the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations. Among them, France is, and will remain, resolutely and consistently committed to supporting such operations, which are an integral part of the DNA of the United Nations.
