Mr. Zouev: First of all, I would like to thank
all members of the Council for their thoughtful
comments, strategic guidance and important
questions. I will address some general issues, while
the three Police Commissioners will briefly address
mission-specific questions.

Iwill start with the issue ofthe periodic review ofthe
14 recommendations, which many speakers mentioned.
As we know, it is an external review. We convene
periodic meetings with Police Adviser Luis Carrilho,
who is here in the Chamber today, and with other senior
Police Division staff, to review the recommendations'
implementation. We have had some success, as well as
gaps that we are trying to fill. Overall, we can see that
there has been a certain amount of progress.

Secondly, there were several references to the
functions, level and place of the Police Division. Here
I would first like to point to resolution 2382 (2017),
adopted under the Italian presidency of the Council in
2017, which calls on the Secretary-General to prepare
a special report on United Nations policing before the
end of 2018. We are making good progress and are in
the final stages of the report's preparation. I am sure
that it will be submitted for the attention of the Council
and the wider membership on time. We will meet that
deadline. At the same time, as we know, with regard to
the functions, structure, capacity and level of the Police
Division, that General Assembly resolution 72/262 C
clearly called on the Secretary-General to make a
special assessment on those four areas. I do not want to
pre-empt the assessment's findings right now because
it will be submitted at the next session of the Assembly.
So there will be one report out before the end of the
year, and the next will follow.

(spoke in French)

I would like to assure the Council that we will
continue to increase the role of women in United
Nations policing. We are always in need not only of
more women officers but of more French-speaking
women. When I meet ministers and heads of police or
gendarmeries, I always raise the issue. It is not an easy
issue, but we are making some progress on it and will
continue to work to that end.

(spoke in English)

I want to assure all Council members, since
the issue was raised, that the United Nations Police
has always worked and will continue to work in full
compliance with the mandates approved and endorsed
by the Security Council in this Chamber. We also carry
out our work in the field and at Headquarters with full
respect for national sovereignty of host countries and
in close consultations with host Governments that we
organize from time to time.

