Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
countries of Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia, Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Ukraine align themselves with this
statement.

At the outset, let me express my deepest
condolences to the family of Mr. Pierre Gemayel,
Lebanon's Minister for Industry, who was assassinated
today. The presidency of the European Union
condemns in the strongest terms this brutal
assassination. The attack comes at a time when the
political situation in Lebanon is already critically
tense. The European Union urges all parties to refrain
from activities that would further endanger the political
stability of Lebanon. The European Union reiterates its
full support for the legitimate and democratically
elected Lebanese Government.
The continuing violence in the Middle East is a
cause of deep concern. We have strongly deplored the
Israeli military action in Gaza, which is resulting in a
growing number of civilian casualties. We have also
strongly deplored the firing of rockets into Israeli
territory. The deterioration of the situation will only
aggravate the already grave circumstances in the
region, where a return to a comprehensive peace
process with a clear political perspective is urgently
needed.

The European Union reaffirms its intention to
support Israeli and Palestinian efforts to advance the
peace process. We underline our intention to actively
contribute to the work within the Quartet to get the
Middle East peace process urgently back on track in
order to make progress towards a comprehensive
settlement on the basis of the Road Map, relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the
commitments made at Sharm el-Sheikh in 2005.

The European Union reiterates its call for the
immediate release of the abducted Israeli soldier and
commends the efforts in the region to that end,
including by partners. We also repeat our call for the
immediate release of Palestinian ministers and
legislators detained in Israel.

The European Union urges the Palestinians to
work for national unity and to form a government with
a platform that reflects Quartet principles and allows
for early engagement. Such a government of national
unity would also be a partner for the international
community in the effort to relaunch the peace process.
We underline the importance of preserving and
strengthening the capacity of the institutions of the
Palestinian Authority and express our readiness to
provide enhanced support to a Palestinian government
that the EU can engage with.

The European Union remains deeply concerned at
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Gaza and
the West Bank and recalls its commitment to help the
Palestinian people. We reiterate our call on Israel for
the immediate resumption of transfers of withheld
Palestinian tax and customs revenues. We encourage
donors and others to make full use of the temporary
international mechanism.

The European Union emphasizes the importance
of the implementation of the Agreement of Movement
and Access of November 2005. We call on Israel as
well to respect previous agreements and to fulfil its

obligations under them. We insist on the particular
importance of regular operations at Gaza crossings,
notably at the Rafah crossing, and call on Israel to do
its utmost to ensure that the crossings be opened and
that they remain open.

On Lebanon, the European Union encourages all
Lebanese parties to reach consensus and to resume the
process of national dialogue. We continue to be
committed to supporting the legitimate and
democratically elected Lebanese Government and its
efforts to stabilize the situation in the country and
maintain its unity. In that regard, the EU fully supports
the reconstruction process in the perspective of the
Paris conference in January 2007. The European Union
reiterates its call for the immediate release of the two
abducted Israeli soldiers. We renew our determination
to support the full implementation of resolution 1701
(2006), and call on all parties in the region to comply
with the resolution, especially the arms embargo.

Lebanon's sovereignty over its land, sea and
airspace must be respected by all. The European Union
urges Israel to stop violations of Lebanese airspace by
the Israeli air force. We welcome the deployment of
troops of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
and of the Lebanese armed forces, which is progressing
well.

We call on countries in the region to refrain from
any interference in Lebanon's internal affairs, in
accordance with Security Council resolutions, and to
provide firm support to Lebanon's Government in
reconstruction efforts.

