Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths,
and the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Ms. Ursula Mueller, for the valuable information
they provided.

Equatorial Guinea has been closely following the
situation in Yemen and remains confident in the work
of the United Nations, which, owing to the relentless
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
and the strong support provided by partners of the
United Nations and the entire international community,
continues to seek a successful path for the parties to the
conflict to arrive at a definitive solution and restore the
peace and tranquillity for which the Yemeni population
has yearned for the past five years.

Over the past few months, the Yemeni parties
have been carrying out important initiatives aimed at
reorienting the dynamics of the conflict, both in the
north and south of the country. That demonstrates
their firm commitment to reaching an agreement on a
number of measures that would reduce the suffering of
the Yemeni people. One such step was the releasing of
290 detainees by the Houthi movement. The same spirit
was evident in its announcement on 20 September to
suspend all attacks with drones and ballistic missiles
against Saudi Arabia.

We also welcome the diplomatic efforts undertaken
and sponsored by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
which led to the signing of the Riyadh agreement on
5 November with a view to resolving the important
differences between the Government of Yemen and
the Southern Transitional Council. It is urgent that the
parties implement the terms of that agreement, among
other aspects, given that the return of the Government
to Aden and the full functioning of its institutions, the
services of which must reach the country's citizens, are
reliant on the agreement. In short, the Riyadh agreement
is a step in the right direction in pursuit of a definitive
solution to the Yemeni conflict.

Equatorial Guinea also commends the leadership
of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement, which, together with the two Yemeni
parties to the Stockholm Agreement, succeeded in
establishing the joint operations centre. The existence
of the centre is giving rise to a tangible reduction in
ceasefire violations.

My delegation regrets the terrible humanitarian
situation suffered by the Yemeni population since the
beginning of the conflict, with the civilian population
being increasingly affected. Humanitarian agencies are
having to overcome significant restrictions in addition
to frequent harassment and attempts at interference. In
such difficult conditions, the most needy cannot easily
be reached. Last month, we heard about local authorities
blocking assessments of the humanitarian situation in
Haj jah and Al-Hudaydah, where approximately 12,000
families have been affected by floods. Millions of
people are not guaranteed of their regular food supply
and others do not know where their next meal will
come from.

We therefore echo the resolution adopted by the
Human Rights Council on 26 September condemning the
ongoing violations and abuses of international human
rights law and violations of international humanitarian
law in Yemen, including the recruitment and widespread
use of children by the parties to the conflict, sexual and
gender-based violence, arbitrary detentions, the denial
of humanitarian access and attacks on the population
and civilian infrastructure, including medical facilities,
missions and their personnel, as well as schools.
Finally, my delegation would like to reiterate its
full support for the efforts of Mr. Griffiths. We also
encourage all the parties not to abandon the path of
dialogue, since the only way to resolve the conflict is
political through frank, direct and inclusive dialogue
among all parties.

