Judge Joensen: I would like to begin by
congratulating the delegation of the United Kingdom
on its presidency of the Security Council for June.
I wish you all the best for a successful tour of duty,
Mr. President.

It is a great honour for me to address the members
of the Security Council and present to them the current
update on the completion strategy of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). I wish to
express the appreciation of the entire Tribunal to all
of the Governments represented on the Council for
their continuing support as we draw ever closer to the
conclusion of our work.

The ICTR has now completed all trial work, has
successfully met all timelines projected in December
for appeals, and has finalized its decision to transfer the
second case of an accused in custody to Rwanda. Five of
the six remaining ICTR appeals cases remain on track
for completion before the end of 2014, and the transfer
to the Mechanism ofjudicial records not in active use
is expected to be completed by the end of 2014. The
Mechanism is now handling its first appeal from an
ICTR trial judgement, and I have been actively involved
in judicial matters handed over to the Mechanism in
my role as Duty Judge of its Arusha branch. Relocating
acquitted persons and those released after completing
their sentences in Tanzania remains a pressing concern
and will require the enhanced cooperation of Member
States. Finally, owing to difficulties that I will explain
shortly, the ICTR is now projecting completion of its
final appeals judgement in the Butare case by July 2015.

I will begin by explaining the status of the trials
and appeals. I am happy to report that all substantive
trials have now been completed with the delivery of the
trial judgement in the Ngirabatware case in December
2012. Thanks to the continued hard work and dedication
of our staff, the ICTR successfully met its timelines for
trials and appeals as projected when I last addressed the
Council six months ago (see S/PV.6880). As expected,
the notice of appeal in the Ngirabatware case has been
filed with the Mechanism, marking the first time that it
will handle an appeal from judgement in a case before
the ICTR or the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. That is an important milestone in
our transition. I would also like to call the Council's
attention to the fact that the Appeals Chamber has
met its accelerated projections to date, delivering one
appealjudgement concerning two persons in the case of
Mugenzi and Mugiraneza in February. It also rendered
a final decision upholding the Trial Chamber's referral
of the Munyagishari case to Rwanda on 3 May. Bernard
Munyagishari is expected to be transferred to Rwanda
imminently, and appeals projections in the remaining
cases have stayed roughly the same, save for the Butare
appeal slipping into 2015.

Five of the six remaining appeals cases concerning
nine of the remaining 16 persons are still expected
to be disposed of before the end of 2014, and the
final multi-accused appeal judgement concerning six
persons in the Butare case is now anticipated by July
2015. This slip in the final case's projected completion
was caused by inability of our language services to
meet the accelerated plans for translation of the Butare
trial judgement and other documents pertaining to the
appellate proceedings, which the defence is legally
entitled to receive in a language that the accused can
understand before filing their appeal briefs. Although
the Tribunal made every effort to meet the accelerated
schedule by providing the translated Butare trial
judgement by August 2012, with the remaining staffing
levels in our language section, the final French version
could be completed and delivered to the parties only
in February. That meant that the briefing schedule for
the appeal had to be pushed back as well. Additionally,
after reviewing the written judgement in a language
they could understand, several appellants requested
leave to expand the scope of their appeals beyond that
in their original Notices of Appeal, which the projected
Butare completion date of December 2014 was based
on. All those circumstances have led to the current
projected completion date of July 2015. In all other
cases, however, I am happy to report that the appeals
work remains on schedule and all appeals except Butare
are on track to be completed in 2014.

I would next like to take this opportunity to express
my gratitude to the Council for its adoption of resolution
2080 (2012), which extended the terms of the ICTR
Appeals Chamber Judges until the end of 2014 or until
completion of the cases to which they are assigned,
if sooner. The swift action taken on that request has
helped ensure that the Tribunal will continue to meet
its completion strategy targets. As projected in our last
report, two of the three judges on the Ngirabatware
case demitted office after completion of their final case,
and the third, Judge William H. Sekule of Tanzania,
was redeployed to the Appeals Chamber in March 2013,
bringing the number of permanent judges sitting in the
Appeals Chamber to 11 at that time. On 31 May, Judge
Andresia Vaz of Senegal resigned from her position
as appeals judge, returning the total to 10 judges on
the appeals bench. The preeminent knowledge and
experience that Judge Vaz brought to the bench will
be sorely missed. and reassigning the 10 cases she
was working on has increased the strain on the other
judges. In order to try to mitigate any detrimental
effect on the completion of appeals work that would
come with the loss of such an esteemed judge, I will
be sending a letter to the Secretary-General requesting
the swift appointment of a replacement for Judge Vaz,
and expressing how important it is that the replacement
judge have a deep knowledge and understanding of
the Tribunal's jurisprudence and practice, so that no
time will be lost in dealing with the heavy workload
remaining for appeals.

I turn now to an important issue that the ICTR
has been raising with the Council for several years.
The enhanced cooperation of Member States to assist
with our persistent and increasingly dire problem of
relocating persons who have been acquitted or released
after completion of sentence by the Tribunal is crucial
to the completion of our mandate. I continue to see as
a cornerstone of my presidency the deployment of all
possible efforts in that regard; during the reporting
period, I increasingly applied my energies to persuade
Member States to assist with relocation.

There are now seven acquitted persons, one of
whom was acquitted in 2004, and three persons released
after the completion of their sentences who remain in
safe houses in Arusha, under the Tribunal's protection.
Those 10 individuals remain on Tanzanian territory
without proper immigration status and are unable to
move freely. The ICTR is deeply concerned about the
consequences of failing to uphold the fundamental right
of freedom to live one's life after being acquitted. The
importance of finding host countries for those persons
before the Tribunal closes cannot be stressed enough.

That is why I have worked closely with the
Registrar to develop a strategic relocation plan which
was recently submitted to the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals. We call upon all Member
States, in particular those members of the Council in a
position to do so, to assist with that persistent problem,
and thank those that have already enhanced their
cooperation with the Tribunal in that respect.
I next turn to downsizing and the transition to
the Mechanism. The Tribunal continues to face staff
recruitment and retention challenges arising from the
downsizing process. Where recruitment is required, the
ICTR continues to have difficulty attracting suitably
qualified candidates given the limited contractual
security that it can provide as a closing institution.
The Tribunal also is still experiencing difficulties in
retaining experienced staff due to the lack of financial
incentives to stay and complete their work and the lack
of possibilities for upward mobility.

I once again wish to express the gratitude of the
Tribunal to the Department of Management, especially
the Office of the Controller and Human Resources
Management, which have steadily assisted the ICTR in
meeting the challenges to preventing any further delay
in the completion of its mandate. Their collaboration
on implementing mitigating strategies in line with the
applicable staff rules and regulations has also afforded
staff members much-needed support in transitioning
from the ICTR to other careers.

Despite the persistent staffing challenges, the
Tribunal has successfully met its projected deadlines and
remains with only appellate work and the continuation
of the transition to the Mechanism, going forward. The
transition is well under way, as the handover of judicial
functions to the Mechanism is now complete and, as
the Prosecutor will describe in more detail, a smooth
transfer of prosecutorial tasks remains on track.

In addition to the Ngirabatware appellate
proceedings, the Mechanism's jurisdiction now
encompasses requests for review of ICTR judgements,
trials for contempt of court or false testimony from
ICTR trials and trials of the remaining three top-
priority ICTR fugitives, once arrested.

The monitoring of all referred cases also falls
under the Mechanism's responsibility, although the
ICTR Registrar and I will continue to help oversee
the administration of the interim monitoring of the
Uwinkindi trial and that of Bernard Munyagishari,
once he is transferred to Rwanda by ICTR staff, until
the Mechanism concludes a final agreement with an
organization in each case.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank
President Meron and Registrar Hocking for the excellent
cooperation between the ICTR and the Mechanism
throughout the transition, which I am confident will
continue until the handover is complete.

With respect to the preparation of the ICTR's
archives, much progress was made during the reporting
period, as the Tribunal is now in a position to transfer
40 per cent of its hard-copy records to the custody of
the Mechanism, including 60 per cent of the judicial
records. The actual handover process for those records
is scheduled to begin later this month, since renovations
ofthe temporary record repositories - which will house
the records until they are moved to the Mechanism's
new building - are almost finalized.

The target date for the completion of the records
handover process remains December 2014, and we
anticipate that all closed judicial records will have been
handed over by then. However, we must bear in mind that
some records which are still in active use in support of
the functions of the ICTR, including active files related
to the Butare case, will remain our responsibility and
can only be transferred once they are no longer in use.
Those records are expected to be handed over as part of
the liquidation process after the ICTR's formal closure.

1 will conclude with some thoughts on our place
in history. Since its inception, the ICTR has sought to
contribute to the process of reconciliation in Rwanda
by helping to restore a sense of justice and playing a
role in the development of a lasting peace in the Great
Lakes region. Rebuilding that sense of justice has
paved the way for moving past the events of 1994. The
Tribunal has helped to ensure that those events are never
forgotten through its outreach and capacity-building
initiatives, and we recognize the need to ensure that the
Tribunal's records are readily accessible to the people
of Rwanda in posterity.

The transition to the Mechanism, which is notably
tasked with maintaining and furthering the Tribunal's
legacy, marks the etching of a new chapter into the
history of international law. The writing of that next
chapter has already begun, with the work of the
International Criminal Court and the Special Tribunal
for Lebanon. With the impending closure of the ad hoc
Tribunals, the Mechanism will ensure that their legacy
is preserved and that the lessons learned are shared
with their successors.

Before facing the renewed challenges that the
next chapter will bring, we would, however, be remiss
if we did not underline how far we have come with
Member States' cooperation and the crucial role it has
played, as well as the difficulties we will face without
reinvigorated efforts in certain areas. The tremendous
support of the international community for the ICTR has
enabled it to not only prosecute those most responsible
for the Rwandan genocide, but also, in turn, to assist
national jurisdictions that are able to complement its
work, thereby further strengthening accountability for
the most serious crimes under international law.

Such empowerment of national institutions
has substantiated the Tribunal's commitment to
implementing the rule of law and may, ultimately, allow
for impunity to be successfully challenged in a lasting
way at all levels. However, we are in desperate need
of increased cooperation with respect to relocation and
trust that Member States will do what is necessary to
help us accomplish that important task before closure.

It has been and continues to be an honour and a
privilege to take part in this important task, and it has
been a great honour for me to address the members of
the Council today.

