Mr. Mbayu (Cameroon): I would like, through
you, Mr. President, to thank Mr. Lubbers for his lucid
and illuminating presentation. I thank him in particular,
as previous speakers have, for the fact that, despite
what some delegations mentioned about the "CNN
effect", he still managed to maintain the focus on
Africa. It is true that, as an African, I would have been
pleased and happy to do without this dubious
distinction, but we have to deal with the fact that the
focus is on Africa.
In that connection, I would like to express my
appreciation to Mr. Lubbers for his mention of the
importance of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD), which is an African-conceived
and African-led initiative that, as all members of the
Council know, is aimed at working for peace, political
stability, economic prosperity and sustainable
development in Africa - which, in fact, is one of the
main and surest ways of stemming the tide of the
refugee problem. I thank him very much for that, and
we take note of his call on African leaders to try to
factor in the refugee component in the implementation
of NEPAD. That message is well understood,
particularly in terms of my country, which happens to
be one of the 14 countries called upon to steer the
implementation of the initiative.

While waiting for NEPAD to have its effect in the
long term, something has to be done in the interim. It is
in this vein that we would like to sympathize with, and
share in, his call for more resources for the activities of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR). That call is very important
because, as Mr. Lubbers mentioned, when he took
office he found out that there was a major financial
gap. As is said in Latin, nemo dat quad non habet -
you cannot give what you do not have.

We understand the difficulties because, in the
process of his reform to accommodate to the limited
resources, some offices have had to be closed or
redeployed. One of those happened to be the one in
Cameroon. In this connection, I would like to ask
him- and I know this was done just a short time
ago - whether he has had the time to evaluate what
the effects of that closure and redeployment are. That is
the first issue.

The second issue concerns his determination to
work against the abuse of the asylum system. I think
this is a very important element because, as he
mentioned, we are dealing here with a very vulnerable
group that, more often than not, are considered as
being scapegoated. We heard of wire reports of some
cases in the southern parts of Africa in which the
system had been abused by some UNHCR workers to
serve as a conduit for immigration to some northern
countries. First of all, I would like Mr. Lubbers to
confirm whether this is true at all; and, if so, to say
what actions are being taken by his Office to address
the situation, which, in a way, detracts from the very
important work being done by the devoted workers of
UNHCR.
Thirdly, my last question has to do with
Afghanistan. Yesterday we heard the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Afghanistan
mention the fact that the United Nations is now
working towards an integrated approach to United
Nations intervention in Afghanistan. Experience in
other areas has shown that, more often than not, the full
impact of international intervention in crisis situations
is diminished by lack of coordination and, sometimes,
by turf wars. I would just like, if time permits, for
Mr. Lubbers to shed light on how UNHCR intends to
fit into that effort, and if he foresees any problems in
which the Council can help with some guidance.

