Mr. Matussek (Germany): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Serbia, as well as Ukraine and
the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this
statement.

The European Union has a profound interest in a
peaceful, prosperous and democratic Africa. A strong
partnership between the United Nations, the African
Union and the European Union can contribute
significantly to achieving that common aim. Our three
organizations are working together closely as
facilitators to peace processes and as peacekeepers on
the ground. We also strive to achieve sustainable peace
and stability in post-conflict situations, such as those in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Cote d'Ivoire,
Sierra Leone and Burundi. At the same time, the EU
supports Africa's efforts to strengthen its own
capacities in crisis management and post-conflict
stabilization.

Let me outline three areas of partnership between
the African Union (AU), the United Nations and the
EU in which our policies and complementary
capacities contribute to peace and security in Africa.

First of all, the European Union is deeply
engaged in political efforts to achieve peace and
security in Africa. We are playing an active role in
efforts to prevent conflicts, settle disputes and
consolidate peace and stability. Our special
representatives for the Sudan, the African Great Lakes
region and the Mano River Union are instrumental in
that endeavour. The Special Representative for the
African Great Lakes Region, for example, has worked
closely with the United Nations and the African Union
for 11 years to support lasting peace in the region. He
also played a key role in the successful transition in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In the Sudan, the Special Representative is
supporting the parties in their efforts to achieve a
political settlement of the conflict in Darfur, to
facilitate the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, and to promote South-South
dialogue.

In that context, let me say a few words about
Darfur. The European Union is deeply concerned about
the current security and humanitarian situation. We
regret the negative response by the Sudanese
Government to the implementation of the United
Nations heavy support package for the African Union
Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) and the deployment of
the hybrid operation as agreed upon last year by the
United Nations, the African Union and the Sudanese
Government itself. The EU calls upon the Sudanese
Government to stand by its commitments and to fully
cooperate with the United Nations and the AU in
establishing an effective peacekeeping presence in
Darfur. The EU and its member States committed
approximately €400 million for AMIS in Darfur, and
we are prepared to provide additional means to uphold
the vital presence of AMIS under challenging
circumstances.

Secondly, the European Union supports the AU's
African Peace and Security Architecture through a
wide range of measures. We aim to enhance Africa's
peacekeeping capacity, and we warmly welcome
similar efforts by the United Nations. The European
Development Fund's African Peace Facility remains
the main EU source of funding for that support. Based
on the principle of African ownership, the Peace
Facility has so far supported African peacekeeping in
Darfur, the Central African Republic and the Comoros,
with €266 million overall. A total of €15 million has
now been earmarked for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM).

The Peace Facility also addresses AU needs in
institutional capacity-building. To date, support has
been provided for a long-term needs assessment of the
AU and subregional organizations, the strengthening of
the Peace and Security Department of the AU, and the
establishment of an African standby force. A new €20
million programme focussing on the African standby
force and capacities at the subregional level is now in
the pipeline. The capacities of African subregional
organizations in conflict prevention are further
supported through substantial regional programmes
financed by the European Development Fund.
Tripartite capacity programmes involving the United
Nations are being considered, notably in West Africa,
involving the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS).

There is a clear need for sustained and
predictable funding for African peacekeeping
operations. The EU wishes to point out that while it
will consider its role in this endeavour, other donors
will also have to contribute significantly in order to
ensure an adequate financial basis.

In the framework of the European Security and
Defence Policy, the EU has twice supported the United
Nations peacekeeping mission in critical phases in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In 2003 we
deployed Operation Artemis in Bunia to prevent a
humanitarian disaster, and in 2006 the European
Union-led force in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo assisted the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) during the electoral process. That military
support has been complemented, since 2005, by two
long-term civilian missions to support security sector
reform in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
are now drawing lessons from the EUFOR operation,
which will be important for further developing our
relationship with the United Nations in the field of
crisis management. This increasing cooperation also
requires appropriate mechanisms for dialogue and
exchange. We will continue to work with the United
Nations Secretariat in this regard.

Thirdly, we are greatly interested in strengthening
the peacebuilding perspective of cooperation among
the EU, the United Nations and the AU. Security and
development go hand in hand. Good governance, the
rule of law and protection of human rights are elements
vital to both conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
The European Development Fund will continue to
support the needs of its African partners in that respect.

The European Union aims to reinforce the
political dialogue with the African Union and
subregional organizations. We are therefore working
towards a joint EU-African strategy, based on the
principles of ownership and mutual accountability, to
be adopted by the EU-Africa Summit at Lisbon in
December. At the same time, the partnership between
the EU and AU Commissions is steadily developing.
Madam President, I would like to thank you for
having convened this constructive debate. The

European Union is ready to continue to provide its
expertise and resources to peace and stability in Africa
as a partner of both the United Nations and the AU.
Thus we welcome the presidential statement to be
adopted today, and we look forward to the report by the
Secretary-General.

