Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Madam, for
the efforts made by the sisterly Mission of Jordan in
this international forum to address issues affecting
Arab countries and, in particular, my country Yemen.
Resolution 2216 (2015), adopted today, is a tangible
demonstration of the serious approach being taken by
the international community and the Security Council
to provide unified support to our people in pursuit of
their legitimate aspirations to instate the rule of law in
a dignified State where all citizens are all equal and
peaceful federal democracy reigns.

As the Council has today adopted a comprehensive
resolution to deal with all aspects of the Yemeni crisis,
may I recall the Security Council's visit at the end of
January 2013 when it met with President Mansour Hadi
and other members of the Government. That historic
visit to my country by the Security Council, which
followed that of the Secretary-General, affirmed the
Council's commitment to the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, as

well as to the outcomes of the National Dialogue and
relevant Security Council resolutions. It was an appeal
to all Yemeni parties to make headway in the political
transition.

The Yemeni people, with the support of international
community and of the countries of the region, stepped
up the pace to bring the transition to a close. Just as
we approached the historic steps of adopting the
federal Constitution of the State and holding legislative
elections, destabilizing militia forces stepped up efforts
to their own ends - a coup d'e'tat.

The State under the constitutional legitimacy of the
Yemeni President was the aspiration of all Yemenis. To
the detractors, it was an obstacle to their designs. On
the one hand, there was a spirit of brotherliness and
dialogue in Yemen, in keeping with the hopes of the
Yemeni people, through national dialogue, to create
a unified State neither by coercion nor by hegemony;
on the other hand, the putsch sought, through a vision
manipulated by Iran - where Houthi militias and
forces loyal to the former president were trained - to
threaten the social fabric of Yemen and the cohesion
of its people. The coup d'etat was sped up against
the legitimately elected President, whom these forces
sought to replace, just as they sought to topple the
Government in all areas, with militias from Sana'a and
Taiz to Aden.

The Yemeni people rose up against them. The
militias tried to attack the President in Aden so as to
topple his legitimate regime and perpetrate a coup
d'etat. The President was forced, in the context of
his constitutional prerogative, to ask his brothers and
friends to protext the Yemeni people and the territorial
integrity of Yemen, in keeping with Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations. The response from the
brotherly countries of the GCC, led by Saudi Arabia,
was commensurate with the political responsibility
and reflects our intertwined destinies. It was a very
firm response aiming to defend the legitimacy of the
Constitution and to rebuff Iran's efforts with regard to
my country.

The militias refuse to recognize the geopolitical
or historical realities of the country or the blood ties
between Yemen and the countries of the region. Let
me therefore reiterate that my country will never
forget and will remain forever grateful to our brothers
in Saudi Arabia and other GCC countries. We must
also pay heartfelt tribute to the heroic fighting of our
brothers in Aden, Taiz, Shabwah, Al-Ghayda, Ibb and
elsewhere - every inch of Yemen has presented a
unified resistance against the army of death, revenge
and destruction.

From the very first hours of the Operation Decisive
Storm, we have taken humanitarian concerns into
account. Under the guidance of the President, we
have worked in cooperation with coalition forces and
humanitarian organizations to mobilize considerable
resources provided by the GCC for emergency measures
to mitigate the humanitarian suffering of the Yemeni
people in various regions of the country; to provide
humanitarian emergency assistance, medical supplies
and medicines; to transport the wounded to Gulf
States; and to help repatriate those stuck in airports
in neighbouring States. Humanitarian operations
continue under the auspices of the United Nations and
the International Committee of the Red Cross. The
Minister for Foreign Affairs is currently in Djibouti,
which has become a humanitarian support centre, to
organize emergency medical assistance.

At the same time, Government efforts continue
to seek an exit strategy from the crisis that has raged
since the coup d'etat of 21 September. Consultations
and dialogue continue among the various Yemeni
forces in various Gulf capitals, including Riyadh. The
presidential decree of yesterday designating Khaled
Mahafoudh Bahah as Vice-President is of particular
importance. It was a necessary measure to restore
peace and stability in Yemen and to urge parties to the
conflict to return to dialogue so as to implement the
outcomes of the national dialogue.

The only way out of the crisis in Yemen is through
dialogue. There can be no forceful solution or coup
d'etat. The militias must implement the resolution just
adopted by the Security Council so as to allow for
the drafting of a reconstruction plan, build capacities
in cooperation with our GCC partners, and establish
a regional security system whereby Yemen will be a
source of stability, development and support to the
brotherly countries of the region.

In conclusion, I would like to express our heartfelt
gratitude to the Security Council members who
have always supported the Yemeni people and our
constitutionally legitimate President, Mansour Hadi. I
would like to thank in particular our brothers of shared
destiny in the framework of ongoing corporation under
the GCC, led by Saudi Arabia, and, in particular, the
King of Saudi Arabia. We would like to thank them for
their genuine support to our country.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General of
the United Nations for his efforts as well as the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan through you, Ambassador Kawar,
President of the Security Council and representative of
all Arabs in these dark times.

The meeting rose at 11 am.
