Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I should like to
preface our statement by expressing our profound
appreciation at seeing you, Sir, preside over our
deliberations today. We wish also to warmly
acknowledge the participation of Mr. Bernard
Kouchner, Minister for Foreign Affairs of France;
Mr. Charles Michel, Minister for Development
Cooperation of Belgium; and Mr. Vittorio Craxi,
Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of Italy.

We wish to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
for her important briefing, as well as the Executive
Director of UNICEF and the representative of
Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict for their
statements. We should also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his important report.

This timely meeting reflects the strong desire of
the Council to address an issue of paramount
importance: the welfare and security of children in
armed conflict. We condemn in the strongest possible
terms the various forms of violence committed against
children in armed conflict. The sight of children
carrying machine guns and other weaponry and
engaging in combat is absolutely unacceptable and
totally reprehensible. Indeed, it is an affront to
international humanitarian law, which clearly prohibits
such practices, either by armed forces or armed groups.

We, the Security Council, have to act, not only
against those abuses but also to work together with the
concerned States to eradicate them. We believe that
those issues can be comprehensively resolved when the
relevant parties work together and cooperate in a spirit
of partnership and good faith. Such a spirit can ensure
that the requisite level of trust is built among the
parties in order to ensure the sustainability of our
efforts.

When addressing this issue in the Council, we
sometimes fail to remember that most of the situations
outlined in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2007/727) pertain to developing countries facing
complex and sometimes insurmountable difficulties.
Should we neglect that notion, at some point in the
future we might find ourselves at an impasse. The
Council can continue to lodge requests with those
countries to address the issues, yet progress in
implementation also depends upon building national
capacities.

We strongly believe that the issue before us can
be properly addressed only by adopting a broad
strategy of conflict prevention and by tackling the root
causes of armed conflict, with their attendant negative
impacts on children. Ultimately, the promotion of
sustainable development, poverty eradication, national
reconciliation, good governance, democracy, the rule
of law and respect for and protection of human rights
are the best guarantors of the welfare of children.

It is for those pertinent reasons that we support
and further encourage development agencies to
participate in addressing root causes. They should be at
the forefront of our efforts. They can make a
meaningful and concrete contribution to addressing the
welfare and well-being of children and preventing the
recurrence of those deplorable practices.

The successful release, rehabilitation and
reintegration of children associated with armed forces
and armed conflict require a comprehensive approach.
It should be recognized that the Security Council's
attention and the efforts of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General are not taking place in a
vacuum. Not least, synergy is required among the long-
established relevant United Nations entities focused on
the welfare of children, most notably UNICEF and the
United Nations Development Programme.
On a specific point, the report made a clear
assessment that the use of cluster munitions is causing
lethal and irreparable damage to children, not only in
armed conflict situations themselves but also in the
aftermath of conflict. We strongly deplore the use of

such munitions targeted directly or indirectly at
children. Remedial actions in the form of rehabilitation
and reintegration must be sought. Furthermore, we are
gravely concerned about the growing so-called
collateral damage that has taken the lives of many
children. The Council, for its part, should pronounce
itself clearly in rejecting the practice by State or non-
State actors of indiscriminately utilizing mine-infesting
weapons.

With regard to the next report on this issue, we
are of the view that the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General should
continue to spare no effort in further improving and
refining its methodology in drafting and formulating
the report, in particular by making reference to
countries in armed conflict situations. The credibility
and authority of the Office lie in the ability to maintain
its objectivity and independence, as well as to forge
constructive cooperation with the States concerned.

Lastly, Indonesia always maintains its principled
views that transparency and inclusiveness are the
bedrock of the work of all international organizations
and their affiliated entities. We therefore recognize
importance of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict in continuing to enhance
its methods of work.

Finally, we also wish to thank and pay tribute to
France for its leadership in the preparation of the draft
presidential statement on this issue that is before the
Council.

