Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): I would first like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the successful initiatives that
you have undertaken during your presidency of the
Security Council, including the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA). I convey to you the gratitude of the
Government and the people of the Central African
Republic. Likewise, I would like to pay tribute to the
members of the Security Council for their unanimous
support for resolution 2301 (2016), initiated by France.

We welcome the fact that the Security Council has
today decided to renew the mandate of MINUSCA.
The resolution is quite comprehensive and reflects
the level of ambition we have for this United Nations
Mission. The Mission's presence in the Central African
Republic is essential for the stability of the country
and of the civilian population. All the provisions of the
text are important, but I want especially to highlight
several points.

First, with regard to the protection of civilians,
this is the first aspect of the mandate - and it is no
coincidence. Although the situation is not comparable
to what it was a few months ago, civilians in fact
continue to be threatened in their security by the
numerous armed criminal groups operating throughout
the entire country. In that context, it is essential and
vital that MINUSCA be active, even proactive, in
its mandate to protect civilians. The Mission must
anticipate situations and, where threats exist, intervene
robustly and without delay. Members will recall that
President Faustin Archange Touadera came specially to
the Security Council on 10 June to participate in the
debate on the protection of civilians and deliver that
very message (see S/PV.7711).

Secondly, with regard to neutralizing armed
groups, we welcome that the resolution makes the goal
of reducing the threat posed by such groups a strategic
objective at the heart of the mandate. To that end,
we will have to implement a comprehensive strategy
consisting of various steps. That, too, is a primary
objective of President Touadera, but he will need robust
and determined action by MINUSCA to bring that
about. Reforming the security sector, restoring State
authority in the country, carrying out the disarmament
programme and restoring public order and justice are
all top Government priorities for which we will rely
on MINUSCA.

Thirdly, with regard to temporary emergency
measures, this will be something new for MINUSCA.
We welcome that this is included in the mandate with
stronger language, as it is essential that such measures
be further implemented. President Touadera asked
for this, and it has been done. We now hope that the
temporary emergency measures will be implemented
with determination.

Much has been accomplished in recent months.
A year ago the Bangui Forum had just concluded
weeks of local consultations, where hundreds of
Central Africans were brought together from every
province and commitments were made. The Forum was
followed by the successful holding of presidential and
legislative elections under very good conditions. The
transition phase was a success, and we must now move
on to the stabilization phase. We then had to adapt the
MINUSCA mandate to the new circumstances on the
ground. The Secretary-General proposed in his special
report (S/2016/565) guidelines that provided a very
good basis for doing so, and they are now reflected in
the resolution.

In his comprehensive briefing on 8 July (see S/PV.7734),theUnder-Secretary-GeneralforPeacekeeping
Operations rightly urged the international community
not to repeat past mistakes because, since the mutinies
of 1996, which led to the deployment the first United
Nations mission in the Central African Republic, no
serious analysis of the post-conflict situation had been
made. It was enough of a lull for one to think that all
was well. And from the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad,
today we have MINUSCA. If we want to avoid such
mistakes and relapses and to ensure that MINUSCA is
the last United Nations mission in the Central African
Republic, it must provide the new authorities with the
resources to match the actions they want to take to pull
the country and the people out of this state of total
deprivation and psychosis - this sword of Damocles
hanging over our heads.

May the unfailing mobilization and the outstanding
solidarity enjoyed by the Central African Republic
during its darkest moments manifest themselves
once again at the donors conference scheduled for
November. The Central African Republic is at a turning
point in its history. We must and expect to shoulder
the immense task before us, and we are delighted to
continue to have the support of the United Nations and
the Security Council.

The meeting rose at 3.20pm.
