Sheikh Abdullah Bin Zayed Al Nahyan (United Arab Emirates): Thank you, John, for your friendship
and for your leadership.

(spoke in Arabic)

Allow me at the outset, Mr. President, to express
to you my appreciation and gratitude for the convening
of this important meeting at this critical time, which
requires a quick response and the coordination of
international efforts. I should like also to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq for all his efforts.

The United Arab Emirates reaffirms its support
for the security, stability and territorial integrity of
Iraq and welcomes the recently formed Government of
National Unity, under the leadership of His Excellency
Haider Al-Abadi, which deserves the full support of the
international community. The United Arab Emirates
wishes also to emphasize that the country should not
fall back once again into the sectarian and exclusionary
policies that triggered the political and security crises
affecting Iraq.

The United Arab Emirates stands firmly against all
those who would attempt to compromise the security
and stability of Iraq and reaffirms its support for
international efforts aimed at combating the terrorist
acts committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria
(ISIS). It also repeatedly stressed its position during the
NATO Summit held in Wales and at the 7816th meeting
of the Arab Ministers for Foreign Affairs; the meeting
held in Jeddah, at which you, Sir, were present; and at
the Paris conference on security and peace in Iraq.

From this rostrum I, as an Arab and a Muslim,
categorically reject the terrorist entity Daesh being
called the Islamic State. I call upon all present to join
us in that rejection and to show solidarity with the
hundreds of millions of Muslims around the world in
condemning the desecration by the criminal terrorist
gang Daesh of what is dear to us all. They are a
criminal gang, no more than that. The United Arab
Emirates believes that the war against ISIS should not
result in the marginalization of the Sunni community,
which should play an important role in Iraq's political
future. It is vital that we all work together to maintain
Iraq's unity, both politically and geographically. ISIS
must be prevented from establishing a safe haven for
extremists in our region, a task we can achieve through
immediate and comprehensive international action,
in coordination with the Iraqi Government, resulting
in the development of a comprehensive international
strategy.

The threat of terrorism is not limited to this
particular terrorist organization. It extends to the
ongoing conflicts in Yemen, Afghanistan, Lebanon,
Somalia, Egypt, Libya, North Africa and the Sahel
region of Africa. These terrorist groups continue to
exploit the chaos in Syria in order to achieve their
goals, without the slightest regard for sovereignty or
national borders. The crimes of these and other terrorist
organizations know no boundaries and follow no
principles. Such oganizations are simply opportunistic,
with no relevance to any religion or standards. They
grow only in environments infested with sectarian
extremism.

In that connection, I would like to highlight the
issue of foreign fighters, which has become a concern
for many countries. I would like to thank the United
States of America for organizing a Security Council
meeting, to be presided over by President Obama, on
this topic. The extremists are trying to establish safe
havens in areas already embroiled in conflict and to
recruit fighters in order to ensure their survival. This
vile phenomenon has dangerous repercussions that can
threaten countries outside the Arab and Islamic worlds.
We must create international partnerships aimed at
combating such terrorism by addressing its root causes,
partnerships that are built for the long term, so they are
not limited to combating ISIS alone.

The United Arab Emirates reiterates its total
rejection of violence and extremism, its commitment
to tolerance and moderation and its willingness to
cooperate with international partners in fighting
terrorism and to partner with moderate forces. We
also emphasize the importance of working to prevent
political and social tensions in Iraq by adopting a
genuine, comprehensive national programme for
renouncing violence and uniting the Iraqi people,
including every faction and excluding no groups. In
that context, we believe that the Kurds have proved
their ability to take on an important role in the Iraqi
Government. We commend the Kurdish forces for the
part they have played in fighting ISIS, and hope that
the region of Kurdistan will remain strong, stable and
an integral part of the Republic of Iraq. The United
Arab Emirates has always supported the Iraqi people
in all circumstances, including backing Iraq's political
process and national reconciliation efforts. We have
undertaken ongoing initiatives designed to provide
humanitarian assistance to those populations affected
by violence and instability. My country will continue
to provide that support.

Finally, I would like to point out that the United
Arab Emirates welcomes the Security Council's work
in combating terrorism and suppressing its use of
resources for recruitment and financing, particularly
through the adoption of resolution 2170 (2014). In
that context, we emphasize the importance of the
international community's role in giving its full,
constructive support to the Iraqi Government.

