Mr. Satoh (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
express my sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for your leadership in initiating and convening this
open meeting of the Council. I would also like to take
this opportunity to congratulate Singapore and the
other new members, namely Colombia, Ireland,
Mauritius and Norway, on joining the Council. We are
convinced that each of the new members will make a
great contribution to the activities of this important
Organization by providing it with fresh thoughts and
perspectives.

Japan has been strongly committed to, and
actively engaged in, efforts to strengthen the
cooperation between the Security Council and troop-
contributing countries, with the involvement of the
Secretariat. For example, when Japan occupied the
presidency of the Security Council in April 1998, it
was instrumental in setting a precedent for convening a
meeting of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations with the President of the Council, to discuss
ways to improve the meeting of the troop-contributing
countries.

Today I would like to focus on one new aspect of
this long-debated and complex issue: that is, the need
to broaden the scope of participants in consultations
between the Security Council and troop contributors. I
want to hasten to add here that it is crucially important
for the Council to listen to the views of the countries
that send their troops and police elements to the field.

As we all know, the maintenance of peace and
security now requires a comprehensive approach, one
that includes efforts in the economic, social and
humanitarian areas on top of the traditional
peacekeeping operations, which encompass military
and police activities. This is reflected in the
multifaceted mandates of recent peacekeeping
operations, which often include tasks having to do with
nation-building, governance and development. These
large-scale, comprehensive missions tend to be funded
by voluntary contributions by interested Member
States, in addition to assessed contributions.

In such multifaceted operations, the civilian
component is often substantial. A case in point is the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), where a third of the military and
civilian police personnel deployed in the operation are
civilians.

It stands to reason that in such multifaceted
operations, consultations between the Security Council
and contributing countries should not be limited to
those countries providing military and civilian police
personnel. Rather, they should be open to those
countries that provide civilian personnel; countries
whose nationals are engaged in humanitarian activities
on the margins of the operation; countries that have
made major financial contributions or provided key
elements or expertise; and countries that are
particularly knowledgeable about the situation on the
ground.

These countries have a great deal at stake in the
conduct and outcome of peacekeeping operations. The
safety and security of personnel is of no less serious
concern to the countries that have provided civilian
personnel than it is to those that have provided military
personnel. Countries that have made major financial
contributions to the operations are held accountable by
their taxpayers. Indeed, because today's operations are
increasingly linked to the post-conflict peace-building
agenda such as nation-building and development,
peacekeeping operations themselves will be
strengthened if all major contributing countries
participate in the consultations with the Security
Council.

This need to include non-troop-contributing
countries in Security Council consultations is reflected
in previous statements and notes of the President of the
Council, such as S/l998/1016 and S/PRST/1996/l3.
Japan, for one, strongly believes that it is important to
stress this need again in our deliberations today on
strengthening the cooperation between the Council and
troop-contributing countries.

