Mr. Bliss (Australia): I would like to thank
Ms. Bensouda for her briefing, for the comprehensive
report submitted to us and for the continuing efforts of
the Office of the Prosecutor in relation to the situation
in Darfur in difficult circumstances.

Australia is deeply concerned that, in the six months
since the Prosecutor's last briefing (see S/PV.6974),
there has been no improvement in the situation in
Darfur. Violence has continued unabated. Furthermore,
the Prosecutor's report makes it clear that crimes,
including the targeting of civilians, sexual and gender-
based violence, forced displacements and attacks on
humanitarian workers and peacekeepers continue to be
committed.

Australia remains concerned at the continued
failure on the part of the Government of the Sudan
to ensure the protection of civilians, and at its failure
to cooperate fully with the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the Special
Representative for Darfur.

As the Council recognized when it referred the
situation in Darfur to the International Criminal Court
(ICC) eight years ago, the ICC has a crucial role to play
in ensuring accountability in Darfur. Given the ongoing

violence and crimes being committed, that fact is no
less true today than it was eight years ago.

While we welcome the Office of the Prosecutor's
ongoing preparations for the trial of Abdallah Banda,
it is clear that the Office has been unable to progress
on other investigations and prosecutions owing to
the Sudan's failure to cooperate with the Court. The
ongoing failure to arrest and surrender, or to bring
to justice, President Al-Bashir, Defence Minister
Hussein, the Governor of Southern Kordofan, Ahmad
Harun, and Ali Kushayb is of particular concern.
While the adoption of policies of non-essential contact
has somewhat limited the movements of the indictees
in the most recent reporting period, Australia regrets
that President Al-Bashir and Defence Minister Hussein
have been able to travel outside of the Sudan, including
to certain ICC States parties, without being arrested.

For eight years, the Sudan has ignored its obligations
under resolution 1593 (2005). In response, the Council
has been virtually silent. The inescapable conclusion is,
as Ms. Bensouda has put it, that the Council's silence
and inaction have contributed to the Sudan's continued
determination to ignore the Council.

The Council's inaction on that issue lies in stark
contrast to the Council's recognition of the importance
of accountability processes. As Ms. Bensouda has
reminded us, as recently as 6 August the Council
recalled that

"justice and rule of law are of key importance for
promoting and maintaining peace, stability and
development in the world" (S/PRST/2013/12, p. 5).

The same presidential statement emphasised that

"ending impunity is essential in a conflict and
post-conflict society's efforts to come to terms
with past serious crimes under international law,
and in preventing future serious crimes under
international law" (ibid).

The time has well and truly arrived for the Council
to take concrete steps to assist the Court in relation to
the situation in Darfur. We need to consider carefully
what the Council can do to support the Court, which,
after all, is only exercising its jurisdiction as a result
of the Council's referral. As Australia has suggested
before and as has been suggested earlier today, one
obvious step for the Council to take would be for the
Council's Sudan Sanctions Committee to give greater
consideration to how the measures at its disposal could
assist the ICC on the execution of the outstanding
arrest warrants. But we can do more. We support the
view that we need a Council forum for legal experts to
discuss ICC matters, so as to strengthen the Council's
cooperation with the Court.

We note that differences of View have emerged
among States in recent months on the role of the ICC in
particular contexts. In that connection, it is noteworthy
that the meeting of the Assembly of States Parties to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
in November demonstrated that, by adopting a flexible
and constructive approach, appropriate solutions can
be found to address legitimate concerns. It is essential,
however, that all ICC States parties abide by their
obligations under the Rome Statute, including in
relation to cooperation with the Court.

Eight years after the Council's referral of the
situation in Darfur to the ICC, conflict continues to
be a daily reality. Rome Statute crimes continue to be
perpetrated with impunity, and that only fuels further
violence. It is crucial, therefore, that the Council
provide stronger support for the Court's efforts to end
impunity than it has to date.

