Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, for
having introduced the latest quarterly report (S/2016/99).
I also thank the First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia
and Ms. Vlora Citaku.

Uruguay supports the role played by UNMIK in
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights. It also values the cooperation and contribution
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo on the ground. Resolution
1244 (1999) remains the internationally accepted legal
basis to resolve the situation in Kosovo, including full
and strict respect for the principle of the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Serbia. In that regard and
as was demonstrated in the framework of UNESCO,
Uruguay has maintained its position of not recognizing
Kosovo, thereby highlighting the principle of the
territorial integrity of States as an imperative norm of
international law. That principle constitutes a central
element ofpeaceful coexistence and cooperation among
the members of the international community.

Although the security situation has been
qualified as stable, we are concerned by the ongoing
disturbances in the functioning of the Assembly
of Kosovo, owing to the opposition parties' use of
violence. It is critical that such differences be settled
through dialogue, rather than by resorting to violence
and undermining democracy. Furthermore, Uruguay
welcomes the agreements approved on 25 August 2015
in the framework of dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, facilitated by the European Union, and in
particular the establishment of the association of Serb-
majority municipalities. We appreciate the fact that the
Government of the Netherlands has agreed to host the
specialist court. We hope that the court will be able to
begin its work as soon as possible so as to advance the
enforcement of justice and accountability.

Regarding human rights, we are concerned about
the fact that the UNMIK Human Rights Advisory Panel
has reported 31 incidences of violations, including
violations of the right to life, of the prohibition of
torture, inhumane or degrading treatment, as well as
the right to social security and an adequate standard
of living. We note that since the previous report
(S/2015/833), no progress has been made with regard to
the recommendations on the payment of compensation.
In that regard, and in conclusion, we would like to
reiterate our belief in the importance of ensuring that
UNMIK implements the recommendations of the
Human Rights Advisory Panel, particularly regarding
the issue of enforced disappearances, abductions or
violations of civilians, whatever their ethnic origins,
for in such incidents there can be no justification for
making any kind of distinctions.

