Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Sir, on Slovakia's very successful presidency of the
Security Council this month. We only regret the fact
that this is a very short month, which represents a
failure on the part of the calendar and not of your
presidency.

As the initiator and a sponsor of Security Council
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006), the Russian
Federation considers them to be key non-proliferation
instruments in preventing weapons of mass destruction,
their means of delivery and related materials from
falling into the hands of non-State actors, particularly
terrorists. We are convinced that ensuring the full
implementation by all States of those resolutions is one
of the principal means of counteracting the serious
threat to international peace and security represented
by the world-wide spread of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery.

The implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
which provides the basis for coordinated efforts to
combat the black markets in weapons of mass
destruction, will, given the scale and complexity of the
targets it sets, be a labour-intensive and lengthy
process. Assistance to countries in the implementation
of the resolution should therefore be based on
constructive dialogue without pressure or interference
in the internal affairs of States and without harming
legitimate international economic, scientific and
technical cooperation.

Effective non-proliferation work is not possible
without a broad-based increase in cooperation between
the United Nations and specialized international and
regional organizations. We feel that, given the
experience and knowledge that have been gained, a
more active role in the implementation of the
resolutions should be played by the export control
regimes. Strengthening national export control systems
is one of the key components of resolution 1540
(2004), and closer contacts between the Committee
established pursuant to that resolution with export
control regimes - including by involving the heads of
those bodies in regional seminars - should be a
priority of the Committee's work.

I wish to report on the efforts Russia is making to
assist in the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
9

within the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).
At Russia's initiative, the issue of the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction is regularly discussed
within the CIS Council of Foreign Ministers. We intend
to relaunch the work of the CIS Joint Consultative
Commission on Disarmament, the draft agenda of
which includes items relating to the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, enhancing national
export control systems, and the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

An intensive dialogue is under way between
foreign ministries of the CIS. A tradition has been
established of convening consultations in Moscow with
CIS States on export control and non-proliferation.
There is active cooperation in strengthening the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons regime.

In the context of implementing the trilateral
initiative of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), Russia and the United States of America, we
continue to send CIS State missions to assist in
providing security and safe storage of radioactive
materials. Russia provides technical and
methodological assistance to CIS partner States in the
area of improving national legislation on the issues of
reporting, control and the physical protection of
nuclear and radioactive materials. In particular, within
the framework of the Russian programme of support
for IAEA safeguards, regional workshops are regularly
held for CIS States on the use of physical protection
systems and their inspection.

We are actively working with the United States of
America and IAEA on the removal from CIS States of
highly enriched uranium from research reactors
manufactured by Russia. To date, processed and
unprocessed nuclear fuel has been removed from
Uzbekistan.

In order to assist in the implementation of the
provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention, the
Russian Federation has offered assistance to a number
of CIS States in drafting national implementation laws
and an exchange of experience of the work of national
bodies established pursuant to those instruments.
Together with our CIS partners, we are striving to
strengthen the Biological Weapons Convention.

We enjoy close cooperation in harmonizing
export control systems, particularly within the
framework of the Eurasian Economic Community
(EURASEC). Together with our partners, we are
10
developing mechanisms for EURASEC States members
to implement the Agreement on a Common Order of
Export Control, a Russian initiative signed in Moscow
on 28 October 2003.

We continue to assist CIS States in enhancing and
improving their national export control systems on the
transfer of dual-use technologies. We regularly inform
our CIS partners on developments in international
export control systems of which the Russian Federation
is a member, but in which not all CIS States
participate. That involves above all explaining changes
that have taken place in export control lists and the
importance of implementing them at the national level.

In conclusion, I wish to note that the Russian
Federation fully shares the views of the joint statement
to be made this morning by the Permanent
Representative of Belarus, Ambassador Dapkiunas, on
behalf of the members of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization.

