Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
gather here today in response to a request made by the
Group of Arab States in implementation of a decision
adopted by the Council of the League of Arab States on
24 March 2003. That decision was issued along with a
reservation by the State of Kuwait, because the
decision makes no mention of Iraqi aggression directed
against the State of Kuwait in the form of missile
attacks or of Iraq's violation of relevant Security
Council resolutions and of all decisions issued by Arab
summits calling for respect for Kuwait's independence,
sovereignty and security. Therefore, Kuwait's
reservation cannot be attributed to today's Security
Council meeting - as can be seen by our active
participation in it - but rather to the reasons that I
have just cited.

At the outset, I should like to express our
profound sadness, anguish and sympathies with regard
to the innocent victims - both the injured and those
who have died - among the brotherly Iraqi people,
and to those among the coalition forces who have
fallen as a result of ongoing military operations. We
wish solace and speedy recovery to them and their
loved ones. This is war; these are its effects. Therefore,
Kuwait joins other countries in stating its position that
war must be the last option. Recourse to war should be
made only after all other means have been exhausted.

The Kuwaiti people, more than others, is fully
aware of the effects of the ongoing military operations
in Iraq. Those operations have resulted from Iraq's
persistent refusal to comply with relevant Security
Council resolutions concerning the elimination of
weapons of mass destruction. The Council will recall
that, in 1990, the Kuwaiti people languished for seven
months under a brutal, abhorrent Iraqi occupation that
led to murder, torture, the desecration of sanctuaries
and genuine suffering as a result of the Iraqi regime's
brutal practices. During that bleak period, Iraq, the
occupying Power, did not even allow international
media or humanitarian organizations - in particular
the International Committee of the Red Cross - to
enter occupied Kuwait to monitor and convey such
suffering to the world through reports and documented
images. That situation is unlike what we are witnessing
today. Present media coverage of the military
operations and of their effects on the Iraqi people is of
an unprecedented scope. Therefore, Kuwait urges the
coalition forces to continue to take every possible
precautionary measure in order to avoid causing human
losses and to avoid exposing civilian lives to danger,
pursuant to international humanitarian law and to the
relevant Geneva Conventions.

With regard to current developments, my country
takes the following positions.

First, the State of Kuwait reaffirms that it has not
participated and will not participate in any military
operation against Iraq and that all measures we are
undertaking are aimed at protecting our security, safety
and territorial integrity.

Secondly, Iraq, since its invasion and occupation
of Kuwait in 1990, has continued its aggressive
policies against Kuwait, its people and its Government.
The most recent of such practices is the launching of
Iraqi missiles against inhabited civilian areas in Kuwait
since 20 March. Iraq's missile attacks have continued
until today, which reaffirms the appropriateness of the
defensive measures taken by Kuwait, by fraternal
countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council and by other
friendly countries to protect Kuwait's security,
sovereignty and stability.

From this rostrum, I salute the forces of the Al-
Jazeera Shield, composed of forces from the Gulf
Cooperation Council, which have come to Kuwait to
help it protect its security and stability and to stand
side by side with its armed forces and those of other
friendly countries. We believe that Iraqi attacks against
civilian targets in Kuwait constitute a flagrant violation
of the Charter of the League of Arab States and the
Charter of the United Nations. We call on the
international community and on the Security Council to
condemn these attacks, to demand that Iraq
immediately put an end to them, and to stress the need
to respect Kuwait's security, sovereignty and territorial
integrity.

Moreover, these Iraqi attacks involve many
important considerations.

First, the Iraqi Government is trying to drag
Kuwait into the war and to compel it to participate in
these operations. However, Kuwait will not be drawn
in by desperate Iraqi attempts aimed at achieving such
an objective.

Secondly, the missiles that Iraq is aiming against
Kuwaiti civilian areas have a range that exceeds 150
kilometres. Some of these missiles have landed on
residential areas in Al-Fuhayhil city in southern
Kuwait, which is irrefutable proof that the Iraqi
Government possesses proscribed missiles whose range
exceeds that allowed by Security Council resolutions.
That proves the invalidity of the Iraqi Government's
earlier claims that it does not possess such missiles.

Thirdly, Kuwait reaffirms that its position on the
ongoing military operations against Iraq is in
conformity with relevant Security Council resolutions
and with the legal obligations on Iraq that proceed
from them. This fact has been totally flouted by the
Iraqi Government. Security Council resolution 1441
(2002) also included a clear warning to Iraq that it
would face grave consequences if it remained in breach
of these decisions. Kuwait reiterates its unequivocal
position, declared before the Security Council in
previous meetings, that the Iraqi Government bears full
responsibility for the grave consequences confronting it
now.

All members of the international community have
called on the Iraqi regime to try to avert reaching this
stage, cognizant as they were of the decisions of
international legitimacy, which authorize, according to
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, the
adoption of all measures to ensure Iraq's observance of
relevant Security Council resolutions and ending Iraq's
defiance of those resolutions. Some brave and sincere
initiatives have been submitted to the Iraqi leadership
aimed at sparing the Iraqi people the suffering they are
facing today, yet the leadership rejected all of them.

Fourthly, the images recently displayed by the
media of coalition forces' prisoners of war (POWs)
taken by Iraq, including the inhuman treatment of the
POWs by parading them before the media, prompt us
to again express to the Council our grave concern for
the fate of the Kuwaiti prisoners and nationals of third
countries who have been detained by Iraq since 1990.
We call on the Security Council, the Secretary-General
and the International Committee for the Red Cross
(ICRC) to intervene promptly with the Iraqi
Government and to demand that it respect the
principles of international humanitarian law, especially
the Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of
Prisoners of War, and to disclose the fate of our
prisoners as soon as possible, pursuant to relevant
Security Council resolutions.

Fifthly, Kuwait calls on the Security Council to
focus on the future situation of the entire population of
Iraq and to attempt especially to avert a humanitarian
catastrophe in Iraq and elaborate a speedy plan that
ensures fulfilment of the humanitarian requirements of
the Iraqi people and ensures their right to a decent life.
In this regard, we support the proposals and other ideas
submitted by the Secretary-General to the Council and
presently under consideration, including amendment of
the oil for food programme. Kuwait calls for granting
the Secretary-General the necessary authority to lead
this urgent humanitarian task.

Sixth, the Government of Kuwait has elaborated a
comprehensive plan to extend all forms of
humanitarian assistance to our brothers, the people of
Iraq, directly and through the United Nations and its
humanitarian agencies, as well as the other
humanitarian organizations. Under these
circumstances, Kuwait has established a centre to
provide humanitarian assistance to the Iraqi people.
Kuwait has also provided financial assistance in the
amount of $5 million to a number of humanitarian
agencies, including the ICRC, the World Food
Programme and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. In the coming days,
Kuwait will announce more contributions to finance
the humanitarian activities of other agencies in Iraq in
response to the appeal of the Secretary-General.

Seventh, Kuwait is keen to preserve the wealth
and national resources of Iraq and to thwart the
desperate attempts of the Iraqi regime to create an
environmental catastrophe in the region. Kuwait has
dispatched a specialized team from its oil ministry to
Iraq to extinguish a number of oil wells that Iraqi
forces intentionally ignited in the Rumailah oil field.
Two days ago the Kuwaiti team successfully
extinguished the fires in one well and currently is
working to extinguish fires in other wells.

It is regrettable that the Iraqi Government
destroys the potential and wealth of the Iraqi people
rather than preserve and develop such resources. It is
well known that the Iraqi regime has many precedents.
Before withdrawing from Kuwait in 1991, Iraq burned
more than 700 oil wells in Kuwait, causing an
environmental catastrophe whose consequences Kuwait
and other countries in the region still suffer from. It is
also regrettable that the Iraqi authorities continue to
plant mines in the waters of the Gulf to prevent the use
by coalition forces of the harbour of Umm Qasr and to
hinder the arrival of humanitarian assistance to the
Iraqi people in southern Iraq, rather than to facilitate
such assistance.

There is no doubt that such practices confirm the
conviction of the international community that the
Government of Iraq is oblivious to the suffering of the
Iraqi people and that its main purpose is to stay in
power at any price.

As it confronts these momentous challenges in
Iraq, either with regard to establishing peace and
stability, or to fulfilling the now urgent humanitarian
needs of the Iraqi people as they undergo their current
predicament, the Security Council must overcome its
divisions and unify its ranks. The Council must set as
its objective the interests of the Iraqi people and all
that is necessary to bring about their security, stability
and development and to compensate for years of
deprivation, torture and displacement. History will then
credit the United Nations with its expected role in Iraq,
as it acts in conformity with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter.

