Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me begin by
expressing the appreciation of my delegation to you,
Mr. President, and to the other members of the Council
for convening this pertinent and timely meeting. We
thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing. We wish in particular to welcome the
participation of Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Palestinian National Authority,
and to underscore the importance of the statement he
made this morning.

My delegation wishes also to associate itself with
the statements delivered by the representative of Egypt
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and by the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, speaking in
his capacity as Chair of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference.

Indonesia appreciates the thorough, analytical
and comprehensive report of the United Nations Fact-
Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48),
chaired by Justice Richard Goldstone. Indonesia is
gravely concerned and dismayed over the findings of
the investigation. The report describes Israel's
activities as a deliberate assault aimed at punishing,
humiliating and terrorizing a civilian population and
radically diminishing its local economic capacity. The
effect is to force upon the people of the Gaza Strip an
ever-increasing sense of dependency and vulnerability,
an excessive and disproportionate use of force, and a
policy of collective punishment. In short, Israel has
committed a variety of crimes, including war crimes, in
violation of international law and international
humanitarian law, as well as the Fourth Geneva
Convention.

Israeli military operations in Gaza from
27 December 2008 to 18 January 2009 worsened the
already dire humanitarian situation there. Indeed, the
illegal blockade and closure of the Gaza crossings by
Israeli authorities persist. Their grave humanitarian
impact on the Palestinian people hardly needs
recalling. Not least are its damaging consequences in
further sowing the seeds of animosity and propelling
the cycle of violence in the region.

In this context, my delegation would like to
reaffirm in the clearest manner possible its outrage at
and strong condemnation of the military onslaught by
Israel in the Gaza Strip. We therefore commend the
Fact-Finding Mission for its recommendations and urge
all parties concerned to pay the utmost attention to the
report's conclusions and follow up its recommendations
accordingly.

The Mission's report states that Israel's continued
occupation of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank
constitutes the fundamental factor underlying violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law,
and that ending the occupation is a prerequisite for the
restoration of a dignified life for the Palestinians, as
well as for development and a peaceful solution to the
conflict.

We are in full agreement with such observations.
The conflict in the Middle East has indeed been going
on for far too long. For 60 years, the illegal Israeli
occupation has made the region a theatre of tension and

violence. The core issues - the status of East
Jerusalem, the borders of a Palestinian State, settlements
in the West Bank, Palestinian refugees, security and
water resources - remain unresolved. For many years
Indonesia has joined the international community in
drawing attention to the consequences of Israel's
continued illegal activity in Arab occupied territories.
We therefore support the current surge in diplomacy
aimed at relaunching negotiations and jumpstarting a
comprehensive peace process, as demonstrated by
ongoing efforts, particularly those of the United States.

One of the core issues that require urgent
attention is Israeli settlement activities in the
Palestinian territory. Israel's settlement policies and
practices, which have been aimed at altering the
demographic composition, physical character and
status of Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
are a blatant violation of international law. The
settlements are the greatest obstacle to the
establishment of a physically viable, sovereign and
independent Palestinian State, and thus to the
achievement of peace. This issue is intricately related
to nearly all other final-status issues.

If Israel has a genuine commitment to peace, it
must stop all settlement construction, expansion and
planning in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and dismantle the
settlements built therein. For these reasons, we attach
primary importance to the role of the Security Council
in responding to the settlement issue, as it did in 1980
through its resolution 465 (1980). The Security Council
must regain its role in resolving this very important
issue.

We also wish to urge the Palestinians who have
been involved in the reconciliation talks for many
months not to relent in those efforts, as facilitated by
Egypt. Palestinian unity is all the more crucial in the
face of the present challenges. In this regard, it is our
hope that, as they prepare to hold Palestinian Authority
presidential and parliamentary elections in January
2010, the negotiating factions will continue to focus on
the critical importance of unity among all Palestinians.

Finally, my delegation wishes once again to
express its concern over Israel's ongoing land and air
violations of Lebanon's sovereignty, in violation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). We call on
Israel to withdraw fully from the remaining occupied
Lebanese land, and we wish to make a similar call for
13
Israel's withdrawal from the occupied Syrian Golan, in
implementation of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).

