Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Please allow me to
begin by congratulating you, Madam, and your
delegation on assuming the presidency of the Council
for the month of January. I thank you for convening
today's important meeting on post-conflict
peacebuilding and institution-building. Our thanks also
go to the Secretary-General for his remarks. I would
also like to thank His Excellency Deputy Prime
Minister Jose Luis Guterres, who spoke on behalf of
the Group of Seven Plus, of which Afghanistan is a
member.

Institution-building is one of the essential
components in establishing a peaceful and sustainable
future in any post-conflict situation. The requirements
for successful institution-building in post-conflict
settings include recognizing unique contexts; steady
provision of resources; growth of human capital;
national, regional and international cooperation; and
strategic patience through the transition period. In
Afghanistan, we have learned first hand the importance
of each of these requirements.

In the ubiquitous debate on the current situation
in Afghanistan, it is easy to overlook the 30 years of
conflict that Afghanistan has overcome in order to
reach a point at which, today, we can discuss
institution-building and post-conflict peacebuilding.
Let us not underestimate the time it takes to surpass the
challenges of history. An environment such as
Afghanistan's, which has faced complex conflict,
power struggles and ongoing violence for decades,
cannot be changed overnight. As we engage in each
and every discussion about the training of the Afghan
army and police, the timeline for military engagement
or international partnerships, we must keep this context
in mind.

In 2001, Afghanistan was considered to be the
most failed State in the world. The fall of the Taliban
left a weakly governed State with no professional
police or army to quell the ongoing fighting around the
country. In 2001, Afghanistan lacked State institutions
and had a budget of merely $27 million. After having
hundreds of thousands of military and non-military
Government employees in the early 1990s, educated
and skilled workers fled the country and its
Government was left with fewer than 2,000 employees
with higher educations. Many Government institutions
were non-functional because basic staffing and
resourcing needs were not met.

Given the magnitude of destruction, stabilization
efforts in Afghanistan have produced impressive
results. Despite its uphill climb since the time of
Taliban rule, Afghanistan has experienced political
transformation and development over the past decade,
achieved through the support of the international
community. The political process for the continued
growth of the country is in place. Nearly 7 million
refugees have returned. Women's roles in politics have
steadily increased. Civil society has emerged
triumphant in a more unified and organized manner.
There are many areas in the country where we are
witnessing governance for the first time in decades.
Progress in the area of infrastructure development,
including building and paving roads and increased
access to water, education and health care, has been
among the most rapid of any post-conflict nation in
decades. Women and girls now have equal access to
education.
Security institutions have developed, supporting
the emergence of Afghan national ownership. The last
year has shown that it is possible to increase the
Afghan National Army substantially and
simultaneously to see its planning and combat abilities
improve. Local administrations have increased their
involvement in security efforts, particularly through the
engagement of the Afghan people, especially elders, in
defence programmes in villages.

As a measure to end violence and achieve lasting
peace, we in Afghanistan have prioritized reintegration
and reconciliation. We continue to encourage members
of the armed opposition to put down their weapons,
choose the path of peace and join efforts for
stabilization and rehabilitation in the country. Progress
continues towards implementing the recommendations
of our National Consultative Peace Jirga, which
constitutes the core of our reconciliation efforts. Now
that we have come halfway, it is the Taliban's turn to
fulfil its responsibility. If the Taliban wants to join
peace talks, it must end Violence and terrorist attacks,
including suicide bombings, the planting of improvised
explosive devices, kidnappings and targeted
assassinations, and sever ties with Al-Qaida and other
terrorist groups.

We must also anticipate the challenges we will
face going forward. The biggest issue - not just for
Afghanistan, but for any post-conflict country 4 is the
sustainability of peace. The functionality of institutions
is necessary; a country must have the resources, human
capital and capacity to stop the threat of insurgency if
it is to avoid relapsing into conflict. Capacity-building
is essential if State institutions are to operate
effectively. Empowering State institutions means
enabling a national Government to provide services for
its citizens.

In any post-conflict setting, sustained
international engagement in the institution-building
stages beyond military involvement is necessary for
peacebuilding efforts to endure. In Afghanistan, an
additional component of the stabilization process is
effective regional cooperation. Progress is at risk of
unravelling if these partnerships do not remain strong.

Democratization in post-conflict countries is a
multidimensional challenge. We have learned from our
experience that the democratization process requires
sustained security, as well as political and development
support. However, as has been emphasized time and

ll-21268
again, democracy grows from within and external
actors can only support it. The international community
and key national stakeholders must work
collaboratively with integrative strategies to provide
effective support for democratization.

In the coming years, national ownership and
leadership with continued international partnerships
will be key for Afghanistan. The adoption of the Kabul
process involves greater Afghan responsibility for
security, development and governance in the country.
The significant increase in the amount of international
funding channelled through the Afghan Government
reflects renewed support for national ownership. The
Afghan Government is committed to assuming full
responsibility for security efforts with the support of
the international community by the end of 2014. It is a
gradual and conditions-based process that relies upon
support for the building of the Afghan security forces'
size, strength and operational capability.

ll-2l268
Building peace by developing institutions can
help address the causes of conflict. However, it is
necessary to end Violence in order to create an
environment in which institutions can flourish.
Progress can be destroyed when conflict flares up. We
must not forget the lessons we have learned in
Afghanistan. A school or clinic built in six months can
be destroyed in only six minutes by the Taliban or
other extremists. Furthermore, the importance of
effective international partnerships during post-conflict
situations cannot be overestimated. In this regard,
adequate resourcing and capacity-building are
preconditions for ensuring lasting peace.

