Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Let me begin
by congratulating you, Mr. President, and your team on
the United Kingdom's assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month, and by thanking Spain and
the Spanish delegation for the excellent work they did
in conducting us in the month of October.

The situation in Libya is at a critical point. Reaching
a political solution to the conflict is vital to the people of
Libya now more than ever. We strongly urge the parties
to conclude the Libyan political agreement, and we are
looking forward to the briefing later this morning on
the prospects for that final agreement.

I want to thank Ms. Bensouda for her report and
her briefing. They are sobering. Violent deaths in Libya
continue to increase month by month, and fighting
in the south has displaced 12,000 people in just four
months. We are particularly concerned that civilian
areas, places of worship and medical facilities are
repeatedly targeted, and minorities specifically so.

The Prosecutor's report makes plain that crimes
are being committed on all sides of the conflict. It is
also clear that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and groups that have pledged allegiance to
ISIL are playing a particularly destructive role. The
Prosecutor's call for States to prosecute their nationals
who are operating as foreign terrorist fighters in Libya
resonates with the Council's own commitment to
countering such actors. The Council has spoken clearly
about the need to combat ISIL, including in Libya, and
has created obligations in resolution 2178 (2014), which
binds all Member States, whether or not they are parties
to the Rome Statute, to prosecute foreign terrorist
fighters. Member States have both an obligation to
prosecute foreign terrorist fighters domestically and an
obligation to afford one another the greatest measure
of assistance in criminal investigations relating to
support for terrorist acts. International cooperation
and information exchange will be critical to effectively
countering foreign terrorist fighters in Libya. We
welcome the commitment shown by the Prosecutor to

supporting such efforts.

The instability and absence of State control in large
parts of Libya make the pursuit of justice especially
difficult. We recognize that the ability of the Prosecutor
to expand investigations into other alleged crimes is
hampered not only by the security situation but by a
lack of resources. The Prosecutor is right to draw this
Council's attention to that distinct barrier to her office
pursuing investigations into ongoing crimes. In our
view, the Council should support the mandates it gives
to the Court. On matters of finances, it should defer
to the General Assembly, which has the prerogative to
decide on funding issues.

Despite the security challenges, we are pleased
that the Prosecutor continues to receive cooperation
from the Libyan Prosecutor General and the Libyan
representative to the International Criminal Court
(ICC), and that the memorandum of understanding
is still being implemented. That groundwork should
support Libya in meeting its obligation under resolution
1970 (2011) to cooperate fully with the Court. While
Ms. Bensouda has not sought a review of the ICC's
finding, which returned the prosecution of Al-Senussi
to Libya, she is closely monitoring the domestic
proceedings against him. Reports on those trials and
allegations of torture in the detention centre where
Al-Senussi is being held raised legitimate reasons for
the Prosecutor to watch progress. We understand that
Abdullah Al-Senussi will appeal his sentence, and we
urge the Libyan authorities to ensure that due process
requirements are followed.

We are concerned that despite its obligations to
surrender him to the ICC, the Tripoli Court of Assize
handed down a death sentence to Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi in July. While Libya has since provided a
formal explanation to the Court, including explaining
the unenforceability of such in absentia judgments,
the larger issue of Al-Qadhafi's surrender remains
outstanding. While we recognize the challenges that
Libya faces, its obligations to the Court, which were
created by a resolution of the Council, are clear. We
welcome Ms. Bensouda's assurance that the Court
stands ready to support Libya in fulfilling that
obligation.

While the report is difficult reading, the Prosecutor's
Office should be commended for continuing to bear
witness before the Council to the crimes in Libya. The
Prosecutor's briefing today, coming immediately before
a briefing on the political situation in Libya, should
reinvigorate the Council's commitment to a political
settlement and stability in Libya. As the Prosecutor
notes in her report, a unity Government and durable
peace present new hope for Libya's efforts to promote
the rule of law, the protection of civilians and an end to
impunity for atrocity crimes.

