Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): This meeting
is being held at a critical time. The credibility of the
multilateral system is at stake, particularly that of the
Security Council as it addresses flagrant violations
of international legitimacy and defends the firm and
established foundations of the peace process in the
Middle East, which is subjected to fierce attack.

The League of Arab States warns against the grave
threat to the main principles of the United Nations
peace process, in particular the two-State solution,
the principle of land for peace and the five final-status
issues. All those principles are under fierce attack by
unilateral, irresponsible decisions that seek to change
the facts on the ground through unilateral actions,
without negotiation, in contradiction to established
international legitimacy. Such actions attempt to settle
the issue of Jerusalem, the most critical final-status
issue, in favour of Israel by means of an illegal
acknowledgement of Jerusalem as the capital of the
State of Israel and the transfer of the United States
Embassy to that city. Another example is the ending
of funding to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which
is an attempt to undermine the will of the defenceless
Palestinian refugees to exercise their inalienable right of
return to their occupied territories, while resolving the
matter of the refugees, which is the second final-status
issue, in favour of Israel.

That fierce attack has been exacerbated by the Israeli
inhumane practices against the defenceless Palestinian
demonstrators since the beginning of the Great March
of Return this year, when more than 200 people were
martyred and nearly 5,000 injured. Most recently, an
Israeli attack claimed the lives of seven martyrs east of
Bureij camp in the Gaza Strip. Such practices require
decisive action by the Security Council, the Human
Rights Council and the International Criminal Court
so as to end Israel's violation of its commitments as
the occupying Power in line with the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and international
humanitarian law and human rights law.

We call on the Council to take action in order to
implement the Fourth Geneva Convention and the new
internationally agreed humanitarian concepts in the
occupied Palestinian territory, particularly those of the
responsibility to protect and human security, which
are established foundations for the protection of the
Palestinian people from a reckless occupying Power
that violates all their rights, including their right to
peacefully demonstrate against occupation.

In that regard, the recent report of the Secretary-
General submitted at the request of the resumed tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly
includes alternatives for action. It is a solid foundation
for the Security Council to regain the initiative on that
important issue and to work with the General Assembly
to adopt an effective mechanism that will provide
protection in all its forms: physical protection from
armed aggression against the defenceless Palestinian
people; legal protection in the face of the nation-State
law of the Jewish people, which denies the Palestinian
people any connection to their historic land; and the
protection of Palestinian territory against settlements
that contravene resolution 2334 (2016). Israel's action
to demolish Khan Al-Ahmar village and other Bedouin
communities in order to establish geographic contiguity
between East Jerusalem, the capital of the State of
Palestine, and the neighbouring Israeli settlements
is unacceptable. Holy sites should be protected by
addressing attempts by Israel to enact a law that permits
Jewish worshippers to pray at the Holy Mosque, which
is a flagrant violation of the status of Jerusalem as a
symbol of coexistence among faiths.

There is also the issue of providing protection for
the Palestinian people in Gaza against the destructive
impact of Israel's blockade of the Gaza Strip, which
undermines Egypt's tireless efforts to achieve the
desired Palestinian reconciliation.

On 20 February, Palestinian President Mahmoud
Abbas presented to the Council a practical plan for
peace through direct negotiations between Israel and
Palestine, based on the two-State solution, the principle
of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and other
terms of reference that would lead to the establishment
of an independent Palestinian State along the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, before
the beginning of next year. That should be achieved
through negotiations on all final-status issues without
exception and without biased external intervention.
He reaffirmed the elements of that plan in his speech
before the General assembly at the beginning of its
seventy-third session.

The League of Arab States looks forward to the
Security Council and the General Assembly supporting
that plan so that we see the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

