Mr. Al-Qahtani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We
have just voted in favour of resolution 1787 (2007),
particularly since our observations were taken into
account. Naturally, we wish we had had a
comprehensive resolution reflecting our comments and
observations after the experience we have acquired
during our almost two years of work in the Council.
Since such a resolution will not be considered until
March of next year, we would like now to offer some
observations on the matter.

It is notable that over the past four decades, and
particularly after the events of 11 September 2001 and
the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), which
established the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
Security Council has been dealing with terrorism
without a clear definition of the term, making it
difficult to know what we are up against in a sure and
definitive way: the Security Council only describes
certain acts as terrorist actions without possessing a
definition of terrorism. It also fails to deal with the root
causes of terrorist acts and of terrorism itself or at the
least, to try to understand the minds and hearts of those
involved in terrorist acts.

The failure to deal with such vital issues has led
to a vicious circle. Therefore, we would like to
reiterate our call to the Security Council and the
relevant Council committees to work to find a clear
definition of this phenomenon and its root causes.

Resolution 1373 (2001) establishes the Counter-
Terrorism Committee in an open-ended manner, which
raises the question of when the mandate of the
Committee or that of its Executive Directorate will
expire. When will the day come when we are confident
that the purposes for which they were established have
been accomplished and that all Member States, without
exception, have fulfilled all of their commitments
under resolution 1373 (2001)?

However, and in spite of the progress achieved in
the implementation of that resolution, we would like to
draw attention to the wasted effort and resources and
the lack of full coordination with the General
Assembly or other bodies in achieving the objectives
of that resolution. In the light of General Assembly
resolution 60/288 of September 2006, on the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the
appropriate joint mechanism to coordinate our human,
technical and financial resources in the fight against
terrorism would be the Secretariat's Counter-Terrorism
07-63366
Implementation Task Force, which brings together 24
entities, including the Executive Directorate.
Therefore, we must seriously consider the future of the
Executive Directorate and the possibility of annexing it
to the Task Force, in order to further coordinate and
develop our efforts and those of the United Nations in
fighting terrorism.

We clearly see a lack of accuracy and balance in
the evaluation by the Committee and the Directorate of
the efforts of Member States to implement resolution
1373 (2001) and an imbalance in the coordination of
visits to countries of the South in comparison with
countries of the North. We also see a particular focus
on the technical assistance provided by countries of the
North and a lack of attention to the extent to which
they are committed to the rules and norms of
international law and human rights law and the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). There is
also the issue of the objectivity and transparency that
should always characterize the Committee and the
Directorate.

Nor have the Committee and the Directorate done
enough for the implementation of resolution 1624
(2005), which focuses on incitement to terrorism and
on the extreme importance of not distorting religions
and cultures or their religious symbols. Resolution
1624 (2005) re-emphasizes international efforts to
enhance dialogue and expand contacts among
07-63366

civilizations and stresses the importance of the audio
and visual media in promoting understanding,
tolerance and peaceful coexistence and in fostering an
environment which is not conducive to incitement of
terrorism and violence. We have called on the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the Executive Directorate to
deal seriously with this issue, to no avail. However, we
would like to reiterate our call on the Security Council
to deal with this issue with complete transparency.

Permit me finally to reiterate Qatar's support for
efforts by the Security Council and the international
community to fight terrorism, in accordance with the
norms and rules of international law, particularly
human rights law and humanitarian law. We call on the
Security Council to play its role and wish it every
success in doing so. We hope that our observations will
be taken into account when the Security Council
considers a new draft resolution on the extension of the
mandate of the Directorate.

