Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal welcomes the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2349 (2017) - the first of its kind on the
Lake Chad basin. We thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for making it a priority of its presidency of
the Council, which is coming to an end today.

There is no doubt that the resolution attests to the
Council's strong and firm resolve to support the efforts
of the countries of the Lake Chad basin to combat
the Boko Haram terrorist movement and, in so doing,
to resolve the humanitarian crisis and address the
underlying causes ofthe situation in the region, which is
particularly dire. The adoption of the resolution comes
on the heels of the Council's visit to Cameroon, Chad,
the Niger and Nigeria from 2 to 7 March and of the open
briefing held two days after the end of the mission,
which was launched at the initiative of the United
Kingdom delegation and which Senegal had the honour
of leading alongside France. The resolution places, in a
timely manner, the crisis facing these countries at the
top of the international community's agenda.

Since the Boko Haram terrorist movement uprising,
in 2009, the region has been facing a dual crisis, both
security and humanitarian. I need not mention all the
figures, as the Oslo conference dwelt at length on the
statistics in relation to the humanitarian crisis ravaging
the countries of Lake Chad basin countries.

Our resolution, which represents a response to
this situation, calls for continued action against Boko
Haram through, inter alia, the Multinational Joint
Task Force, which was created by and is composed
of personnel of countries of the region and deployed
by the African Union, so as to help create conditions
conducive to stabilizing the region and to the delivery
of humanitarian assistance. In that respect, it calls on
multilateral and bilateral partners to strengthen their
support for the Force so as to boost its operational
capacity, especially in the areas of logistics, mobility,
communication, equipment and intelligence. States are
also called upon to contribute generously to the African
Union Trust Fund.

The resolution also welcomes the $458 million in
humanitarian assistance pledged at the Oslo conference
for 2017 and urges swift disbursement of these funds,
especially since the countries ofthe region have already
dipped into their own pockets.

Even more important is the interest that the
resolution shows in the development dimension,
recognizing the indivisibility between peace, security,
development and human rights and their importance
to the concept of sustainable peace. The resolution
also points to the pressing need for the countries in
the region to resolve political, economic and gender
inequalities, as well as environmental challenges, and
encourages the Governments concerned to step up the
coordination of their efforts in implementing their
respective programmes. It also invites international
partners to lend assistance.

Likewise, it calls on the Economic Community of
West African States and the Economic Community of
Central African States, along with the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, to devise a holistic and effective joint
strategy to address the root causes that contributed to
the advent of Boko Haram.

In conclusion, I should like to express the wish that
the report that the resolution requests the Secretary-
General to produce within five months will provide
an in-depth understanding of the progress made with
respect to the measures that have been adopted.

