The Secretary-General: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your leadership and your excellent
Korean pronunciation. I am very touched.

I would like to thank the Council for this tribute.
I am deeply honoured by the recognition I have been
given. It has been a great privilege to work with all the

Security Council members over the past 10 years.

The Council's role in maintaining international
peace and security is as daunting and necessary as it
was 70 years ago, when the United Nations was founded.
Over the past decade, I have witnessed at first-hand the
Council's capacity for innovative thinking. During my
tenure, it established more than a dozen peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, some of them
incorporating novel approaches in order to respond to
complex situations. The Council's decision to establish
the Force Intervention Brigade in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo set an important precedent in
addressing the challenges in the eastern part of that
country. The United Nations Mission in Nepal played a
key role in supporting the country's peace process and
the free and fair election of its Constituent Assembly in
2008, culminating in the completion of the Mission's
mandate in 2011. Other successes include the paths
to stability that have been found in Cote d'Ivoire and
Liberia. We also deepened partnerships with regional
organizations, particularly the African Union.

During my tenure, the Council has also consolidated
the normative framework in relation to some very
important cross-cutting items. I would particularly like
to highlight its mainstreaming of the subject of women
and peace and security into its agenda. I encourage
it to continue its important work in that regard, and
I know that my successor, Antonio Guterres, will be
a most determined ally in that. I would also like to
commend the progress that the Council has made in
addressing sexual violence in conflict. While Council
reform continues to be discussed in intergovernmental
negotiations, the Council has increased its flexibility,
transparency and efficiency. I urge it to continue
its work to advance not just early warning but early
preventive action, including through a greater focus on
human rights and greater involvement on the part of
civil society.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing that
the Council is strongest when it is united. Some
striking examples of that include the Joint Mission
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and the United Nations, formed to achieve
the destruction of chemical weapons in Syria, and
the establishment of the United Nations Mission for
Ebola Emergency Response to fight the epidemic in
West Africa. But where unity is lacking, such as on
the question of Western Sahara, the consequences can
be profound, and in the case of South Sudan, even
catastrophic. However, my deepest regret as I leave
office is the continuing nightmare in Syria. I once
again plead with all the members of the Council to
cooperate and fulfil their collective responsibility to
protect Syrian civilians.

The Security Council holds the key to peace and
progress for some of the world's most vulnerable
people. It has been a privilege and an honour to serve
it. I thank the Council for supporting me and our
indispensable Organization.

