Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. President, let me at the outset welcome the fact
that you are personally presiding over today's meeting.
I should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report and Mr. Jessen-Petersen for his briefing, and to
thank Mr. Covic for his introduction.
The situation in Kosovo is now at an important
stage with respect to its future as well as the stability
of the Balkan region. We have always believed that a
comprehensive and proper settlement of the question of
Kosovo requires the full implementation of the various
standards, in accordance with resolution 1244 ( 1999).

Meanwhile, the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and Montenegro must be respected.
According to the Secretary-General's report, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government have taken some positive measures and
have achieved some positive results in the
implementation of standards in certain areas.

However, there has been little progress in the
areas of the return of refugees and freedom of
movement of minorities. Progress has also been slow
in dealing with unemployment, economic development
and raising the living standards of minorities. We hope
that all ethnic groups in Kosovo will endeavour to
enhance mutual trust and promote reconciliation so as
to lay a good foundation for the establishment of a
society characterized by peaceful coexistence.

We welcome the willingness of the leaders of
Serbia and Montenegro to engage in direct dialogue
with the Kosovo authorities, as this will be conducive
to the final settlement of the question of Kosovo. We
hope that dialogue will resume as soon as possible and
lead to positive developments in the situation.

This year is a very crucial one for Kosovo, as the
Security Council will be considering the
implementation of the standards. Work on
implementation of the standards must therefore
continue, and all parties should promote the
implementation process in a spirit of sincerity and
practicality. Only substantive results in the areas of the
economy, security, ethnic reconciliation and the
establishment of a society based on multi-ethnic,
peaceful coexistence can lead to the definitive
settlement of the question of Kosovo.

