Mr. Waweru (Kenya): At the outset, allow me to
wish you, Mr. President, a prosperous year ofthe sheep.
On behalf of my delegation, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the People's Republic of China for
convening today's important debate to reflect on the
founding purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations at its seventieth anniversary. I would
also like to take the opportunity to thank the Secretary-
General for his participation and briefing.

My delegation wishes to reaffirm its strong
commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and its key role in
maintaining world peace, common development and
justice and fostering international cooperation and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. We recognize that,
since the United Nations founding, 70 years ago, the
world has gone through profound and complex changes,
but the United Nations founding purpose and principles
remain valid. However, as the former Secretary-
General noted in the 2004 report of the High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, entitled "A
more secure world: Our shared responsibility",

"The different societies that make up the human
family are today interconnected as never before.
They face threats that no nation can hope to master
by acting alone - and opportunities that can be
much more hopefully exploited if all nations work
together." (Foreword, p. vii)

My delegation notes that various attempts and
initiatives have been started to refashion and renew
the United Nations to rise up to meet the new realities
and be the indispensable common house of the entire
human family, as envisaged in the Millennium
Declaration. However, most of those attempts have
yet to be fully completed due to the intransigence and
lack of flexibility of a few Member States that continue
to benefit from the current status quo. Clearly, a new
approach to updating the noble purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations to fit the evolving
global dynamics, challenges and contexts is needed.
We need a more preventive approach to respond to
emerging challenges and to use reactionary tools only
as a last resort.

To that end, my delegation wishes to associate itself
with the African Common Position on United Nations
reform, particularly with due regard to the reform of
the Security Council. My country participates in the
African Union Committee of Ten on that issue. Now
more than ever, the reform of the Security Council is a
matter of paramount importance.

A more peaceful, secure world is possible only if
the least developed countries are given a real chance to
develop, since development and peace and security are
intertwined. Over the past 70 years, the United Nations
has been fairly successful in preventing inter-State
conflict. However, it is important to strengthen the
United Nations capacity to prevent the outbreak of
violence within countries, using the preventive tools at
its disposal, while observing the principle of territorial
integrity and sovereignty. That can be achieved if the
relationship with regional and subregional organizations
such as the African Union is strengthened and deepened
on the basis of mutual trust. Once collective security
is achieved through deeper cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations and the Member States
themselves, a meaningful foundation for sustainable
development and peace will be established. We
are passionate about this because of our successful
experience in such partnerships in our region, such as
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development peace
processes for Somalia and South Sudan and the Arusha
process for Burundi, to name but a few.
Kenya, and indeed Africa, continues to partner
with the United Nations and other continental and
regional intergovernmental organizations, multilateral
organizations and stakeholders to strengthen the rule of
law, institutions of governance and human rights. While
the responsibility for conflict prevention and mitigation
lies with each State, transnational drivers of conflicts
must be collectively addressed by the international
community through the United Nations. We believe
that by strengthening our institutions of governance
andjustice through the fair and impartial application of
international law, we will promote economic and social
inclusion. That will help in eradicating inequality and
exclusion at the local, national and international levels.

As we approach the expiry of the Millennium
Development Goals in September 2015 and continue
to design the post-2015 development agenda this
year, which marks the seventieth anniversary of the
establishment of the United Nations, we have a unique
opportunity to write a new chapter in our collective
history. Together, we can end poverty and inequality,
adapt to climate change, reduce inequality, enhance
inclusivity and justice and assure future generations of
collective peace and security on a sustainable basis.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that my delegation
is fully committed to the founding purposes and
principles of the Charter and subscribes fully to the
greater unity of purpose in shouldering common
responsibilities and multilateral cooperation to tackle
global challenges.

