Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to first thank Mr. Rex Tillerson, Secretary
of State of the United States, for presiding over this
briefing and to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for
his comments.

We are thankful to the presidency of the Security
Council for having organized this open briefing, which
is of particular importance at a moment when tensions
in the Korean peninsula have risen to unprecedented
levels. I recall that, last year, my delegation requested
on more than one occasion the convening of an open
meeting of the Security Council to address this
matter, on the understanding that such a meeting
could contribute in some way to enhance the way the
Organization deals with this particular item. I am
pleased to note that, several months later, the Council
is finally addressing the situation in an open meeting.

Uruguay is a non-nuclear-weapon State. It is
a member of the first nuclear weapon-free zone,
established by the Treaty of Tlatelolco, and an
adherent to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. It is therefore strongly committed
strengthening the ruling of disarmament and
non-proliferation regime and consistently advocates
for a world free of nuclear weapons. Uruguay's
foreign policy hinges on the essential principles of
international law, including the prohibition of the use
of the force in international relations and recourse to
peaceful means to settle disputes. The use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons constitutes a crime against
humanity and a serious violation of international law,
including international humanitarian law, as well as of
the Charter of the United Nations. The only guarantee
against the use or threat of the use of these weapons is
their explicit prohibition and total elimination.

Uruguay has expressed its firm condemnation of
the nuclear tests and ballistic missile launches carried
out by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and will continue to do so if the North Korean regime
continues to challenge and ignore the prescriptions of
the Security Council by persisting in its nuclear and
ballistic missiles programme. The actions ofthat country
not only heighten tensions in the Korean peninsula, but
also constitute a violation of international law and the
resolutions of the Security Council and a serious threat
to international peace and security. Uruguay therefore
urges the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
abandon its existing nuclear programmes completely,
verifiably and irreversibly and immediately to end all
related activities, including launches using ballistic
missile technoloy and other acts of provocation. We
also urge that country to return to the Non-Proliferation
Treaty and the safeguards regime of the International
Atomic Energy Agency.

Uruguay has maintained a position on this issue that
supports all initiatives favouring dialogue. It therefore
believes that efforts to relaunch talks in the Korean
peninsula should be intensified, generating confidence
between the parties so as to return the North Korean
Government to the negotiation table and undertake
serious denuclearization negotiations. In times of high
tension, it is necessary to remain calm, avoid unilateral
actions and focus on the solution of the problem. In that
connection, I recall paragraphs 47 and 48 of resolution
2321 (2016), adopted by the Security Council in
November, wherein the Council reaffirms its support
for the Six-Party Talks, calls for their resumption, and
refers to the objective of the verifiable denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula in a peaceful manner. We
also reiterate the importance of maintaining peace and
stability in the Korean peninsula and in North-East
Asia as a whole, and of reducing tensions in the Korean
peninsula and outside of it.

Uruguay has insisted on the urgent need to break
the vicious cycle of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea violating resolutions of the Security Council,
which in turn imposes sanctions, issues communiques
and reiterates that it is the responsibility of powerful
States to open avenues for negotiation to resolve the
situation. Uruguay is of the View that only dialogue,
negotiation and political engagement can resolve
the North Korean matter. In that regard, my country
reaffirms its readiness to continue working within
the Security Council in order to reach a peaceful,
diplomatic and political solution that will result in the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

