Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to convey my appreciation to you,
Sir, and the Swedish presidency, and to express my
thanks to Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing.

My delegation welcomed the adoption of resolution
2334 (2016), which is a step in the right direction, namely,
the realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to self-determination. The resolution represents
the consensus and political will of the international
community to object to and oppose the policies and
practices of the Israeli regime against the Palestinians.
While the regime, encouraged by impunity, has always
flouted international law, including United Nations
resolutions, the Security Council should uphold its
responsibility as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations by adopting necessary measures to implement
its recent resolution and end the criminal policies that
the regime has pursued thus far.

The rapid increase in illegal settlements in
Palestinian territory, which constitute not only a grave
breach of the Fourth Geneva Convention but also
war crimes, as defined by the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, demonstrated long ago
that the Israeli regime has never had any interest in
peace with the Palestinians and that its participation
in the peace process has been just a cover to hide its
policy of aggression and expansion. In the past few
years, it has increasingly put aside that cover and
utterly negated the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination. Under the current circumstances,
as it was always the case in the past, the situation in
Palestine requires urgent international attention and
action. The illegal and brutal occupation continues
unabated, causing much suffering to the Palestinian
people, and is dangerously inflaming tensions in the
already volatile situation faced by the region. The
Israeli regime continues to breach international law,
including humanitarian law and human rights law and,
by doing so, inflicts widespread human suffering on
civilians and deliberately destabilizes the situation,
with far-reaching and serious consequences for peace
and security in and beyond the Middle East.

At the same time, the criminal policies and
practices, including the illegal blockade of the Gaza
Strip, are causing massive deprivation, hopelessness
and a grave humanitarian crisis. The destructive
impact of such violations is immense, as reflected in
the rising tensions and the deteriorating socioeconomic
conditions among the Palestinian civilian population,
which has been living under half a century of Israeli
occupation.

Other crises in our region, such as those in Libya,
Iraq, Syria and Yemen, all share the common element of
being stoked by invasion, illegal foreign intervention,
terror, extremism and Violence. Those problems have
persisted and deepened because the international
community has failed to do its part in dealing with the
root causes.

Finally, Lebanon continues to suffer from the
successive Israeli Violations of its borders and
incursions into its territory, followed by subsequent
years of occupation and aggression. Unfortunately, the
Israeli regime continues to Violate Lebanese airspace
and territory. Such activities are a blatant violation of
Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions.

The occupation of the Syrian Golan continues to
demonstrate another aspect of Israeli aggressiveness.
Their attempts to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, which
have intensified after the outbreak of Syrian crisis,
constitute another grave breach of international law.
In that case, as well, Security Council resolution 497
(1981) and other relevant resolutions have been flouted
by the Israeli regime, while the Security Council has
failed to take any action.

