Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): As members may recall, in the statement I
made to the Council during the meeting (S/PV.6627) it
held on 4 October 2011, I described a painful event
that had occurred that same day in Aleppo, in northern
Syria, during which armed gangs assassinated Saria
Hassoun, the son of the Imam of the Syrian Arab
Republic, and a university professor. Coincidentally, at
today's meeting, I can, on behalf of my country - both
the Government and the people - inform the Council
that last night the Syrian authorities arrested two young
men who were involved in the assassination of the
Imam's son. The two men - Syrian nationals - have
confessed to their crime, stating that they had each
received $800 for every crime they committed.

At the time I made that statement, some raised
questions as to the presence of armed gangs in my
country. However, today, fortunately, we have heard
many colleagues encouraging those armed gangs to
observe their commitments to the plan put forward by
Kofi Annan, the Joint Special Envoy of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States. Syria, as all are
aware, welcomed Mr. Annan's mission from the very
beginning and has interacted with it, and the Special
Envoy, in a positive and adequate manner. It has stated
that it would spare no effort to ensure the mission's
success, within the framework of the sentiments of
national responsibility that are impelling us all to put
an end to the painful crisis that Syria is experiencing,
which undermines the safety and stability of the Syrian
Arab Republic in its entirety - the State and the
people.

My country's Government has taken serious
measures aimed at fulfilling its obligations under the
six-point plan. It has declared its commitment to
stopping armed confrontations as from 6 am.
yesterday, and has indeed done so. The Government is
providing to Mr. Annan, in writing and on a regular
basis, information on the measures taken to implement
the six-point plan. In addition, my country, Syria, has
also accepted the concept of a United Nations
supervision mechanism that would operate within the
limits of Syrian sovereignty, which the Syrian people
consider a red line that there can be no justification for
crossing. We are currently in negotiations with the
Special Envoy and his technical team in Damascus on
the drafting of a special protocol that would guarantee
the deployment of a team of observers.

In return for this openness, cooperation and
commitment on the part of Syria, and since Damascus
accepted Mr. Annan's plan, terrorist operations have
escalated, including acts of aggression and the killing
of Government forces and civilians; the sabotage and
destruction of infrastructure; and the forcible eviction
of peaceful citizens and their relocation to
prefabricated camps in neighbouring countries, with
the objective of laying the groundwork for the creation
of a refugee crisis to be used for political ends and later
built upon to establish so-called buffer zones that
would, in turn, justify calls for foreign military
intervention.
In that context, we find worrisome the ill
intentions of some States members of the Council with
regard to Syria, in that they deliberately do not hold
armed gangs accountable for their crimes or for their
acts of aggression against Syrian civilians and military
personnel.

For our part, we have offered, and provided, to
Mr. Annan documented information on the violations
that were perpetrated by armed gangs after the
ceasefire went into effect yesterday. There have been
50 such violations, including the killing of dozens of
civilians as well as army and law enforcement
personnel, not to mention the destruction of many
public and private installations.

What we find puzzling in this respect is that some
of those who claim to care about human rights have
paid no attention to the information submitted by
numerous international bodies other than the Syrian
Government about the grave human rights violations
perpetrated by armed groups in Syria. Those violations
include kidnapping and the holding of hostages for
ransom as well as the torture and execution of
members of the police force, the army and civilians
who are regarded as supporters of the Government.
Moreover, armed groups in Syria are recruiting child
soldiers and using civilians as human shields. And to
all this we can add the many in-depth field exposes
published by major media organizations that confirm
the fact that armed gangs in Syria are engaging in
unprecedented criminal activities.

Here I would like to make mention of the
important article published by the German magazine
Der Spiegel concerning a meeting between its
correspondent and two criminals in hospitals in Tripoli
and Lebanon. In that interview, the latter admitted that
they had slaughtered 150 people by knife as per the
instructions that they had received from their
commanders in the armed groups.

Syria expresses the hope that Mr. Annan will deal
with the crisis in a comprehensive manner. It affirms
that in return for the official Syrian commitment to
guarantee the success of the mission, Mr. Annan must
also hold the necessary meetings with the various Arab
regional and international parties that have ties with
the armed groups in order to ensure that they abide by
the cessation of violence.

The success of Mr. Annan's mission cannot be
guaranteed by official Syrian support alone; indeed, the
aforementioned States must abide by their commitment
to freeze and halt the funding, arming and training of
armed groups, refrain from encouraging them to

continue their acts of terrorism and stop providing safe
haven to their members. Those countries must also stop
escalating and encouraging the Syrian opposition to
reject any initiative aimed at launching a
comprehensive national dialogue with the goal of
finding at a peaceful political solution to the crisis in
Syria.

It is worth noting here that while Mr. Annan was
holding intensive talks with his Syrian interlocutors,
some parties were holding conferences in Istanbul in
parallel to Mr. Annan's plan, in a clear attempt to
circumvent his mission and the role of the United
Nations as well as to undermine the mission's role and
its chances of success in its attempt to help Syria
emerge from the crisis. Some have even endorsed a
funding mechanism that would enable Gulf countries to
fund armed groups by offering salaries to their
members, to say nothing of the pledges made by those
attending the conference to provide $100 million to fan
the flames of the crisis rather than extinguishing them.

Added to that are the calls made during the
conference by the Foreign Minister of Qatar urging
military intervention in Syria and the establishment of
so-called safe zones on our territory. In that regard, we
also note the statement made by the Foreign Minister
of Saudi Arabia that arming the Syrian opposition was
necessary.

We wish to raise the question here of what it
means when some States say that they support
Mr. Annan's mission while at the same time they
undertake parallel efforts aimed at ensuring the
necessary funding for armed groups - to provide them
weapons and militarize them - impose sanctions on
the Syrian people and call for direct military
intervention in my country.

All of that completely contradicts the text of
Mr. Annan's plan. We would therefore like to affirm
before the Council that the ongoing support for armed
groups will pose a genuine threat to Mr. Annan's plan.
The parties involved are responsible for shedding the
blood of Syrians and spreading terrorism in the
country. The countries that have imposed unjust
economic sanctions on the Syrian people are also
complicit in the crisis. Those States cannot shed
crocodile tears over the difficulties facing Syrian
citizens every day while they are themselves to a large
extent responsible for those hardships.
What else could be the purpose for externally
manipulating the exchange rate of the Syrian pound?
What is the purpose of preventing Syrian expatriates
from wiring money to their families in Syria? What
could be the goal in damaging Syria's energy sector? Is
the goal of all that to guarantee the well-being of the
Syrian people and meet their demands for reform?
What about the European Union's imposition of
sanctions on Syria's Ministry of Energy? Will that help
to deliver electric power to the Syrian people? All of
this adds up to an unethical crisis that we must
examine.

What is happening in Syria is a manifestation of a
geopolitical conflict over regional roles. It is a settling
of scores, some of them old and others of newer
Vintage. The main weapon in the conflict seems to
involve pitting political pan-Arabism against extremist
political Islam. Extremist manifestations are being
spread in order to fuel future wars in the region that
will come in the form of sectarian, religious and ethnic
crises intended to fragment the region. All this aims at
bringing an end to the last locus of coexistence,
brotherliness and diversity in the region, as well as to
entrench the concept of a confrontation among
religions, cultures and civilizations.

In conclusion, Syria reiterates its commitment
with regard to the Joint Special Envoy's plan. We are
prepared to continue to cooperate with him in order to
bring an end to the crisis in Syria. We hope that
Mr. Annan will not allow any party to bypass his plan
or circumvent its provisions. The resolution that the
Council has adopted today requires the commitment of
the countries that proposed it and voted in its favour
and have continued to support armed groups in Syria.

While we believe that the resolution is not
balanced, Syria believes that it is in its own interests to
ensure the return of security and stability to our
12

country. We hope that the countries that supported the
resolution will implement it effectively and refrain
from sending lethal and non-lethal assistance alike to
the terrorists and armed groups.

Before I conclude my statement, I should also
like to reiterate that the suffering, hopes and
aspirations of the Syrian people go beyond being mere
commodities in the hands of speculators in the
marketplace of political interests and deals. The Syrian
people do not need a few million dollars to buy
bulletproof vests. Instead, they need help to live in
safety, peace, freedom and stability without increasing
tensions among its various factions. The Syrian people
need the lifting of the unjust sanctions imposed against
them, for they are resulting in billions of dollars in
losses. That is the only way in which those who
adopted today's resolution can help the Syrian people,
rather than providing Israel with six submarines that
can be equipped with nuclear weapons and creating
tension in the region conducive towards more war and
aggression. Whether Arab or not, the people of the
region will serve as the fodder for such war.

(spoke in French)

My colleague the Ambassador of France
mentioned the Syrian people in saying that the time of
violence is a thing of the past. I completely agree with
him. I would just remind him, however, that the time of
trusteeship is over as well. His statement to the Syrian
people is at the very least untimely, given that, on
17 April, they will celebrate their day of independence
from French occupation.

