Ms. Cliffe: I would like to thank the Government
of Brazil for the opportunity to participate in this
meeting and for the work of Ambassador Viotti in
consistently drawing attention to security and
development linkages in the discussions of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) on Guinea-Bissau. I
would also like to express my gratitude for the
contribution of General dos Santos Cruz in the
Advisory Council of the World Development Report,
along with that of President Kagame, Minister Amado
and the many other leaders of the Member States
represented here.

I want to say at the outset that, as His Excellency
Mr. Gasana emphasized, we View this very much as a
joint process with the United Nations. The early
meetings with the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, as well as the input we
receive from United Nations departments, funds and
programmes, have been crucial in shaping the analysis
of the World Development Report. The main message
of the Report is that strengthening the national
institutions and governance that provide citizen
security, justice and jobs are crucial to avoiding
repeated cycles of violence and instability. I will touch
on four issues connected to that, namely, the ways in
which security and development linkages are changing,
national lessons, possible directions for international
policy and the urgency of the stakes.

With regard to changing security and
development linkages, the Report highlights that there
have been many successes in reducing global violence.
There has been an enormous reduction in inter-State
war. Civil wars, while still exacting an unacceptable
toll, directly cause only one quarter of the deaths that
they did 20 years ago. Much of that achievement
should be credited as a success of the international
architecture established after the Second World War -
and subsequently adapted - including, of course,
centrally, the intergovernmental bodies of the United
Nations.

Yet 1.5 billion people still live in areas where
violence limits their ability to live normally, to go to
work and to see their children educated. However,
many of those areas are no longer dominated by classic
inter-State threats or civil wars between Governments
and well-organized rebel movements, but by much
more fluid cycles of social protest and criminal and
political violence.

As the Secretary-General underlined, organized
criminal movements can undermine the gains made by
successful peace process, as we see in Central America.
Criminal gangs can be mobilized into larger political
violence during elections, as we saw in the case of
Kenya. Protests over food prices or unemployment can
spread into larger political unrest. The cross-border
impacts of violence are considerable, from drug
trafficking, which has affected even isolated West
African countries, to refugee flows and terrorist
attacks. Economic and political grievances often
combine, as with the demand for both jobs and justice
that we have seen in recent events in the Middle East
and North Africa.
5

What are the common elements among the
different ways in which security and development links
are manifested? New work completed for the World
Development Report shows that the risks of violence
are highest when institutional weaknesses in societies
combine with high levels of internal and external
stress. Societies are vulnerable when local institutions
are unable to protect their citizens from abuse, either
from their own security forces or from non-
Government groups, or to provide equitable access to
justice and economic opportunities. Those institutional
vulnerabilities can then be exacerbated when countries
face the stresses of populations with a high percentage
of young people, high unemployment, growing
inequality, or external events such as the infiltration of
foreign fighting forces, trafficking networks or
economic shocks.

The specific triggers of crises vary by countries'
circumstances, but the risks of both political and
criminal violence are consistently linked to underlying
deficits in the ability of institutions to provide security,
justice and jobs. Government capacity obviously
matters greatly for violence prevention, but so do
accountability and the legitimacy of relations between
State and society. Societies with high levels of
corruption or human rights abuses, for example, face
greater risks of violence in future.

The World Development Report draws together
lessons from national reformers in preventing and
recovering from violence. These have provided a
number of interesting insights, which I will touch on
briefly. First, successful national transformations are the
result of multiple transitions, not one-off processes of
change. One need only think of the multiple transitions
in Ghana, in Chile, in Indonesia or in the Republic of
Korea in terms of security, justice, economic policy and
political reform. The Report has looked at the historical
timelines for institutional and governance
transformations. In the twentieth century, no country
accomplished this in less than 12 to 15 years, and the
average, for the fastest reformers, was between 20 and
30 years.

Secondly, leaders have built coalitions that are
inclusive enough to restore confidence, not necessarily
including all political or armed groups, but broad
enough to build national support for change and
provide a platform for working with local leaders in
violence-affected communities.

Thirdly, producing some early results has been
crucial to restoring confidence. These do not need to be
many in number. I would cite, for example, Liberia's
programmes to restore basic security and some
electricity, and to take action on corruption, or
Colombia's redeployment of the military to protect
civilian transit on roads.

Fourthly, countries have made tough choices over
priorities for institutional change. Experience
underlines the importance of early attention to the
institutions that provide basic security, justice and
employment, and has shown that new initiatives can
decrease corruption. Our work confirms previous
analysis by the Brahimi Panel, among others, that
elections, while often a crucial part of transitions, are
not a panacea for broader reform. They must be part of
a package of change.

Lastly, countries have historically innovated in
their institutional approaches rather than copying from
abroad. A focus on institutions and governance does
not mean convergence on Western institutions. There
are many examples demonstrating that the copying of
institutions does not work, from colonial legacies to
the transplant of models to Iraq. Even South-South
copying does not always work smoothly. The
institutions of South Africa's transition, for example,
while highly effective in those political circumstances,
have not always been easily adapted to circumstances
in other countries.

At the national level, the Report also looks at a
number of practical programme tools that have been
used to restore confidence and transform institutions.
Some lessons here are the importance of early signals
on justice and inclusion that signal a break with the
past but manage expectations of the timing of change;
maintaining a focus on basic functions; making the
connections between security and justice reform;
pursuing community-based approaches, such as those
supported by the United Nations Development
Programme, the Department of Political Affairs and the
World Bank; establishing back-to-basics job-creation
programmes that give marginalized youth respect and
status; and involving women in both economic
empowerment and the hard areas of security and justice
reform.

The Report describes the successes of
international action, but it also highlights some areas of
deficit in linking security and development assistance,
and four possible tracks for change. First, with respect
to increasing capacity to support citizens' security,
justice and employment, we are underinvested in those
areas, although they are central to today's risks of
violence. It is much harder, for example, for countries
to get assistance for their police forces and their courts
than for their military forces. It is much harder for
them to get assistance for employment generation than
for health, education or macroeconomic stability. It is
much harder for countries to get assistance when they
are struggling to prevent risks from rising than it is
after they have had a civil war. As President Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf of Liberia said to us in our discussions:
"After we have had a civil war, you guys provide us
with all the assistance; but when we are trying to
prevent it, there is very little that the international
community is able to do to help".

In order to address this, we look at the potential
for greatly expanded initiatives to draw together
public- and private-sector investment in generating
employment in insecure areas. On police and justice
capacity, we note the value of a clear lead role for the
United Nations, and the need for flexible capacity that
links policing with courts and corrections assistance
and can provide a range of advisory, executive and
mandated mission functions. We also consider the need
to move from talking only about coordination to
combined operational support - for example, through
the World Bank supporting the lead of the United
Nations or regional institutions on mediated
agreements and security and justice reform; or United
Nations departments supporting the security and justice
aspects of local economic development initiatives.
Here, I would also like to reiterate what the Secretary-
General said on the importance of coherence across the
multilateral system and the ability, through signals
from Member States, to ensure that multilateral
agencies themselves have an integrated approach.

The second track of change we look at is on
internal agency reforms. International assistance,
whether in development aid or peacekeeping, is often
too slow to enter, too quick to exit, and insufficiently
able to support national institutional capacity. Our
systems and procedures in the international financial
institutions - but perhaps it is fair to say that the
United Nations and bilateral agencies face some of the
same problems - were originally designed for
environments that are stable, with strong institutional
capacity and competitive markets. These three

conditions do not apply in the majority of the most
fragile situations. There is a need to rethink how
systems can be made fit for purpose to support rapid
confidence-building and institutional transformation,
including through faster and less volatile aid, flexible
peacekeeping, long-term mediation, and developing
budget, staffing and contract systems that acknowledge
the reality of insecure environments.

The third track for change concerns regional
approaches. International approaches are still primarily
focused on individual nation-States, and they encounter
difficulties in addressing regional challenges such as
those in West Africa and Central America. We suggest
scaling up action in two areas.

The first is to support the political convening
capacities of regional institutions to address cross-
border economic and security issues in concert with the
global financial and technical capacities of institutions
such as the United Nations and the international
financial institutions. Practical examples would include
supporting the African Union border programme or the
needs for pooled capacity to address drug trafficking in
Central America.

The second area is tougher action to stem illicit
financial flows from trafficking, corruption and
money-laundering. This would include action through
more joint investigations and prosecutions between
developed and developing country jurisdictions.

The fourth track concerns marshalling the
combined resources of low-, middle- and high-income
countries, I will be a little more frank here than we are
in the text of the World Development Report.

In our country consultations, there were
considerable divisions over approaches among national
leaders in fragile situations, middle-income countries
and Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) donors. Some of those
divisions were driven by disagreements over
governance models - which norms of responsible
leadership apply in fragile situations or situations of
risk, particularly in terms of the speed of governance
transformation and the models adopted, whether in the
context of political reform or corruption.

Different countries face different domestic
pressures related to the risks and results involved in
their international programmes - a problem we call
the dual accountability dilemma. It would be

presumptuous to claim to have complete answers on
this issue, but three starting points can bring
approaches closer.

First would be to use factual and historical
evidence on the speed of governance transformations
to inform dialogue. Secondly, one could draw more on
South-South exchanges, but also on exchanges between
the South and the North that make it explicit that
OECD countries are not immune from the problems of
corruption and violence and that the challenge of
justice and jobs and the grievances they can provoke is
a shared challenge. Last, greater leadership must be
provided to regional institutions where they are well
positioned to convene both high- and middle-income,
non-regional partners. We suggest that the
Peacebuilding Commission's unique composition may
also give it unexploited potential to facilitate part of
that dialogue on timetables for governance
transformation.

Let me conclude on the urgency of the stakes.
The impact of the failure to prevent new and repeated
cycles of violence and instability is considerable. Once
countries have fallen into a cycle of weak institutions
and violence, it is very hard for them to get out. The
economic and social impacts are immense. Civil
conflict costs 30 years of growth in gross domestic
product of the average developing country. No low-
income, fragile or conflict-affected country has yet
achieved a single Millennium Development Goal.
Countries that fall into protracted conflict and fragility
lag 20 percentage points behind in poverty reduction.
And as recent events have shown, deficits in the
institutions that provide security, justice and jobs for
citizens can spur conflict not only in the most fragile
States, but also in countries that were long viewed as
strong and stable.

I would like to close by mentioning again the
partnership between the United Nations and the World
Bank in developing the World Development Report. It
has been substantive, thoughtful, non-territorial and
focused on a shared peacebuilding agenda, and we very
much hope that this will continue in considering the
implications for action of the Report.

