Judge Muse: I would first like to take up the
question raised by the Ambassador of Germany
relating to the 40 cases to be transferred to national
jurisdictions. It is of course too early now to know
exactly how many of those cases will eventually end up
in any particular country, for instance, Rwanda. That is
a question that will have to be addressed by the
Prosecutor after a review of the cases he just referred
to. What we can say now in terms of the Tribunal as a
whole is that the Chambers have not yet been seized
with any requests under rule 11 bis to transfer any case
to any national jurisdiction. That is where we are now.
Only when we know the possibilities explored by the
Office of the Prosecutor, and when that Office makes a
request and the process is started, will we be able to
fully answer that question. Should any such cases end
up in Rwanda, then I certainly would agree that there
will be a need for the international community to assist
and to ensure that there is sufficient infrastructure in
place and resources available to ensure the necessary
guarantees at the domestic level.

I should now like to turn to the issue raised by the
French Ambassador. I agree with the analysis by
President Meron in that regard. Of course, "completion
strategy" is an ambiguous term, because there is the
completion strategy of the Prosecutor, on the one
hand - namely, regarding the number of indictments
to be brought to the Tribunal - and, on the other hand,
there is the completion strategy of the Tribunal as a
whole. The Tribunal as a whole is dependent on the
numbers proposed by the Prosecutor. But each of the
three branches of the Tribunals must analyse, and now
internalize, the significance of the completion strategy.
In other words, the techniques employed will be the
overall responsibility of the presidency, then overall
responsibility within the Coordination Council.
Thirdly, there will be an ongoing internal assessment
within each of the three branches regarding how each is
actually performing and progressing with its
completion strategy. As a short-term measure, we will
certainly involve the new trials committee, which has
already contributed to ensuring a steady flow of cases.
There may be other committees involved as well, but
that is where we are now.

Many representatives asked for a more detailed
completion strategy, and I certainly agree with them.
But it is difficult to provide details at this stage. Only
when we know the exact numbers we are talking about,
after the current revision and review of files, will we be
able to return to the Council. That will be an ongoing
process. There may be a review of the 22 detainees
mentioned by the Prosecutor, as well as of the 16
indictees and the 26 suspects at large. But as soon as
that is clarified - and, again, I think that the words of
the Prosecutor were encouraging - we will come back
to the Council with revised provisions and projections.

If we get the nine ad litem judges, will we fulfil
the task? That question is linked to the previous one. In
life it is impossible to give guarantees, especially when
it comes to international criminal justice. Again, we
will come back to this issue when we have a detailed
strategy. But what we can say is that only with the nine
ad litem judges will it be possible to achieve what we
have to achieve. Without them we will not succeed.
That is certain.

There was a reference to regular exchanges or
meetings between international institutions and courts.
That is an interesting idea, and it has been tested in the
past. For instance, there was a meeting between the
ICTY and the ICTR three years ago in London, which
was followed by a meeting in Dublin two years ago.
There may be other such meetings. The problem is that
when one takes time to exchange Views, then one loses
time for sitting in trials. That is, therefore, a difficult
balancing process. But we are aware of that possibility
and will consider it carefully.

I think that brings me to the end of the questions
raised regarding the overall responsibility of the
Tribunal. Let me simply thank all delegates for their
very interesting and fruitful observations and
comments. They will certainly be taken home to
Arusha and made known to our colleagues. Let me also
say that I noted with pleasure the statement made by
the delegation of Rwanda to the effect that Rwanda
supports our work and that it fully intends to cooperate.

