Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): At the outset, let me
extend a very warm welcome to His Excellency Sheikh
Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani, Prime Minister of
Qatar, and His Excellency Mr. Nabil Elaraby, Secretary-
General of the League of Arab States, and thank them
for sparing their valuable time to brief the Council.

Pakistan enjoys long-standing and close brotherly
relations with all members of the League of Arab
States. That relationship is underpinned by a common
heritage and shared values. We greatly value the role of
regional organizations such as the League of Arab
States in promoting the cause of peace and development.
We also support regional processes leading to the
peaceful resolution of disputes. That is a good example
for the United Nations. We therefore highly appreciate
the efforts of the Qatari Prime Minister and the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States.

By seizing the moment and by deploying the
observer mission, the League of Arab States has indeed
proved that great strides can be made in the resolution
of regional issues through regional mechanisms. We
hope that the efforts of the League will bear fruit
through the return of peace and normalcy to Syria
through a process of dialogue and negotiation and
without any resort to force and coercion.

The security situation in Syria continues to be a
source of serious concern to us all. The reports of
continuing violence and bloodshed cannot and should
not be taken lightly by anyone. We strongly condemn
the use of force against any peaceful protesters. The
killing and injuring of innocent people must stop. We
call on both sides to shun violence, pursue the path of
dialogue and reconciliation, and engage in a results-
oriented and inclusive political process leading to the
peaceful resolution of the problem.

We must be mindful of the fact that whatever we
decide in this Chamber in the coming days will have
long-term implications not only in Syria, but in the
Middle East as a whole. That region can ill afford
further instability. The situation therefore requires a
collective analysis towards obtaining a solution.

We also want to emphasize that while we in the
Security Council are and should remain the upholders
of the principles enshrined in the United Nations
Charter, the discussion must remain in full cognizance
of and respect for the independence, unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Syria. It also should remain
within the framework of Chapter VI of the Charter and
the principles of the pacific settlement of disputes.

We support the Arab League's efforts, including
the deployment of observers. We also commend and
support the services rendered by members of the
observer mission, who are performing their duties to
the best of their abilities despite working in difficult
and sometimes dangerous circumstances.

We take hope for peace from the words of the
Prime Minister of Qatar in his capacity as Chairman of
the Arab Ministerial Committee on Syria when he says
that we are not calling for a military intervention and
that we are not for a regime change either, for that is a
matter that is up to the Syrian people to decide. All
that, in reaffirmation of the sovereignty and integrity of

Syria, was also voiced by Secretary-General Elaraby
and reiterated by the French and British representatives.
I am hopeful that that will be explicitly and adequately
reflected in the draft resolution being brought before
the Council. We hope that other members of the
Council will join us in commending the Arab League.
We also hope that the mission will continue its work.

Let me be absolutely clear. All the grief vented in
the Council might result in fruition only if we swiftly,
with cohesion and consideration, replace mere rhetoric.
Therefore I conclude by saying that, in terms of the
Council's action, we should strive to achieve consensus,
for a unanimous message will always be better and
essential to promote our objectives and peace in Syria.

