Mr. Bukenya (Uganda): I thank Vice President
Biden for organizing and presiding over this high-level
meeting. I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing, as well as Foreign Minister of Iraq
Hoshyar Zebari for his good statement.

The resolutions (resolutions 1956 (2010), 1957
(2010) and 1958 (2010)) that the Security Council has
adopted today mark an important milestone for the
future of Iraq. Uganda is convinced that the future
stability and prosperity of Iraq lie in its Government
and people taking full charge of their destiny. These
resolutions affirm Iraq's readiness to take charge of its
own affairs. Uganda welcomes the progress that Iraq
has achieved in the political, security and economic
spheres in spite of many challenges. That progress
would not have been possible without the extraordinary
courage and resilience of the Iraqi people, supported by
its international partners. The United States has played
a leading role in those efforts.

We commend Iraq's political leaders and people
for overcoming their political differences and reaching
an inclusive power-sharing agreement in November. It
is important that the Prime Minister form a
Government expeditiously. That will facilitate national
cohesion and foster democratic governance, which are
essential for a stable, secure and prosperous Iraq.

The outcomes of today's meeting are a clear
testimony that Iraq's international standing has been
restored to the status it had prior to the adoption of
resolution 661 (1990). Uganda salutes Iraq for the
progress made in putting in place successor
arrangements for the Development Fund for Iraq and
the International Advisory and Monitoring Board,
which are expected to take effect by 31 December. It is
important that the Government work steadfastly to
resolve all outstanding issues during this last extension
period.

With regard to weapons of mass destruction,
Uganda welcomes the progress made by Iraq in
complying with non-proliferation and disarmament
commitments. We encourage Iraq to ratify the
additional protocol to its Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty.

We commend the Government of Iraq for its
commitment to finalizing arrangements to provide
appropriate funding for indemnification under the oil-
for-food programme.

There are still challenges that Iraq will need to
address, with the support of the international
community, in order to consolidate the gains made so
far. They include dealing with the threats posed by
insecurity and terrorist attacks, ensuring the safe return
of refugees and the resettlement of internally displaced
persons and resolving disputed internal boundaries.

It is essential for Iraqi leaders to work together in
addressing the remaining challenges to ensure political
stability, peace and development. We welcome the
improved bilateral and regional relations because we
are convinced that the stability of Iraq is linked to
regional stability. We therefore encourage Iraq to
strengthen cooperation with neighbouring countries
based on a mutual desire to respond to security
concerns and bolster economic cooperation.

The action taken by the Council today highlights
the progress that the Iraqi Government and people are
making in taking responsibility for the stability and
development of their country. Iraq will continue to
require international support. We therefore call upon
development partners and the international community
to align their support with Iraq's priorities and
programmes, particularly in building the capacities of
its national institutions.

In conclusion, Uganda commends the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the staff
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq for
their important work. We thank the delegation of the
United States for spearheading the drafting of the
resolutions and the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2010/27) that we have just adopted.
