Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I welcome the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Lacroix, to the Security
Council and thank him for his detailed briefing on the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1113) on phase
one of the reconfiguration ofthe African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). In
addition, I welcome the encouraging developments
outlined in the report, in particular with regard to the
reduction in the number of clashes and levels of violence

during the reporting period. We believe that phase one
is vital to achieving stability in Darfur.

We welcome the fact that the Government of
the Sudan has accepted the conclusions of the joint
assessment and allocated land for the establishment
of a temporary operating base in G010. Furthermore,
we welcome the efforts of the Sudanese Government
to stabilize Darfur, in particular with regard to the
return of refugees, the collection of weapons and the
national dialogue. We support the national dialogue
process and the efforts of the African Union's High-
level Implementation Panel. We welcome the efforts
of UNAMID, in cooperation with local forces in
Darfur, to facilitate the transition to the post-conflict
peacebuilding phase. We reiterate the importance of
supporting the Sudan in its efforts.

The positive role played by friends of the Sudan
in implementing development projects in Darfur
facilitates the voluntary return of displaced persons
and helps to provide them with a decent life. In that
regard, I reiterate the importance ofreaching a political
solution in Darfur and of ensuring that all stakeholders
participate in a peaceful political process.

It is important to end arms proliferation in Darfur.
I welcome the cooperation between UNAMID and the
Government of the Sudan with regard to the collection
of weapons in certain refugee camps. In addition, I
reiterate the importance of respecting the sovereignty,
unity and independence of the Sudan. 1 note the
attacks perpetrated by militia groups in the Sudan
that destabilize the country and the wider region. We
reiterate our support for the Government of the Sudan
in its efforts to overcome challenges and meet the
demands of the United Nations.

