Mr. Ahsan (Bangladesh): Let me join previous
speakers in thanking Mr. Hans Haekkerup, Special
Representative of the Secretary General, for presenting
the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and for his informative briefing and update
on its important aspects. The presentation was
especially important as he touched upon many issues
before the Kosovo-wide elections, scheduled to be held
on 17 November, and provided details of the post-
election transition scenario.

I will focus briefly on a few points in the
Secretary-General's report and the presentation of
Mr. Haekkerup.

First, concerning the elections, the democratic
process in Kosovo started with the holding of
municipal elections there last year, which saw some
success in achieving the representation of different
communities in the interim institutions. However, the
political engagement of the Kosovo Serbs has remained
a challenge. We look forward to the November
elections for further consolidation of the process. We
are appreciative to the authorities in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, and particularly to President
Kostunica, for encouraging the Kosovo Serb
community to participate fully in the civil registration
for the upcoming elections. A full participation of all
ethnic communities is the only option for a peaceful
future in Kosovo based on the greater tolerance and
mutual accommodation of different ethnic entities.

In parallel with voter registration and bolstering
the security situation, UNMIK has a great
responsibility in engaging different communities in the
electoral process. We welcome UNMIK's efforts in
reaching out to the Kosovo Serbs, particularly those
living outside Kosovo, to inform them of the electoral
system and of the importance of ethnic representation
in the new Assembly and to lobby for their
participation in both registration and elections. Here, I
want to note with satisfaction the fact that 20 per cent
of the representation in the new Assembly will be by
women. The Mission can consider further ways of
showing the Kosovo minority communities what
benefits they can derive from engagement in
community life and the electoral process.

UNMIK has increased its efforts to strengthen
law and order in Kosovo. Strengthening security
measures is particularly important during the pre-
election period, in view of politically motivated
criminal incidents and ethnically targeted violence. We
call on all community leaders in Kosovo, particularly
those from the major ethnic communities, to come out
clearly against any kind of violence. We condemn
recent attacks against members of the international
security presence. This must stop if the international
community is to be helpful in realizing the hopes and
aspirations of the Kosovars.

We support the efforts of UNMIK and KFOR to
improve public security, including through the
confiscation of weapons and the packaging of
legislation to combat violence and to encourage the
return of displaced persons. We call on the Kosovo
Albanian leaders to extend active support to those
efforts.

We encourage further constructive engagement
between UNMIK and authorities in Belgrade.
UNMIK's Belgrade Office has proved to be a valuable
instrument in facilitating and regularizing contacts
between UNMIK and authorities in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. We welcome the important
steps taken by Belgrade in appointing Serbian Deputy
Prime Minister Nebojsa Covic', who briefed the
Council on 17 September, as head of the Joint
Coordination Committee for Kosovo. We believe that
intensification of contacts between UNMIK and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia would pave the way for
better ethnic tolerance and accommodation in Kosovo.

In closing, we would like to say that we endorse
the statement that the Council will adopt at the
conclusion of this meeting.

