Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): I would like to
convey Australia's gratitude to Colombia for convening
this debate on a very important subject.

Over a year has passed since the catastrophic
earthquake that struck Haiti, killing 220,000 of its
citizens and setting back years of nation-building and
development. The earthquake devastated a fragile
economy and destroyed vital infrastructure. At a time
when we are counting fresh losses to the United
Nations family, we can also never forget that the quake
also decimated the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), which is tasked with
stabilization and post-conflict recovery.

Australia would like to reiterate its condolences
to the people of Haiti, not only for the losses they
suffered in January 2010 but also for its aftermath and
continued crises: 2.3 million people displaced, floods,
a near brush with Hurricane Tomas, the outbreak of
cholera and the various challenges posed by an election
in very difficult circumstances.

Despite our geographic distance from those
events, Australia was one of the first to respond, with a
$24 million package of relief efforts, divided between
emergency relief and early recovery and
reconstruction, through the Caribbean Disaster
Emergency Management Agency and the Caribbean
Community. In a broader region-wide development
assistance package, Australia is working with key
partners in the Caribbean and Latin America to address
the challenge of climate change, reduce the risk posed
by disasters, build economic resilience and enhance the
capacity of key institutions.

Twelve months on, I am personally proud to
report that Australia has fully funded our promised
commitments. In addition to the Government's
assistance package - and this statistic is even more
telling, in my view - the Australian public also
donated over $26 million as they watched, half a world
away, Haitians bravely rebuilding their lives and
livelihoods.

Australia is a country that does what it says. We
likewise call on all donors to honour their pledges and
disburse their funds where they are still badly needed.
The United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs recently warned that Haiti's
recovery was far from assured and that, while much
has been accomplished, more than 800,000 people
continue to live in tented camps, more than 1 million
people need emergency access to water and more than
1 million children rely on donor-provided food rations.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his mid-term report on Haiti (S/201l/183*), which
underlines the serious challenges ahead. We endorse
his view that strengthening the rule of law in Haiti will
help to achieve sustainable peace and long-term
development. Australia firmly supports the Secretary-
General's call for the prosecution of all those involved
in crimes against their own people, to show the Haitian
people there can be no impunity. An independent
judiciary and transparent and truly representative
Parliament are necessary elements of good governance,
which will allow the Haitian people to enjoy some of
the same economic, human, social, civil and political
rights as their Caribbean neighbours.

As we are all aware, MINUSTAH's mission is far
from complete. While the relative success of last
month's presidential and legislative elections was a
significant step forward for a country steeped in a
history of political and civil instability, United Nations
troops were needed to restore order in some areas. An
orderly transition to democracy is essential to launch a
new chapter in Haiti's history.

I would also like to welcome the concept paper
submitted by the delegation Colombia as President of
the Security Council on a way forward for Haiti
(S/2011/218, annex). It should catalyse debate on
better coordination of the international community's
efforts, as well as lessons learned, MINUSTAH's
unique mandate and the challenges of rebuilding a
peaceful, sovereign State without perpetuating
dependence on foreign capacities and resources.

One great lesson learned pertains to the
coordination of relief efforts by non-governmental
organizations, regional organizations and donor
countries. In that regard, the United Nations Special
Representative for Haiti has worked tirelessly to
coordinate all actors on the ground. I would also like to
pay tribute to the United Nations Special Envoy for
Haiti, President Bill Clinton, who has coordinated all
the various organizations to elicit funds and to ensure
the notion of building back better, and that that remains
a Haitian-led process.

In our view, Colombia rightly raises questions
about how the international community can ensure that
Haiti does not become reliant on foreign intervention.
In all recovery and capacity-building efforts, the
Interim Haiti Recovery Commission and the Haiti
Reconstruction Fund must remain central to decision-
making. We need to encourage and reinforce Haiti's
ownership of its own reconstruction. The Haitian
Government and people are best suited to charting the
future of their own country.

Haiti does not face unique challenges, but
coupling those challenges with disaster recovery on
such scale is unique. While MINUSTAH was originally
deployed to prevent a civil war, its mandate is now
focused on recovery, rebuilding and unifying a country
that has been rent by social and economic instability. In
that regard, Australia supports Colombia's call for the
maintenance and reinforcement of the special character
that the Security Council has wisely given that
mandate.

Australia welcomes the United Nations continued
work to build the mechanisms to support the rule of
law in Haiti and the Security Council's mission to
reinforce Haiti's peaceful and sustainable recovery.

In conclusion, as the Ambassador of the Bahamas
said just before me, Haiti's success will be our success,
too.

