Sri Lanka warmly congratulates Indonesia on the assumption of the presidency ofthe Security Council forthe month of August, which will undoubtedly beasuccessful tenure considering the extensive diplomatic skills of the Indonesian delegation. The growing complexities and evolving nature of the linkages between terrorism and organized crime, particularly in this digital age, makes this discussion timely and relevant. As observed in the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/754) on addressing this interlinked issue, it is clear that the ability of terrorists to draw on organized crime, whether domestic or transnational, online or offline, can exacerbate the threat posed by terrorism to international peace and security. Although progress has been made in the implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy since 2006, many challenges have been encountered as a result of the changing face of terrorism and violent extremism, due to the avenues created by globalization, in the facilitation of the increased movement of persons and goods and the rapid advancement of technology, giving rise to faster methods of communication and messaging, as well as the transfer of finances. While the phenomena of foreign terrorist fighters and the financing of terrorism are not new, their sharp and visible increase in recent times, with the more effective use of web-based platforms by terrorist entities, challenge the capabilities of Governments to mitigate such activities and successfully protect and secure all those within their borders. In tandem, there continues to be a symbiotic relationship between organized crime and terrorism. Criminal enterprises have always been the source of funds for terrorist activities. The rapid evolution of transnational criminal outfits and international terrorist groups have resulted in the formation of hybrid organizations, which has made them more sustainable and better equipped, posing unprecedented challenges for law enforcement agencies. As a country that suffered for nearly three decades under the brutality of terrorism, we are only too aware of the devastation and destruction that it creates. The terrorist organization Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), which existed in Sri Lanka prior to its military defeat in 2009, had many international networks and linkages to organized crime, which served as a critical, lucrative lifeline for its ability to engage in suicide attacks against civilians, political leaders and opponents and indiscriminate bombing of civilian spaces and critical infrastructure, as well aS wage war against the State through a well-developed ground guerrilla force, complemented by sea capabilities and, although rudimentary, air capabilities. A steady flow of funds was generated through a variety of local and transnational criminal activities, which included the trafficking of humans, drugs, arms and wildlife; human smuggling; forgeries; the extortion of funds from the diaspora and protection money from those living in areas in which the group operated. This was in addition to the funds generated through front businesses owned overseas. The efforts taken by the Sri Lankan Government to curtail these avenues of financing, with the collaboration of friendly countries, though challenging, had a severe impact on the sustenance of the terrorist outfit towards the latter stages of the conflict. Securing the proscription of the LTTE - across 32 countries - contributed immensely to stifling its amassing of funds internationally for the creation of wanton destruction back in Sri Lanka. The listing of a few LTTE front organizations that operated under the guise of charities and development organizations also proved effective in revealing the multifaceted faces of terrorist financing, through organized crime and criminal activity, and challenges facing law enforcement agencies in curtailing the same. These international networks of the LTTE remain intact, even following the military defeat in Sri Lanka, and morphed into other organizations espousing the same violent ideology. Therefore, Sri Lanka strongly believes that legal prohibitions must continue to be enacted in letter and spirit by the international community, rather than by the dictates of their domestic political compulsions, which regrettably have been apparent. This is fundamental to curbing terrorist activity and organized crime, an abhorrent partnership. From these experiences, Sri Lanka underscores the importance of recognizing that transnational organized crime provides a strong support structure to terrorists and directly relates to the financing of terrorism. As such, the country has made significant progress in improving and strengthening the effectiveness of its anti-money-laundering and countering the financing of terrorism regime through the adoption of domestic legislation enabling the implementation of United Nations and Security Council resolutions related to the financing of terrorism. These efforts have resulted in the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) - the global policy setter on anti-money-laundering and countering the financing of terrorism - delisting Sri Lanka from the FATF's compliance document. More also needs to be done to address the roots of radicalization, including real and perceived injustices and grievances among young people. We are seeing increasing radicalization among youth who are most at risk of indoctrination towards violent extremism by terrorist groups and of becoming their pawns. The terrorist attacks of Easter Sunday in April 2019 in Sri Lanka revealed that radicalization leading to violent extremism and devastating terrorist attacks can be perpetrated not only by impressionable vulnerable youth but also by those who are educated and empowered in society. The complexities presented in monitoring preparations for terrorist activity in this new phase of terrorism, as well as tracing their financing, as evidenced by these attacks, have revealed the necessity for law enforcement and intelligence agencies to re-examine their protocols and strengthen capacity and readiness, as well as regional and international cooperation. In order to prevent linkages between prisoners held for terrorism offences and other criminal offences, including that of engaging in the illegal narcotics trade and other underworld activities, there is an urgent need to reform prison structures and prevent their use as a hub for recruitment and platforms for knowledge sharing. In this context, Sri Lanka is currently in the process of restructuring the prison system, as well as training officers to curb this practice, an area where information sharing on best practices could be deemed relevant for the multilateral system to collate and assist. As an island that serves as a maritime transit hub, Sri Lanka is vigilant and committed to ensuring that the country's territory is not used for illegitimate and illegal transactions. In the national policy framework of the Government of Sri Lanka, entitled Vistas of Prosperity and Splendour, dismantling all structures supporting terrorism and extremism, preventing crime and developing a country free from drugs have been placed as top national priorities. Sri Lanka has been continuously associated with United Nations initiatives on counter-terrorism and remains closely engaged with its counter-terrorism architecture. We take this opportunity to thank the Office of Counter-Terrorism for its work. We are confident that the Office will help strengthen the capability of the United Nations system and enhance coordination and coherence to ensure the balanced implementation of the four pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, with the cooperation of Member States in accordance with their requirements. Sri Lanka will continue to collaborate with the Office of Counter-Terrorism and welcomes the focus on capacity-building assistance to Member States. The work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in Sri Lanka must be acknowledged, having engaged robustly with its Global Maritime Crime Programme and assisted in the foundation of its Indian Ocean Forum on Maritime Crime. Sri Lanka, leading the Indian Ocean Rim Association Working Group of Maritime Safety and Security, has been working closely with UNODC ona range of activities connected to mitigating maritime crimes. In this context, UNODC has been cooperating closely with the Sri Lankan Navy since 2016, contributing to activities with regard to strengthening the capacity-building of the Sri Lanka Navy and Coast Guard. Since 2019, the Sri Lankan Navy, with the support of UNODC, has conducted six training courses on visit, board, search and seizure in Sri Lanka for the participants from Indian Ocean littoral States. In the past few years, drug seizures by Sri Lanka and other littoral States in the Indian Ocean have increased, in particular owing to international cooperation. Terrorism and organized crime transcend boundaries and, in order to enhance early detection, there is a vital need for enhanced international cooperation. We call for greater sharing of information, technology, databases and intelligence in combating this global menace. There should also be increased cooperation in building counter-terrorism and anti-criminal response capacities and training for the critical skills required in this area. Sri Lanka notes that, despite broad support on the need to combat the scourge of terrorism, the inability to reach an agreement on the definition of the term "terrorism" has remained an obstacle to concluding a comprehensive convention on international terrorism. Sri Lanka underscores the need for such a legal framework to strengthen our collective efforts to destroy terrrorists' safe havens, financial flows and support networks. As Chair of the Working Group on measures to eliminate international terrorism, Sri Lanka looks forward to a constructive dialogue with all States and calls for commitment and resolve to bring those negotiations to a successful conclusion. Sri Lanka condemns in the strongest possible terms all acts of terrorism, irrespective of their motivation, as one of the most serious threats to peace and security. It is imperative to combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations by all means. We also condemn in the strongest possible terms the incitement to commit terrorist acts, and we repudiate attempts to justify or glorify such acts. Asacountry that is party to 13 core terrorism and counter-terrorism conventions, as well as the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, Sri Lanka remains an active participant in global efforts to counter the odious duo of terrorism and organized crime and will continue to support the work of the General Assembly and the Security Council in coordinating efforts and establishing legal norms to that end.
