Mr. Popolizio Bardales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Madam President, for convening this
briefing, as well as Ms. Altalli and Mr. Pedersen
for their comprehensive briefings this morning. We
commend Mr. Pedersenfor his hard work andprudence
in seeking to bring the parties closer to an inclusive
political solution. The impact of the Syrian conflict
on its population and on regional stability leads us to
reaffirm the urgentneed to makeprogress in theprocess
that the United Nations has been supporting. The
Geneva communique (5/2012/522, annex) and resolution
2254 (2015) must continue to guide our efforts.

We are therefore concerned about the developments
described this morning by the Special Envoy, which
point to the limited progress made in the second round
of the work of the Constitutional Committee, which is
attributable to an apparent lack of willingness on the
part of the Syrian Government. This situation is not in
keeping with the high expectations of the international
community with respect to the work of the Committee,
which is expected to draft a new Constitution that
will lay the political and institutional foundations for
sustainable peace.

We note the sense of urgency to record tangible
results on this issue because of the negative impact on
the credibility of the process if there are further delays
in such basic understandings as the finalization of the
Committee's agenda and its work plans. We encourage
the parties, especially the Syrian authorities, to show
genuine flexibility and commitment, with a view to
finding points of convergence that will lead to a better
climate of understanding. We note the central role of
the Special Envoy in this regard, as facilitator and
consensus builder, and underline the broad support that
the international community should therefore give him.

We believe it is essential that, in addition to the
efforts made within the Constitutional Committee, we
promote the adoption of confidence-building measures
that will contribute to a more favourable environment
for Syrian reconciliation. In particular, we expect
more substantive developments in the identification of
missing persons, the handing over of mortal remains,
and the release of detainees and missing persons.
Another great challenge is to address the serious
situation that millions of refugees and internally
displaced persons are facing, which requires not only
the availability of financial resources, but primarily
political will, to ensure their safe and dignified return
within internationally accepted parameters.

We also stress the need to avoid an escalation of the
conflict that would undermine the chances of reaching
a political settlement. The prospects for achieving
sustainable peace in Syria, such as the aforementioned
Constitutional Committee, depend to a large extent on
preventing Idlib from figuring in the playing out of a
new humanitarian tragedy.

We reaffirm Peru's full commitment to the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Syria. In
this regard, any de-escalation or other arrangements, as
well as the presence of foreign forces, must always be
of a provisional nature and must not lead to a de facto
partition of the country.

As some of my colleagues before me have done,
we assume that this is probably the last meeting of the
month under the presidency of the United States and
the conclusion of our participation in the Security
Council. In this context, I would like to congratulate
you, Madam President, and your entire team for your
outstanding performance in conducting our work in
December. I also express our best wishes for success to
the delegation of Viet Nam in its upcoming presidency
in January, as well as to the newly elected members
who will join the Council in 2020 - Estonia, the
Niger, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
Peru wishes to thank all the members of the Security
Council and the Secretariat for their ongoing support,
cooperation and friendship during these two intense
years in our shared efforts aimed at maintaining
international peace and security. It has been a privilege
for Peru to participate in the Security Council.

