A year and a half after the peaceful transfer of power and the election of President Tshilombo Tshisekedi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is experiencing a special situation that gives rise to both hope and concern if concrete and permanent acts of change do not support the political rhetoric that is being used nationally and internationally. Thanks to the new regime that came to power as a result of the elections of 30 December 2018, the public space has been opened up to multiple political parties and groupings, political exiles have returned home, several political prisoners have been released, previously closed private media have been reopened, and dialogue with international actors has resumed. However, nowadays, the practices of the former political regime tending to give the green light only to public demonstrations that supported the policies of the President of the Republic characterize the behaviour of the security forces. At the security level, in the territory under Government control, the security and defence forces are facing a unity-of-command problem, dysfunction, a lack of resources and ineffectiveness in defending territorial integrity, which is currently being threatened by incursions on Congolese soil by armies from neighbouring countries, but also, and above all, ineffectiveness in securing people and their property. In Ituri, for example, the activism of the armed group known as the Coalition des democrates congolais, which has involved the commission of serious atrocities against the local population, constitutes a serious threat to peace and security in that region. In this fragile context, the human rights situation has been affected by the commission of frequent human rights violations, the impunity of most of the perpetrators of these acts, and the difficulties in implementing reforms urgently needed to improve the situation and establish the rule of law in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. For example, illegal arrests and detentions, torture and inhumane and degrading treatment by law enforcement and security services, threats, attacks and arrests of human rights defenders, of which there have been approximately 10 since the state of emergency was imposed as a result of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, as well as sexual violence in the special circumstances resulting therefrom, have been observed in several parts of the country in the absence of effective measures for their cessation and the prosecution of their perpetrators. The fight against impunity and corruption, which is a priority in the five-year programme of President Tshilombo Tshisekedi's term, is hampered by the lack of a clear and coherent policy in this area. Furthermore, the economic and social rights of populations, which were already difficult to ensure, have been undermined by COVID-19 since the State budget was reduced, together with the massive violation of people's right to work and have access to health and education. Continuing its mission in the framework of the implementation of the MONUSCO mandate adopted in December 2019 by the Security Council, the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office (UNJHRO), in association with MONUSCO, monitors human rights violations committed throughout the country, reinforces the promotion and protection work capacities of its partners, including both State and civil society entities, contributes to the protection of human rights defenders, monitors and advises on actions to fight impunity and to implement necessary reforms, and conducts advocacy with Congolese decision-makers and partners in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Although limited by shortages of resources and no longer located throughout the country since the closure of MONUSCO offices in seven cities in the Democratic Republic, the work of UNJHRO-MONUSCO is supported and assisted by civil society organizations that regularly provide it with information on human rights violations, participate in data consolidation in this field and present various training courses through the Office's branches. Non-governmental organizations receive support from UNJHRO-MONUSCO in their legal actions against the perpetrators of human rights violations and in their advocacy at various levels, as well as when, in the course of their work, their members are threatened or prosecuted by local authorities. The COVID-19 pandemic in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has affected the work of non-governmental organizations focused on human rights as a result of reduced financial, human and material resources and of difficulties in travel and communication. Consequently, the work of information-gathering, training and advocacy has also been reduced. The UNJHRO-MONUSCO supports non-governmental organizations in the sharing of means of communication and the continuity of advocacy by facilitating logistical access, the interface with and the transmission of their concerns to the Congolese authorities and other partners in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly in the area of raising the awareness of populations in relation to their fundamental human rights in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. With respect to the various activities of UNJHRO-MONUSCO, I and my organization have been able to make useful and relevant contributions. For example, in the mapping report published by the United Nations, Groupe LOTUS is mentioned several times. With regard to the protection of human rights defenders, not only have I myself benefited more than once from the assistance of the human rights, political affairs and military components of MONUSCO for my security through relocation to MONUSCO premises at times when, owing to my commitment to human rights, serious threats to my life were being made. The logistical and technical support provided by MONUSCO for my participation in national and international meetings on peace and human rights, as well as exchanges on analyses relating to national political issues, are reciprocal enrichments that have contributed not only to strengthening of the capacity of Congolese non-governmental organizations but also to the impact MONUSCO's actions has had on Congolese society in general. In addition, it is important to highlight the work of Congolese civil society organizations as the interface between MONUSCO and the Congolese people, as well as in raising awareness about MONUSCO's activities among local communities and young people in schools and universities in the local languages. The different activities of the UNJHRO-MONUSCO in the field of human rights have enabled the Congolese people to understand the cross-cutting nature of human rights within United Nations peace missions as well as the global and integrated approach to peacebuilding in a post-conflict society such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In the light of all this, I think it would be useful to draw the attention of Council members to the importance of strengthening political dialogue with the authorities at the national and local levels, of protecting civilians and of providing resources for UNJHRO-MONUSCO's activities. Accordingly, I would make the following recommendations to improve MONUSCO's effectiveness in general. Support must be provided for the good offices mission of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The presence and resources of UNJHRO-MONUSCO must be strengthened throughout the country, including in areas where MONUSCO offices have been closed. We should support the professionalization and accountability of the security sector - the army and the police being a priority - including through training on respect for human rights and the implementation of the United Nations Human Rights Due Diligence Policy in its efforts to filter out individuals who impede security sector reform or commit human rights violations. We must continue to support the Congolese authorities in protecting civilians through effective means that are adapted to the situation. Political affairs units, including Radio Okapi, should be set up and strengthened in localities where MONUSCO offices have been closed. The fight against impunity and corruption must be supported in accordance with fair trial standards. We need to encourage efforts to ensure justice and establish the truth for the victims of serious human rights violations. We must support the organization of local elections and assist the reform of institutions established to support democracy, such as the Independent National Electoral Commission and the National Human Rights Commission. We need to support Congolese civil society organizations and engage and consult with civil society in MONUSCO assessment process and in considering exit strategies for the Mission, ensuring that in the process undertaken for MONUSCO's departure from the country an exit strategy based on objective criteria or benchmarks relating to the context of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is established.
