Mr. Nitzan (Israel): Today, representatives from
a variety of Arab and other countries have used this
forum to launch a range of baseless accusations against
my country, referring to our eternal capital Jerusalem.
It is truly absurd to hear some of the world's most
oppressive tyrannies lecture the Middle East's only true
democracy about human rights and religious rights. One
has to wonder what rights those representatives might
be referring to. Perhaps they mean religious rights like
the Saudi policy of executing individuals who import
Christian literature, or perhaps they are referring to the
Saudi policy of banning non-Muslims from entering
entire cities.

In his remarks earlier, the Lebanese representative
accused Israel of violating resolution 1701 (2006). In
fact, in the past two months, violation of the Blue Line
and resolution 1701 (2006) from the Lebanese side have
increased daily. Instead of standing guard, the Lebanese
Armed Forces are standing by and permitting violations
of resolution 1701 (2006) and the Blue Line by armed
Hizbullah activists and armed Lebanese citizens.

Both sides - and that includes Lebanon - must
respect resolution 1701 (2006). Lebanon's words are not
enough. Perhaps Lebanon should consider toning down
its rhetoric and turning up the heat on Hizbullah. As we
speak, Hizbullah has built an arsenal of 60,000 rockets
in populated areas south of the Litani River in Lebanon.
By operating within civilian populations and directing
a tax against the civilian population in Israel, Hizbullah
and Lebanon are committing a double war crime.

In light of those and other human rights abuses, it
takes a great deal ofaudacity on the part ofthe Lebanese
representative to sit in the Chamber and demonize
the only democracy that respects human rights in the
Middle East. But I must say I was touched to hear
the representative of Lebanon show such an interest
in Palestinian rights, although I would suggest that,
instead of issuing empty words, his Government should
take a look at the Palestinian refugee camps throughout
Lebanon where Palestinians are kept in some of the
worst conditions in the region. They are subjected to
violence, discrimination, economic oppression and
marginalization from every sector of society.

I would like to also respond to certain other States
in our vicinity that spoke against Israel earlier today. To
begin with, there is no blockade in Gaza. All goods and
humanitarian aid - let me repeat that, all humanitarian
aid - enters Gaza from Israel. It does not take an expert
in geography to know that Gaza has an additional entry
point.

Furthermore, I wish I could be shocked by the
accusations hurled by the Syrian representative earlier.
But nothing can be more shocking than the crimes that
Syria has perpetrated, first and foremost the murder of
120,000 men, women and children; secondly, the use
of chemical weapons against innocent civilians; and
thirdly, the displacement of millions of people. The
Syrian representative is using the oldest trick in the
book. By attacking Israel, he is creating a smokescreen
to distract from the atrocities being perpetrated in
Syria by his Government. That trick has not worked in
the past, and it is not working now.

Lastly, we have heard many representatives from
the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) group who have
criticized Israel today. I would like to point out to
those same representatives that they choose to ignore
the crimes of the State that holds the chairmanship of
NAM. today, Iran, at their own peril. Iran is actively
supporting a murderous regime in Damascus and
responsible, at the same time, for killing thousands of
Syrians, including Palestinian refugees. And it is that
country that is leading all the attacks against Israel in
this Chamber. The rhetorical hypocrisy of NAM. must
now cease.

