Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We thank the
delegation of the Russian Federation for organizing
this important meeting on post-conflict peacebuilding.
My delegation is pleased that the Security Council
extended an invitation to the Chairman of the
Organizational Committee of the General Assembly,
the President of the Economic and Social Council, the
President of the Peacebuilding Commission and other
important actors that are participating in this debate
today. We also appreciate the fact that the Security
Council has opened this meeting to other States
Members of the United Nations as a way of
demonstrating that peacebuilding is a responsibility for
all.

Last year, both the General Assembly and the
Security Council established the Peacebuilding
Commission. Now that the Commission is soon to be a
year old, it is time for each organ - the General
Assembly and the Security Council - according to its
respective mandate, to reflect further on the purpose
and mission of the Peacebuilding Commission.

At present, my delegation is concerned that the
Commission means different things to different people.
To quote briefly the ambassador of Angola and Chair
of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission,

"Let us all agree that our theoretical differences
in New York are meaningless to those who are
directly suffering from the consequences of
conflict on the ground. What matters for them are
concrete actions and not just eloquent
statements."

For example, it is easier to explain that the
Peacebuilding Commission is not a donor agency, since
it cannot have the resources of the United Nations
Development Programme, the World Bank or even the
International Monetary Fund. Also, the Commission
cannot simply meet in New York to discuss far-away
countries that are struggling to emerge from conflict.
What the Peacebuilding Commission is, and should be,
is more complicated and difficult to explain.

According to the founding resolutions passed by
both the Security Council and the General Assembly,
the Peacebuilding Commission has three main
purposes. The first is to bring together all relevant
actors to marshal resources and to advise on and
propose integrated strategies for post-conflict
peacebuilding and recovery. Its second purpose is to
focus attention on the reconstruction and institution-
building efforts necessary for recovery from conflict
and to support the development of integrated strategies
in order to lay the foundation for sustainable
development. The third purpose is to provide
recommendations and information to improve the
coordination of all relevant actors within and without
the United Nations, to develop best practices, to help to
ensure predictable financing for early recovery
activities and to extend the period of attention given by
the international community to post-conflict recovery.

Certainly, the aims and purposes of the
Peacebuilding Commission are phrased in language
that is vague. What is clear, however, is that the
Commission has to make its impact on the ground,
which means that it needs to embrace strategies for
post-conflict recovery that enjoy the confidence of the
countries concerned. Without country ownership, the
Commission is likely to be regarded as a structure that
imposes solutions that may be unacceptable to the
countries that are supposed to benefit from its expertise
and advice.

The Peacebuilding Commission has to be
knowledgeable about the actors on the ground that are
promoting post-conflict recovery, since it is in the best
position to enhance coordination and cooperation
among various stakeholders. The Commission can
bring together the United Nations agencies, the donors,
civil society and the Governments in a common
purpose of building peace and thereby fill the gap that
is always present when various organizations and
agencies are trying their best to achieve the same goal
from different perspectives and mandates. In this way,
the Commission may be able to identify a niche for
itself.
We welcome the recognition by the Security
Council of the link between peace and development,
which is reflected in the integrated approach to
peacekeeping. In response, the civilian components of
peacekeeping operations are structured under a
development pillar and a security pillar. Peacekeeping
is an integral part of peacebuilding, and therefore it is
important that peacekeeping operations create an
enabling environment for those involved in
peacebuilding efforts, including the promotion of
human rights, so that their efforts could be integrated
from the point of the deployment of a mission. This
integrated manner is already reflected in the Council
mandates for recent complex missions such as the
United Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti, the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire,
and others.

The Security Council could seek advice from the
Peacebuilding Commission before peacekeeping
operations are deployed and after the Council has
decided on mandates, so as to ensure greater cohesion
between the United Nations peacekeeping operations
and other actors involved in peacebuilding. Before
scaling down the activities of peacekeeping operations
in a country emerging from conflict, the Security
Council could also consult with the Commission, so
that the transition is smooth and everything is in place
when the peacekeepers leave.

The holding of elections has often been
considered as a benchmark for declaring that a country
has emerged from conflict and is ready for the next
stage of peacebuilding. Yet there have been occasions
when the donors, including the Bretton Woods
institutions, have needed more assurance beyond the
holding of elections, no matter how free and fair those
elections may be. I pause here again to quote the
President of the Economic and Social Council, who put
it much better in his statement by calling this tactic "a
wait-and-see approach". While the holding of elections
is an important indicator of future stability, it may not
indicate that a country emerging from conflict is
beyond a relapse to its past.

A more comprehensive indicator of stability may
be a combination of the holding of democratic
elections, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR), reconstruction and security sector
reform. Yet in some countries emerging from conflict,
the World Bank and the United Nations Development
Programme have been slow in funding or
implementing DDR activities because of large unpaid
debts owed to them - usually by the previous regime
or Government. The Peacebuilding Commission could
provide a forum through which problems relating to the
slow pace of funding peacebuilding activities could be
resolved quickly.

The quick injection of resources into a country
emerging from conflict is often the glue that keeps that
country from falling apart once again. Here, I would
like to refer to the statement made earlier by the
Representative of Sierra Leone, who said simply that
the mandate of the Peacebuilding Commission reflects
a sense of urgency. For that reason, we believe that the
donor community needs to be flexible and to remain
engaged, particularly in the early post-conflict stages.

The Peacebuilding Fund was created for the
specific purpose of assisting in the facilitation of
peacebuilding activities. The Fund was understood to
be a catalyst for attracting much-needed resources -
particularly at a time when there may be little hope of
success towards recovery. It is for that reason that we
hope that the role of the Peacebuilding Fund will be
clearly defined. It would be unfortunate if, because of
the Peacebuilding Fund, the Peacebuilding
Commission were to be mistaken for a donor agency.

Finally, there are fundamental practices that the
Commission should follow if it is to become
successful. One of these is ensuring that countries
emerging from conflict have full ownership of the
building of the peace for the benefit of their people.
Another is to make certain that the Peacebuilding
Commission develops rules of procedure that are
permanent and predictable. It should be clear to
everyone what the Commission is about and what it
can and cannot do. Lastly, the Peacebuilding
Commission will soon be requested to consider taking
on other countries, beyond Sierra Leone and Burundi.
We hope that such requests will be considered in the
light of the experience gained in assisting the first two
countries on the Commission's agenda.

The Peacebuilding Commission is very important
for the lives of people in countries that are emerging
from conflict. It needs to be a beacon of hope and
promise. Its impact must be felt on the ground. In other
words, the Commission should soon meet in Freetown
or Bujumbura. New York meetings alone are not going
to make a great difference in the lives of people in
Freetown and Bujumbura, who are supposed to be the
beneficiaries of the Peacebuilding Commission.

