The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as Permanent
Representative of Mexico.

I thank Mr. He'di Annabi, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Haiti, for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/129). My
delegation wishes to express its appreciation for his
commendable work as head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and to
thank him for his very valuable observations today.

We welcome the presence of our colleague
Ambassador Leo Merores, Permanent Representative
of Haiti. In addition, I welcome the representatives of
international institutions, bodies and agencies of the
system, whose work is extremely important for Haiti's
present and future: the Economic and Social Council,
the Organization of American States, the United
Nations Development Programme, the World Food
Programme, the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and the Inter-American Development
Bank, whose representatives are joining us today.

For my country, this debate is particularly
important, as it reflects the Security Council's clear
commitment to the political stability, reconstruction
and development of Haiti. That country is a clear
example of the vital comprehensive attention that
should be given to many of the crisis situations on our
agenda, which go beyond the strict notion of
maintaining international peace and security. Given the
unfavourable global environment, they are crisis
situations to which we must become accustomed.

Mexico welcomes the international community's
increasing attention to the situation in Haiti. That was
demonstrated by the recent visits of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and the Security Council mission to
renew the Organization's commitment to and support
for the stability of the country. We are grateful for the
support received on that occasion from Haitian
authorities and institutions and from Haitian society in
general.

We hope that this debate will truly help to
promote greater interest and commitment on the part of
the international community at the Washington donor
conference to be held on 14 April, which will be a
crucial event for the country's future.

Mexico welcomes the progress made in Haiti in
such areas as the political-electoral sphere, institutional
strengthening, security, the rule of law and human
rights. Nevertheless, we acknowledge that that
progress is still fragile and that its sustainability
depends largely on progress regarding the socio-
economic situation of the Haitian people.

Like other delegations, we urge the Government
and the society of Haiti to make every effort to ensure
that the forthcoming electoral process to fill vacant
Senate seats, to be carried out on 19 April, will be a
democratic, participatory and inclusive exercise. The
assistance of MINUSTAH will be decisive in attaining
that objective. To support the holding of those
elections, my country recently delivered to Haiti's
Provisional Electoral Council electoral material for
organizing and developing the elections - ballot
boxes, booths and office furniture - which will be
distributed at the voting centres established in the 17
regional departments.
Mexico believes that a priority task for
MINUSTAH is to train the Haitian National Police.
That is a crucial factor if we are to foster an
atmosphere of security for the country's population and
guarantee stability throughout the national territory.
That is why Mexico welcomes the fact that such
training is in keeping with the objectives set by the
Mission. Likewise, my country is pleased to have been
able to contribute to the strengthening of the Haitian
Police through anti-kidnapping training programmes.

Haiti's economic and social situation requires the
cooperation of the international community as never
before. The efforts made to date, both bilaterally and
by the donor community through various multilateral
forums, have fallen short in contributing to a long-term
solution to the problems related to the country's growth
and social development.

Therefore, it is urgent that a new alliance be
forged between Haiti and the international community.
The new arrangement must be based on mutual
commitments. On the one hand, national institutions
must guarantee to the Haitian people access to basic
services, to the rule of law and to democratic
governance; on the other, the international community
must respond more decisively, both in terms of
emergency and humanitarian aid and in terms of
cooperation, to meet the enormous needs of the Haitian
people.

The Government of Mexico will, to the best of its
abilities, decisively join in efforts to help strengthen
the health, energy, security, education and agriculture
sectors. In addition, we will enhance our humanitarian
aid programmes by dispatching medicine and food. I
am pleased to announce the Government of Mexico's
decision to create the Mexico-Haiti Fund in order to
resolve the implementation of bilateral technical
cooperation and humanitarian aid projects, which we
will explain in detail at the donor conference to be held
in Washington on 14 April.

Finally, I should like to acknowledge the
countries - many of which are represented here
today - that have actively contributed to the well-
being of the Haitian people. I appeal to the
international community to continue to support peace,
security and development in Haiti.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on Ms. Sylvie Lucas, Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg, who will speak in her
capacity as President of the Economic and Social
Council.

