Mr. Cohen (United States of America): The
United States would like to thank France, the
penholder, and all our Council colleagues for their
collaboration in renewing one of the world's largest
peacekeeping missions.

As Mali prepares for presidential elections in a
few short weeks, the people of Mali find themselves
at another significant crossroads. We have sought in
resolution 2423 (2018) to find the best way to frame the
role of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in Mali's
present and future. Peacekeeping missions are not
indefinite, nor should they be. This one, founded in
2013, which we have now renewed for another year,
will not be in Mali forever. It is there to do one thing
above all - to support the implementation of the 2015
Algiers Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali as a way to achieve durable and lasting political
solutions there.

The Mission cannot achieve that alone. For years,
various parties have stalled that process while the world
has waited and the security situation has deteriorated.
That is why this year's resolution makes clear to the
parties that without significant progress on their part,
we will be forced to look at options to overhaul the
Mission. We agree that there has been some progress in
implementing the accord over the past few months, but
we should be much closer to full implementation, and
we must see progress now. For the Council and Mali's
many friends, who have made a significant financial
and strategic investment in the country, the resolution
makes it clear that we can accept no further delay.

With the resolution, we have also streamlined the
mandate, emphasized the primacy of the Mission's
political engagement, and stressed the importance of
outreach and engagement for the protection of civilians.
We have called on the Mission to develop better strategic
messaging so that Malians understand that MINUSMA
is there to bring peace and stability and to work with
others in the development, security and political sectors
to help Mali succeed.

Many Malians, and MINUSMA's peacekeepers,
face life-and-death realities every day, contending with
terrorist attacks, escalating intercommunal violence
and - increasingly - human rights violations and
abuses by Mali's security forces. The rising number
of extrajudicial killings and mass graves in places like
Boulikessi, Diourra, Koumaga, Nantaka and Menaka
must be reversed. Human rights violations and abuses
by security forces only serve to fuel violence, instability
and recruitment to terrorist organizations. In the
resolution, the Council is united in declaring that respect
for human rights and accountability are not optional.
Violations by security forces have consequences.
I would like to note that in the twenty-second
preambular paragraph and in paragraph 61, the
resolution includes the words "in matters that are
within its jurisdiction" in reference to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The United States interprets
those words to mean in matters that are within the
ICC's jurisdiction under international law. We note that
Mali is a State party to the Rome Statute, has consented
to ICC jurisdiction and has self-referred its situation to
the ICC, pursuant to article 14 of the Rome Statute. As
we have stated previously, the United States respects
the decisions of those nations that have chosen to join
the ICC, and in turn we expect that our decision not
to join and not to place our citizens under the Court's
jurisdiction will also be respected.

We look forward to successful elections, to the next
President's full commitment to the peace accord, and to
the parties' swift and significant progress towards its
implementation. Their collective effort is the only way
to achieve the political solutions that the people of Mali
deserve on their way to a brighter future.

