Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's important open debate. We also
thank the Secretary-General and the other briefers for
their comments.

Considered against the historical injustices
of colonialism, apartheid and other obstacles to
development, the progress in Africa has been no
small feat. By establishing democracy, rule of law and
institutions that serve citizens, a number of African
countries have fared well. Where political dialogue,
reconciliation and coexistence have been embraced,
gradual stability has led to strong economic progress.
Indeed, as in other parts of the world, Africa is not
alone in dealing with conflicts. But just as in other
situations, it is paramount that parties be supported
fully in resolving their disputes peacefully. It is also
Vital that the United Nations and other partners assist
affected countries effectively in their capacity-building
and broader peacebuilding, in line with their nationally
identified priorities. The national ownership of their
peacebuilding and development is crucial.

As a country that has itself navigated its path from
autocracy and instability to democracy, rule of law,
equitable development, harmony and a vibrant and
resilient economy, Indonesia knows well the imperative
of peacemaking and a fully owned national undertaking
for sustainable peace and development. Indonesia is
heartened that Africa stands resolutely for honouring
the desires and aspirations of African people. Many
courageous African leaders are working diligently
to bring peace and prosperity and to end discord and
poverty. They tireless in their fight against disease,
hunger, poor governance, corruption and extremism
and to hasten their citizens' enjoyment of the rewards
of democracy.

We are also pleased that, just as in our own region
of South-East Asia, where the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations plays a critical rote, the African Union
(AU) has been a strong force for dialogue, peaceful
conflict resolution and cordial relations among African
countries. The African leaders' declaration to achieve a
conflict-free Africa - a key pillar of the visionary AU
Agenda 2063 - is commendable. Indonesia supports
the five thematic priorities of the new AU Peace and
Security Architecture Roadmap 2016-2020. We also
congratulate African Governments on the outcome of
the twenty-seventh AU Summit. The operationalization
of the Peace Fund, which also fulfils Africa's
commitment to finance 25 per cent of the cost of AU
peace support operations, is yet another concrete sign of
Africa's determination to build embrace peacebuilding.
The United Nations and the international community
must also robustly play their roles to further assist
African countries and the AU in ushering in peace and
well-being.

Since the convening of the Asian-African
Conference in Bandung more than six decades ago,
Indonesia has attached high importance to Africa. At
the Asian-African Summit in Indonesia last year, the
Asian and African leaders, reiterating the unshakable
historic bond between the two continents, formulated
important, comprehensive steps to bolster Africa in
achieving its aims.

Indonesia's support to African countries will
always be there. Our bilateral cooperation and training
programmes for civilian capacity-building and other
fields will expand further. Our National Peacekeeping
Centre provides training in multidimensional
peacekeeping and peacebuilding to personnel from
a number of African countries and will continue
to do so. Currently, 1,537 Indonesian troops and
police are participating in eight United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa: the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the United Nations Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan, the United Nations Mission in Liberia,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
and the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara.

My delegation hopes that the intergovernmental
momentum generated in the wake of the review of
United Nations peace operations and peacebuilding and
the global study of resolution 1325 (2000) will also be
utilized to intensify efforts in prevention, mediation,
finding credible political solutions and deepening
partnerships with the AU and its mechanisms.Following
the adoption of resolution 2282 (2016), on the review
of the peacebuilding architecture, we look forward
to a more productive partnership of the Security
Council with the Peacebuilding Commission and
other relevant United Nations and non-United Nations
entities to advance more effective peacebuilding in
Africa. It is also our expectation that the Peacebuilding
Commission will, by learning from its previous work
and optimally using all provisions of the new and past
resolutions, enable more impactful peacebuilding in
African countries.

Finally, Indonesia would like to underscore the
need for a comprehensive approach that incorporates
peace and security, development, and human rights to
address the root causes of conflicts. The United Nations
system must see to it that these three concerns do not
exist in unbridgeable silos and that its response is
integrated, sustained and in accordance with the needs
of the affected peoples.

