Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): With
the growing responsibilities of United Nations
peacekeeping operations in increasingly challenging
environments today, the widely endorsed Action for
Peacekeeping initiative recognizes the critical need
to rethink the way mission mandates are crafted and
implemented. Deploying better-trained and better-
equipped personnel to the field is an important way of
coping with these mounting challenges. In this regard,
today's open debate on enhancing the capabilities of
peacekeeping operations is timely, and I would like to
commend Indonesia for its leadership in moving this
important issue forward.

Today, I wish to make four points on training and
capacity-building. First, to deliver customized quality
training, training programmes should be designed on
the basis of a thorough and in-depth analysis of both
the mandate and local context where the mission is
operating. The analysis could include the host country's
priorities; threats to the safety of peacekeepers;
overall capability of the mission, especially the gaps;
composition and capacity of troop-contributing
countries (TCCs); and the command and control of the
mission, to name just a few elements.

To this end, it is critical to strengthen the capacity
of the Secretariat for data collection and analysis, as
well as planning and review. The Security Council
can also engage with relevant stakeholders, including
TCCs, missions and host Governments for this purpose.
In this regard, we welcome the Secretariat's efforts
aimed at developing an integrated performance-policy
framework and comprehensive performance-assessment
system in accordance with resolution 2436 (2018).
Better assessment of whole-of-mission performance
and capabilities would help address capability gaps,
propose corrective actions and direct resources where
most needed.

Secondly, the Secretariat and Member States
should ensure that all personnel - both civilian and
military - are properly trained and equipped. Some
TCCs may have too-limited resources to adequately
train and equip their peacekeepers. It is our collective
responsibility to provide them with the necessary
support in terms of training and capabilities, while
holding them accountable to proper conduct and
delivery of mandates. In this regard, we welcome the
efforts of the Secretariat and Member States to provide
the relevant support to TCCs through innovative
approaches, including triangular partnerships and light
coordination mechanisms.

With more than 600 peacekeepers currently
deployed in South Sudan and Lebanon, the Republic
of Korea has been consistent in its efforts to properly
train and equip its peacekeepers. And at the last
Peacekeeping Ministerial, we pledged to host five
United Nations training courses for other interested
TCCs and provide all-terrain, mine-resistant vehicles
to support peacekeeping operations in Africa. This
year, we will also host a senior mission leaders course
to train prospective leaders.

Thirdly, peacekeepers should be better trained
for engaging with the local community, and training
guidelines should be produced for this purpose. Long
guided by the conviction that genuine peace stems
from the minds of people, Korean peacekeepers have
been working hard to win the hearts and minds of local
people. Such efforts have helped deliver on mandates,
while enhancing their own security. Many of today's
conflicts escalate from local disputes over land,
resources and authority over a district, and community
engagement would help to address these local conflict
dynamics. In this regard, mission personnel should
be encouraged to possess in-depth knowledge of
host societies, cultures and institutions, as well as a
command of local languages. This resonates with the
strong call of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations for a shift towards a people-centred
approach for more effective peace operations.

Finally, building the capacity of the host country's
security sector is as important as - or even more
important than - the training and capacity-building of
United Nations peacekeepers. It would help accelerate
the exit strategy of the mission, while preventing
relapse into conflict after its withdrawal.

Training and capacity-building are only a part of the
puzzle to achieve safer and stronger peace operations.
As set out in the Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
they need to be looked together with other issues in a
holistic manner. It is for this reason that we welcome
the initiative of the Secretariat to create a web-tracking
tool to monitor the progress of the implementation of
the initiative. The Republic of Korea, together with
Ethiopia and Norway, as chairs of the Group of Friends
of Peace Operations, will continue to support the
Secretariat's efforts to translate the commitments of
Member States pursuant to the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative into concrete actions.

In closing, I would like to assure the Security
Council that, as the tenth largest financial contributor
to the United Nations peacekeeping budget and the
next host of the Peacekeeping Ministerial, the Republic
of Korea remains committed to strengthening the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.

