Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (Spoke in Arabic): I thank the Lithuanian presidency for
convening today's important meeting. It is my pleasure
to deliver a statement today on behalf of my country,
the Syrian Arab Republic.

As I am addressing the Security Council today,
the Qatari satellite television channel Al-Jazeera is
broadcasting an interview with a terrorist called Abu
Muhammad Al-Julani, who is the leader of the terrorist
so-called Al-Nusra Front, which is an organization on
the Security Council's Al-Qaida sanctions list. That
interview is designed to incite terrorism and threaten
the Government and the people of Syria.

As the Council well knows, such an interview is
a flagrant violation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council on terrorism, in particular resolution
1624 (2005), which prohibits incitement to terrorism.
It is clear that the Qatari regime is trying, through
such an interview with the commander of a terrorist
organization on a Security Council sanctions list, to
whitewash the image of the Al-Nusra Front, just as the
mafia launders dirty money, by portraying it as the
moderate opposition. It needs to be known that, in his
interview on the Qatari satellite television channel, this
terrorist, Al-Julani, directed various threats against a
number of States Members of the United Nations.

The Syrian Government has always dealt with
the media in all openness. From the very first weeks
of what is called a crisis, it enacted a new law on
media in a reform effort that aims at enhancing the
freedom and transparency of the work of the media. In
cooperation with the former Joint Special Envoy of the
United Nations and the League of Arab States on the
Syrian crisis, Mr. Kofi Annan, the Syrian Government
committed to implementing his six-point peace plan,
including point 5, relating to the access and work of
journalists. This Syrian commitment was reflected
in the delivery of authorizations to enter and work
in the country to hundreds of Arab and non-Arab
foreign journalists. That was confirmed at the time by
Mr. Annan, when his Office said that it had verified
journalists' access to Syria and that the requests he
received then were only requests to extend the periods
of visits.

The Syrian Government still welcomes and receives
journalists who wish to enter Syria, but it requires that
they do so in a legal manner and through the official
border crossing points in order to be able to work freely.
The Syrian Government attaches great importance to
the safety and security ofjournalists and asks them not
to enter Syria illegally, which would put them in harm's
way. It also requests that journalists avoid the places
where terrorists groups, especially Daesh and the
Al-Nusra Front, are present. It is unfortunate that some
foreign journalists have become victims of terrorism,
having faced aggression, abductions, detentions and
murder, just like their Syrian counterparts.

The Syrian Government has made great efforts, in
cooperation with the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, to free the
abducted journalists and evacuate the wounded and the
remains from the areas where armed terrorist groups
are found and repatriate them. Nevertheless, some
journalists unfortunately continue to illegally infiltrate
Syrian territory through our borders with neighbouring
countries, sometimes with the help of armed groups or
with the assistance of the authorities of neighbouring
States, which leads some of them to face grave danger.
Others are arrested and then released and allowed to
leave Syria.

On behalf of my Government, 1 have addressed
official letters to the Secretary-General and successive
Presidents of the Security Council reaffirming that we
seek to guarantee the safety and security ofjournalists
wishing to work in Syria. We ask them to abide by
official regulations, to stay out of danger and not to put
themselves in situations where the Syrian authorities
would be unable to guarantee their safety.

For the fifth consecutive year, an unprecedented
media campaign continues to incite terrorism and
violence, sow divisions and concoct lies concerning
the events taking place in my country, in flagrant
violation of resolution 1624 (2005) and media ethics, or
what is left of such ethics if they even exist. Numerous
global television channels and Internet websites openly
promote terrorism, attract and recruit foreign terrorist
fighters and bring them to Syria from all parts of the
globe, in deliberate violation of relevant Security
Council resolutions and other international counter-
terrorism instruments.

While this is happening, a suspicious paralysis
has beset the Security Council and its subcommittees,
coinciding with attempts to silence the Syrian media
by targeting their institutions through terrorist acts
of sabotage, and by abducting and assassinating its
personnel. Those terrorist attacks have caused the
deaths of 33 journalists and media personnel working
with Syrian media institutions, and scores of others have
been attacked, injured, kidnapped and held in detention
by armed terrorist groups that certain powerful
members of the Security Council pride themselves on
training, openly, in Turkey, Jordan and other countries.

