Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to express our gratitude to you, Sir, for convening
and presiding and over this important meeting to discuss
the existing challenges of the fight against terrorism
in Africa. During its term in the Council, Togo has
been a vocal proponent of the goal of advancing peace
and security in the region and globally. Your presence
today demonstrates your country's strong commitment

to finding solutions to the problems facing the African
continent.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
Mr. Abdullahi Shehu for their insightful briefings and
interventions. I welcome the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2013/5 as the outcome of today's
debate.

Terrorism is a serious threat to international peace
and security, as well as to the political independence,
sovereignty, territorial integrity and social and
economic development of all States. With its constantly
changing nature and character, terrorism continues to
challenge the well-being of our societies, claim the lives
of innocent people, and undermine internal security
and stability. No country or region is immune from this
scourge.

Azerbaijan is an active contributor to global
counter-terrorism activities. The fight against terrorism
in the light of the current security developments in
some African countries was one of the widely discussed
topics at the International Conference on Strengthening
Cooperation in Preventing Terrorism, co-organized by
Azerbaijan, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the Islamic Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, in Baku on 18 and 19 March.

Terrorism in Africa has its own distinctive
character, patterns and more diverse and complex
route causes compared to other regions of the world.
A number of subregions of the continent suffer
from perennial political, security, socioeconomic
and humanitarian challenges. Instability,
underdevelopment, intercommunal tensions, poverty,
lack of viable State institutions and porous borders
create conditions favourable to the infiltration of armed
groups and terrorist and criminal networks, the in-flow
of weaponry into the region and an upsurge in radical
separatist activities.

In terms of addressing those root causes, Africa
as a whole has made significant progress, and many
African States have made serious strides towards
political stability, democratization and sustainable
economic and social development. Remarkable efforts
have been displayed by the African Union, as a leading
regional player, and by subregional organizations in
Africa, in collectively promoting peace, security and
stability on the continent. However, as can be judged
from the dynamic of the African issues on the Security
Council's agenda, that goal is yet to be achieved. A
comprehensive and integrated response and consistent
engagement on the part of international, regional and
national actors are required in that regard.

Development and security are interlinked and
critical to an effective and comprehensive approach
to countering terrorism. The spread of terrorism and
extremism in various parts of Africa is a source of
serious concern. More specifically, the crisis in Mali
carries negative implications for the region and beyond,
and requires a multifaceted and integrated response in
which the political, security, humanitarian and human-
rights dimensions are well coordinated and mutually
reinforcing. Azerbaijan supports the ongoing efforts
aimed at restoring the country's territorial integrity,
sovereignty and unity, and at dismantling the terrorist
and criminal networks there.

It is essential to continue taking all measures
necessary to effectively confront the threats and
challenges posed by terrorists and armed opposition
groups in Somalia, in particular Al-Shabaab, including
through actions against those internal and external
actors who attempt to undermine the peace process
there.

Across the continent, priority should be given to
continued implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in an integrated manner
and in all its aspects, as well as to the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We stress the urgent need for prompt
and effective application of the sanctions imposed by
the Council as a key instrument in the fight against
terrorism. It is also critical that States work towards
developing strategies and enhancing coordination in
order to combat the activities and prevent the expansion
of terrorist Islamist groups such as Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram, the Mouvement pour
l'unicite et le jihad en Afrique de l'Ouest and Ansar
Dine. It should be noted that the last two have recently
been listed by the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities in connection with
the emerging terrorist threat in West Africa.

The full implementation of international legal
obligations and the most transparent inter-State
cooperation in Africa are fundamentally important.
We recognize that significant efforts are being made
by the United Nations and other international, regional
and subregional organizations to promote cooperation
and coordination and to enhance the capacities of
African States to tackle terrorism and transnational
organized crime. We believe that bilateral cooperation
programmes with African States should also be
expanded. Azerbaijan is ready tojointly explore, as part
of its dialogue with the African Union, the possibilities
for our assistance in that area.

