The Secretary-General: Madam Minister and
President, let me start by saying how pleased we are to
see you in our midst today and to congratulate you and
your delegation on organizing this timely debate.
Given its subject, I am very glad that civil society
representatives will participate in it.

The partnership between the United Nations and
civil society has grown considerably in recent years.
That reflects the increasing role of civil society in
helping to shape and scrutinize government policies
and in holding Governments accountable. It also
reflects the need, in an era marked by both global
integration and State fragmentation and failure, for
civil society to contribute to international decision-
making.

Of course, civil society actors come in all shapes
and sizes. Many make outstanding contributions to
peace. Others, which I have in the past called "uncivil
society", are drivers of conflict. If peace-building
missions are to be effective, they should, as part of a
clear political strategy, work with and strengthen those
civil society forces that are helping ordinary people to
voice their concerns and to act on them in peaceful
ways. By the same token, they should seek to reduce
the influence of forces that promote exclusionary
policies or encourage people to resort to violence.

The aim must be to create a synergy with those
civil society groups that are bridge-builders, truth-
finders, watchdogs, human rights defenders and agents
of social protection and economic revitalization. That
can build reconciliation and lessen the appeal of those
who might try to reignite conflict. It can help ensure
that national and international actors are held
accountable. It can assist in building national
consensus on the design of post-conflict structures and
programmes. It can help prepare local communities to
receive back demobilized soldiers, refugees and
internally displaced persons, and it can give a voice to
the concerns of the marginalized. That is why there
should be a two-way dialogue between the United
Nations and civil society, not so that one can direct the
other but to ensure that our efforts complement one
another.

However, we should not see civil society groups
as peace-building partners only after we have arrived
in a country with a mandate in our pockets. On the
contrary, civil society organizations, local as well as
international, have a role to play in the deliberative
processes of the Organization, including the Council.
In recent years, civil conflicts and complex
emergencies have taken centre stage in the work of the
Council. That has deepened the need for the Council to
have a real understanding of the places and situations
in which it is engaged. I believe that Council members
can benefit from the expertise, focus and insight which
civil society groups bring to the table. I therefore
welcome the efforts the Council has made to strengthen
its informal relations with civil society groups. But the
time may have come for the Council to deepen its
dialogue with them and to place its relations with them
on a firmer footing.

Here I would ask the Council to pay serious
attention to the report released yesterday by the high-
level Panel on United Nations relationships with civil
society. I am extremely grateful to the Panel members
and to all who contributed to the report. Its
recommendations are practical and forward-looking.
We in the Secretariat are studying them carefully. I
trust that the members of the Council - and, indeed,
all Member States - will do the same.

I am particularly pleased that the Panel has
proposed a number of concrete measures to increase
the participation of civil society representatives from
developing countries, and the report offers many
innovative ideas to strengthen the partnership with
civil society in our humanitarian and development
work.

The report also has a number of practical
suggestions on how the Security Council might engage
more effectively with civil society, ranging from
making better use of the Arria formula, to holding
seminars on issues of emerging importance, to
convening independent commissions of inquiry after
Council-mandated operations.

The Security Council is, of course, a Council of
sovereign Governments dealing with the most sensitive
matters of war and peace. It should view the input of
civil society organizations not as an attempt to usurp
the role of Governments but, rather, as a way to add
quality and value to its decisions and to help ensure
that they will be effectively implemented.

I would like to remind the Council that many
civil society organizations - not just from the North,
but also from the South; and not just international, but
also local - have shown that they can make a real
contribution to the work of the United Nations in peace
and security. I therefore have high hopes for the
international conference on conflict prevention which
civil society groups have decided to hold next year in
response to the recommendation in my 2001 conflict-
prevention report.

Engagement with civil society is not an end in
itself, not is it a panacea, but it is vital to our efforts to
turn the promise of peace agreements into the reality of
peaceful societies and viable States. The partnership
between the United Nations and civil society is
therefore not an option; it is a necessity. I hope that,
through this debate, the Council will be able to develop
more comprehensive and concrete strategies for
strengthening its partnership with civil society.

