Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to welcome the
presence among us ofthe Prime Minister of Mali as well
as the Malian Foreign Minister. I wish to once again
thank the Foreign Minister for the welcome extended to
us on our visit to her country a few days ago.

Since our previous debate on the situation in Mali
in January (see S/PV.8445), more Blue Helmets and
Malian soldiers have been killed and the country has
experienced a new spike in violence against civilians.
We were in particular deeply shocked by the massacre
in Ogossagou on Saturday. I wish in turn to pay tribute
to the memory of all the victims.

The implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali has not progressed as quickly as
we had all hoped. Belgium is greatly concerned about
the delays in that implementation. That key provisions
of the agreement have not been finalized jeopardizes
the development, security and stability of Mali and
gradually destroys the hopes that the agreement had
generated among the population. It bolsters the enemies
of peace, who continue to denounce the path of dialogue
and compromise as a dead-end route and advocate
violence as an alternative.

Therefore, Belgium of course welcomes the recent
progress made in the implementation of the agreement.
We particularly appreciate that the constitutional
reform process is crucial but at the same time delicate
to carry out - crucial as it would pave the way for the
realization of a series of measures provided for in the
agreement. It would also allow the country to adapt its
basic law to the realities of Mali today - significantly
different to those of 1992 - for the benefit of Malians
throughout the country.

Such efforts and political courage must also be
extended to the other key provisions of the agreement,
in spite of the difficulties and obstacles that f I am
aware - are sometimes significant. I would like to
underscore that that responsibility lies with the three
signatory parties to the agreement, and I urge them to
make it their urgent priority. Belgium wishes to stress
the critical role of women in the implementation of all
aspects of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation,
including the constitutional reform process, as essential
to achieving lasting and inclusive peace. Furthermore,
in view of the centrality of the peace agreement, I
would like to stress that Belgium believes that it must
be possible for all Council measures to be used against
those who obstruct peace. Sanctions have already been
put in place, and the Council should be ready to take
further action if necessary.

It is hard not to mention the situation in the
centre of the country, and specifically the regions of
Koulikoro, Segou and especially Mopti, where there
are now victims of violence on a daily basis. We
commend the efforts undertaken by Mali, in particular
the establishment in 2017 of a comprehensive plan to
re-establish State presence in the centre of Mali on
the initiative of the Prime Minister, a well as his visits
to the region to promote peace and reconciliation.
Nevertheless, it is clear that, despite all of those
efforts, the situation has not improved. In addition
to terrorist acts, intercommunal violence has led to
an alarming spiralling of violence since last year.
That phenomenon is worrisome in a country such as
Mali, which is historically a country of diversity and
peaceful coexistence among ethnic groups. Terrorists
and aggressive militias cannot be allowed to take root.

As the Council regularly recalls, the solution
cannot be related only to security, although that is
obviously essential. The aspirations voiced with regard
to governance, the fight against corruption, justice and
basic social services deserve to be heard. Living together
and the refusal to stigmatize specific ethnic groups, as
well as local mediation, are essential parameters for
the return of State authority over the country's entire
territory. Moreover, combating impunity must be made
a priority.

Recent events in the centre of the country cannot
remain unaddressed. I therefore stress the need for
the necessary investigations to be carried out and for
those responsible to be brought to justice. Without
that, resentment will only increase and further fuel the
violence. Only Malians hold the key, and the United
Nations must support them in their efforts. In that
respect, Belgium believes that the future mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) should
sharpen its focus on the protection of civilians,
including in the centre of the country, and in particular
through supporting the authorities.

Belgium welcomes the development of an
integrated strategic framework by MINUSMA and the
United Nations country team. It is essential that the
resources available to the United Nations as a whole
in Mali be used to the fullest and in the most efficient
and integrated way possible. In the same vein, Belgium
remains attentive to the integrated nature of MINUSMA
and encourages all pillars to work together closely.

Finally, I would be remiss not to commend the
efforts of all Mission staff, and in particular Special
Representative Annadif, for their work in often
difficult circumstances.

