Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the
other members of the Security Council on having
organized today's meeting, which is open to non-
members of the Council. I truly believe that such
meetings are useful, because they involve many States
in the Council's fight against terrorism. I wish also to
congratulate the new members of the Council:
Bulgaria, Cameroon, Guinea, Mexico and the Syrian
Arab Republic. I wish my friend Ambassador Jorge
Navarrete of Mexico all success in his new endeavours;
that is a virtual certainty, because he has so effectively
represented his country at the United Nations.

My delegation, which endorses the statement
made by the representative of Costa Rica on behalf of
the Rio Group, considers it important to speak at
today's Council meeting because the struggle against
terrorism has been and continues to be a major
objective of our Government's policy. Peru reaffirms
its emphatic rejection of terrorism, whatever its
motivation and whoever its perpetrators. My country,
which suffered the barbarism of terrorism for nearly 20
years, has already submitted to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
information on our experience in the struggle against
this scourge. My country is prepared to continue
contributing to the activities of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, which is chaired by the representative of
the United Kingdom, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, whom we
congratulate on his work thus far.

It is not my delegation's intention to repeat the
content of my country's speech in the General
Assembly debate on the agenda item entitled
"Measures to eliminate international terrorism"; we
wish only to emphasize here that the same energy and
determination that must be applied to the international
community's action in the struggle against terrorism
must be applied also to respect for peoples' civil and
political rights.

Over the past decade there was undoubtedly a
great deal of progress in the world democratic system
and in respect for human rights and the globalization of
justice. The measures we adopt to fight terrorism
should not affect that process. The best antidote to
terrorism is the tolerance that is achieved only within
democracy. A fight against terrorism that destroys
democracy, that violates human rights and that hides
behind impunity impoverishes nations in both civic and
moral terms. We say this because during the anti-
terrorist struggle we in Peru suffered human rights
violations and impunity on the part of the Fujimori
Government, abuses that the current democratic
Government is investigating and making amends for.

Moreover, both the Security Council and the
General Assembly must clearly affirm that terrorist
groups themselves are violators of human rights, just as
States can be. That is also in accord with what the
Commission on Human Rights in Geneva has been
saying for a number of years.

In addition, we would like to stress that there are
no more effective anti-terrorist measures than those
that originate in concerted efforts within the United
Nations. Terrorism is a global problem, and eliminating
it must be the responsibility of the organized
international community. We therefore consider that
the highest priority must be accorded to the adoption of
a comprehensive convention against terrorism.

My delegation wishes also to mention two
elements on which the Committee should focus its
attention. The first is the biological or bacteriological
terrorist threat. Recent events have shown that this is a
potential reality whose elimination ought to be
discussed in the Committee, including the possible
appointment of an expert in this important area.

Secondly, as the Secretary-General said in his
speech before the Council last November, besides
encouraging policies related to monitoring radioactive
materials and to strengthening the nuclear non-
proliferation regime, the Committee should promote
international cooperation to strengthen measures to
strengthen nuclear and radiological safety and the safe
transport of radioactive waste. In that connection, we
welcome the scheduling of a conference on the latter
subject for early 2003.

My country, which is a party to the 12
international anti-terrorism treaties and which is
placing its experience at the service of the Committee
through the participation of a Peruvian expert,
reaffirms its conviction that success in the struggle
against terrorism depends on achieving a broad
partnership not only among States but also including
the private sector, including banks and financial
institutions, the academic sector with its research, and
civil society with its ardent support for human rights.

Peru reaffirms its commitment to the struggle
against terrorism. It will continue its cooperation to
ensure that the total elimination of that scourge will
soon become a reality.

