Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Let me join earlier
speakers in congratulating the Russian Federation on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of June and on organizing this open debate
on the very relevant and timely topic of new trends in
peacekeeping operations. I also take this opportunity
to thank Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations Herve Ladsous for his comprehensive
briefing today.

Since its inception, United Nations peacekeeping
has been constantly evolving. The current period is no
exception. Peacekeeping continues to face challenges
and a huge range of demands. United Nations missions
are assisting countries in making the difficult transition
from conflict to peace and from chaos to State-building

by supporting political processes aimed at establishing
inclusive and legitimate Governments, providing
security and catalysing peacebuilding processes. The
current mandates of peacekeeping operations are more
challenging and complex, necessitating long-term
preparation and training for peacekeepers. In addition,
a greater sense of commitment and dedication on the
part of troop- and police-contributing countries is also
essential. Troop- and police-contributing countries
also face challenges in terms of fulfilling the robust
mandates. In that context, the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS), the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) are worth mentioning.

To meet the increasing demand, there is a need to
improve the rapid deployment and force generation
process in the start-up ofmissions, not only for enablers
but for all uniformed capacities. The challenges must
be met through a variety of means, including joint
and individual contributions. Various United Nations
missions lack the appropriate capabilities for meeting
the multifaceted challenges and demands associated
with fulfilling mandates, assigned tasks and desired
outcomes. Despite the utmost efforts of all partners,
the United Nations is still finding it difficult to reach
the capability level needed in terms of appropriate
force generation, suitable mission support, in particular
logistics, and other technical support.

United Nations peacekeepers have inherent
operational limitations in terms of real-time intelligence
gathering. Those limitations must be understood before
they can be credibly deployed in complex conflict
situations. Today, technology supports a wide range
of tasks in United Nations peacekeeping operations
beyond those undertaken by military and police
forces, encompassing information and communication
units, medical support, and analysis and reporting
functions. The use of unmanned aerial surveillance
systems is helping to improve situational awareness,
early warning capacity, and the safety and security of
peacekeeping personnel. We therefore fully support
the appropriate use of modern technology to enhance
the reach of the peacekeepers and increase operational
capabilities in complex environments. However, we
feel that technological means should be used prudently,
sensitively and realistically, not to replace needed well-
trained, capable peacekeepers on the ground who are
able to fulfil their assigned mandates with greater
understanding.

In demanding situations and in order to
fulfil robust mandates, there is a tendency to use
peacekeepers in a combatant role. We must be able to
differentiate between robust peacekeeping and the use
of peacekeepers as combatants. We believe that any
attempt to use peacekeepers as combatants will hamper
their credibility and universal acceptability. Over the
years, peacekeepers have built a good reputation in
bringing long lasting peace to conflict-riven countries
with professionalism and impartiality. We therefore
must also create enabling conditions that protect
peacekeepers so they can perform their traditional
peacekeeping role.

It is important to realize that in the volatile
situations or complex political and social environments
where most peacekeeping missions are currently
operating, there remain risks that peacekeepers will
appear to favour one group or organization or other in
a conflict, thereby clashing with the foreign policy of
many Member States. For example, Bangladesh follows
a policy of "friendship to all and malice to none". We
would not like to see our peacekeepers siding with any
warring factions and contradicting our national policy
of friendship to all and malice to none. On that point, I
fully support the statement made by Mr. Asoke Kumar
Mukerji, Permanent Representative of India.

While the primary responsibility for the safety and
security of peacekeepers and assets rests with the host
country, the lead for United Nations security policy
and procedure rests with the Department of Safety
and Security. With every passing day, peacekeepers
are being subjected to increasing threats. Weapons
proliferation, sectarian violence and non-State actors
are some of the factors that are making peacekeepers
more vulnerable to multifaceted threats than ever
before. Longer preparation on the part of troop- and
police-contributing countries, developing realistic
and achievable mandates and well-coordinated efforts
from all the stakeholders can ensure better safety and a
secure environment for peacekeepers. In our efforts to
maintain global peace and security under Blue Helmets,
we have lost more than 112 valiant men and women.

Protecting civilians under imminent threat of
physical violence is now a key area of focus for nine
peacekeeping operations that represent about 95 per
cent ofdeployed peacekeeping personnel. Implementing
the protection of civilian mandates in a coordinated
and expedient manner requires dedicated coordination
and the input of all concerned parties, which adds to
the challenges that mission leadership in general and
peacekeepers in particular face in complex and fluid
situations. In addition, at times, the credibility of the
United Nations is questioned due to its inability to
intervene and protect the civilians in time, as was seen
in the cases of UNMISS and MINUSCA. Clearly, there
is scope to deliver a lot more in that regard.
With respect to reimbursement for peacekeepers,
I strongly echo the statement of the Permanent
Representative of India and call on the Council to
increase reimbursement on the basis of the rates
proposed in the survey commissioned by the General
Assembly. In addition, we do not support the mixing
of mandates in a single mission - a point that was
also emphasized by my Indian colleague. I would also
highlight the importance of providing appropriate
logistical support to peacekeepers so that they can
deliver their best on the ground. Our police personnel
and aviation unit in South Sudan had extremely tough
days as a result of the lack of even minimum mission
support. I am sure they deserve much more than what
they have received.

Finally, I would like to stress the importance of
strengthening the partnership and coordination among
the Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat - also known as
triangular cooperation. It needs to grow further and
stronger through improved information exchange and
increased strategic planning and consultations and
by promoting cohesiveness and ownership among the
various stakeholders, including parties to conflict.
As one of the leading troop- and police-contributing
countries, we would like to assure the Security Council
of our continued support in efforts to strengthen the
partnership. We urge the Council to allow the troop-
and police-contributing countries to join in dialogue
and discussion under article 44 of the Charter prior to
making decisions on and mandates for United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We believe that increased
partnership, collaboration, political commitment and
dialogue can work together to help us to achieve our
goals of attaining global peace, security and stability
more effectively and more efficiently.

