Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Annabi for his
briefing on the situation in East Timor. We are also
grateful for the participation in today's meeting of Mr.
Xanana Gusmao and Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, who have
given us their appraisals of the situation in East Timor
as it moves towards independence.

Our latest review of the situation in East Timor,
including a study of the interim report of the Secretary-
General, enables us to draw conclusions about the
progress made in the territory's move towards
independence. However, a great deal remains to be
done to achieve that independence. In this connection,
we view positively the activities of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
headed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Vieira de Mello. At the same time, along
with obvious successes, we cannot fail to draw
attention to remaining problems.

Among the most serious of those problems is that
of refugees in West Timor. Unfortunately, the pro-
integrationist militia has not yet been disarmed. That
militia is not only preventing the return of refugees, it
also continues to be a source of threats along the border
with East Timor.

As far as we know, there has once again been a
postponement in refugee registration. In that regard,
there is still no certainty that registration will take
place within the new time-frame. This issue is of
substantial significance because the new postponement
virtually eliminates the chances for participation in
East Timor's general election for those refugees
remaining in West Timor, who expect to be registered
there as temporarily displaced persons and to return to
their former residences after the elections.

We are also concerned about the fact that there
has been an intensification of the political split within
Timorese society because of differing views about
conditions for the implementation of national
reconciliation and about the draft of a future
constitution. Unfortunately, the existing differences
have not been kept within the bounds of civilized
disagreement, but have spilled over into clashes among
East Timorese.

The international community's attention has been
drawn to the recent decision taken by an Indonesian
court regarding one of the leaders of the pro-
integrationist militia, Mr. Guterres. We are opposed to
interference in the administration of justice in
sovereign States, but we are convinced that those guilty
of the terror unleashed in East Timor in connection
with the holding of a referendum there, as well as those
who attacked United Nations personnel in West Timor,
must receive the proper punishment. We must take
decisive measures to prevent similar incidents in the
future.

A notable event in the internal political life of
East Timor took place on 7 May. That day marked the
start of the first census to be taken in the territory. That
event took place along with the registration of voters,
in the course of which over 42 per cent of the
population has been registered. We trust that this can
been considered a good guarantee for the successful
conduct of planned activities.

With regard the further presence of the United
Nations in East Timor, we believe that the concrete
format and parameters of that presence will be
determined in accordance with real requirements, and
with the agreement of the authorities of an independent
East Timor.

