Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank China for convening this
open debate of the Security Council on the theme of
strengthening multilateralism and the role of the United
Nations. It is indeed an issue that concerns international
peace and security.

This debate could not be more timely. It is
taking place in an increasingly complex and difficult
international and regional context, at least for our
region, with the resurgence of conflicts that we thought
we had laid to rest; new dimensions of terrorism and
extremism; cybercrime; extreme poverty in a globalized
world; ethnic division in a world experiencing an
exponential growth of information technologies and
communications; climate change, certain aspects of
which represent an existential threat for many countries;
a weakening of the disarmament and non-proliferation
regime; rising nationalism, and so on.

With all of those challenges, it is clear that we are
truly at a crossroads of our destiny, where all options,
even the most extreme, stand out in stark relief. More
than ever before, we need the multilateralism that is
embodied by the United Nations, which is neither an
option nor an alternative but our only path to salvation.

As is clearly emphasized in the concept paper
before us (S/2018/982, annex), the path to peace and
stability is long and arduous. We are aware of that. Let
us translate into reality the common aspiration and
firm will expressed today in this forum to safeguard
the gains we have fought long and bitterly to achieve,
strengthen multilateralism and ensure that the United
Nations voice rings louder than that of nations. How
can we better safeguard multilateralism in the light of
current challenges? That question is legitimately posed
in the concept paper and raises questions on three levels.

First, the central role of the United Nations is
constantly underlined as a reminder that the system,
which was built by the ancestors of some among us,
and which we subsequently joined, remains at the
heart of global governance. Its scope for action, based
on consultation, dialogue and negotiation, fosters a
perspective that seeks to capitalize on consensus in
order to achieve collective, sustainable and realistic
partnerships. It is in the interests of us all to safeguard
and build on those achievements, because we have
enjoyed successes and will enjoy more.

Secondly, the three pillars of the Secretary-
General's reform, particularly that of peace and
security, rightly respond to the need for a holistic
review of the functioning of the Organization. Tunisia
has strongly supported that necessary reform process.
Our Organization must resolutely rethink its working
culture and methods. We believe that we are heading in
the right direction to achieve our ambitions.

Thirdly, it is generally accepted that the Viability
of a collective security system is intimately linked to
the development of peoples - economically, socially,
culturally and so on. It must be remembered that one
of the purposes of our Organization, according to
the Charter of the United Nations, is the recourse to
international institutions to promote the economic
and social progress of all peoples. The Sustainable
Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development are, without doubt, the main catalyst
for lasting peace. Development cannot, in fact, be
conceived sustainably without multilateralism, which
is also true for lasting peace.

It is clear that the collective actions of the
international community must be rooted in regional
responses. If necessary, the dynamics of medium- and
small-scale negotiations must be deepened, reinvented
and institutionalized. The United Nations must be the
champion in that regard. We welcome the fact that, at
the African level, there has been an annual dialogue
between the United Nations and the African Union
since 2017. The existence of the United Nations-African
Union Joint Task Force on Peace and Security reflects
the revitalization of the instruments of cooperation
between the two organizations. Such action is timely as
the African Union is beginning its own reform process
to refocus our regional organization on key priorities
that affect the entire continent and its institutions.

In that regard, I would like to express Tunisia's
appreciation for the holding of the second annual
African Union-United Nations conference and the recent
meeting in September of the United Nations-African
Union Joint Task Force on Peace and Security. Those
actions can only further strengthen multilateralism and
the role of the United Nations in conflict prevention and
management, of course based on its three pillars.

The dividing line between regional peace
and international peace and regional security and
international security is no longer relevant, as they are
all intrinsically linked to each other. That is why we
continue to believe that peace in the Near East and the
Middle East is a decisive factor in international peace.
The achievements and efforts of the United Nations in
the region must be capitalized on, because they reflect
and express international legality.

Tunisia continues to believe that the only viable
and sustainable way to address challenges of peace
and security is inclusive dialogue. We have made that
our rallying cry at the international level, especially
following our accession to the United Nations, when
we advocated that approach to the resolution of
conflicts, including the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
and we continue to advocate it today as the only way to
peacefully resolve conflicts, including the Libyan crisis.

Tunisia is an emerging democracy, recognized for
its consensus-based approach, which has enabled it to
strengthen its capacity to overcome difficulties and
meet challenges. As Africa's candidate for the Security
Council for the 2020-2021 term, Tunisia will act on
behalf of the international community and honour
its commitments by incorporating the objectives and
principles of the Charter and the close correlation
among peace, security and sustainable development.
Our success, however, depends on the extent to which
our collective influence and its mechanisms for action
can be multilateralized.

