Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking Belgium for convening this very important meeting. I would also like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Edi Rama, Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and Prime Minister and Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Albania, to the Security Council and thank him for his comprehensive and very insightful briefing. Indonesia welcomes the positive role of regional and subregional organizations, including the OSCE, in dealing with issues of peace and security in their respective regions. Indonesia also welcomes the three key objectives of the Albanian 2020 OSCE Chairmanship: making a difference on the ground, implementing OSCE commitments and _ building stability through dialogue. In that regard, allow me to highlight three points. First, with regard to adherence and respect for international law and norms of international relations, Indonesia views that the activities of regional and subregional organizations must be in line with international law and respect the principles of non-interference, national sovereignty and territorial integrity. Everyone must also abide by the principle of the non-use of force in the resolution of conflicts, as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. Secondly, dialogue is key to sustaining peace. Preventive diplomacy, with inclusive dialogue, must be prioritized with the full backing of all relevant actors. Every effort must be made to build confidence and resolve conflicts peacefully. We sincerely believe in the value of dialogue and the need to settle disputes amicably. Political will may not always be present among the parties at beginning, but, with sustained dialogue, mutual respect and credible peacemaking, it can be nurtured. My third point concerns the promotion of regional arrangements. Over the span of two weeks, we have had two Council briefings related to the role of regional organizations. Indeed, the importance of regional arrangements is stipulated in Chapter VIII of the Charter. Political processes to find amicable and durable solutions to conflicts and tensions should be conducted on an ongoing basis both within and among regions. Presidential statements on the role of regional and subregional organizations, including presidentialstatement S/PRST/2007/42, which was introduced and adopted during Indonesia's presidency in November 2007, have recognized that regional and subregional organizations are well positioned to understand the root causes of many conflicts and other security challenges close to home and to influence their prevention or resolution. We appreciate the commitment of the OSCE to adhering to the spirit of Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter to support the United Nations global mandate at the regional level. The OSCE has great potential to help reduce tensions, rebuild trust and foster cooperation on shared security concerns. In South-East Asia, where Indonesia and Viet Nam are located, we have the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). One of ASEAN's main purposes is to promote peace and stability through abiding respect for justice and the rule of law in relations among countries of the region and beyond. The dividends are concrete. Since ASEAN's inception in 1967, no major conflicts have occurred in Southeast Asia. With a total population of more than 650 million people, South-East Asia has some of the fastest-growing economies and is the engine of global growth. Let me conclude by wishing Mr. Rama every success, during his term as Chairperson-in-Office of the OSCE, in implementing the three key objectives highlighted in his briefing.
