Mr. Binrn Lian (Norway): As one of the major
contributors of personnel and resources to humanitarian
assistance operations, as well as of troops to peacekeeping
operations, Norway welcomes the opportunity to
participate in today's important debate.

In the post-cold-war era, the world has witnessed a
string of conflicts resulting from the break-up of former
States and of internal conflicts accompanied by a
breakdown of State authority. One tragic consequence -
in some cases, even the objective - of many such
conflicts has been massive population displacement. The
United Nations has increasingly been presented with
complex emergency situations and demands going beyond
those of traditional peacekeeping operations. The new
tasks and challenges include the creation of secure
conditions for the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
refugees and displaced persons, civilian police functions,
the monitoring of human rights and respect for
international humanitarian law.

Such complex emergencies require a concerted and
rapid response from the international community as a
whole. The first priority must be to provide urgent
humanitarian assistance to civilians in need, whenever a
refugee crisis occurs. Norway, as one of the largest
contributors in this field, has been involved with
humanitarian personnel and provisions to refugees in all
the major emergencies of recent years. From the former
Yugoslavia to the Great Lakes region, Norwegian relief
agencies have cooperated with other national and
international organizations, notably the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in
saving the lives of thousands of innocent civilians
displaced by conflicts.

The presence of humanitarian aid workers and the
assistance that they provide are in themselves important
elements in the effort to protect refugees, not only from

 

hunger and disease, but also from intimidation, killings and
violations of humanitarian law. The deployment of human
rights monitors, civilian police and military observers could
further strengthen this protective presence. However, in
recent years we have witnessed an increasing tendency for
parties to conflicts to directly target civilians and refugees,
as well as international and humanitarian personnel. In
countering such unacceptable practices, the deployment and
presence of military and peacekeeping personnel is
sometimes the only way of creating the minimum of
security necessary to conduct humanitarian operations. As
a result, there has arisen a need to develop an integrated
approach to operations which are essentially
multifunctional, in that they comprise humanitarian, civilian
and military elements. In undertaking such multifunctional
operations, often under dangerous security conditions, the
United Nations and the Security Council should give due
attention, we feel, to the following issues.

First, the mandates for these operations must be clear
and realistic, and must be properly explained to the local
populations as well as to international media. An effective
information strategy can clearly prevent misunderstandings
of what the United Nations can be expected to accomplish
in a particular conflict, and can avoid misinterpretations
which could undermine public support for the important
work of the United Nations in such conflicts. At the same
time, Member States must ensure that sufficient resources
are available to enable the United Nations to fulfil its
mandates. Council members have a special responsibility in
ensuring that there is a congruence between mandates on
the one hand and resources on the other.

Secondly, the Security Council should consistently
emphasize the responsibility of the parties involved for the
safety of humanitarian personnel and other international
staff, as well as for the protection of refugees and other
vulnerable civilians, particularly women and children. It is
of the utmost importance that the Council maintain a
common, united stand in keeping political pressure on all
parties to implement their obligations and commitments in
this regard, and to ensure unimpeded access for
humanitarian deliveries.

Thirdly, political pressure by the Council could entail
a range of measures, including the imposition of targeted
economic and political sanctions. Such measures should be
formulated with a view to ensuring compliance with
Council decisions, including those relating to humanitarian
law, to decreasing violence and conflict, and to preventing
unnecessary hardship from being imposed on the civilian
population. We cannot rule out the possible use of military
means in some situations where the central Government
has collapsed, violations against international law and
human rights are widespread, and human suffering is
pervasive. Recent experience in parts of the former
Yugoslavia and Somalia are cases in point.

Fourthly, coordination, cooperation and information-
sharing between the military, civilian, political and
humanitarian elements of a multifunctional operation are
essential in ensuring the effectiveness of humanitarian
assistance as well as the security of personnel. Such
coordination is vital, both at United Nations Headquarters
and in the field, in all phases of a potential or actual
conflict, from fact-finding through analysis, planning and
elaboration of the mandate, and into implementation.

In this regard, Norway is of the opinion that the
mechanism for consultations with the Security Council in
advance of the adoption or renewal of mandates should
also include not only potential troop contributors, but also
countries that are heavily involved with personnel in
humanitarian operations. One could perhaps also consider
ways and means of involving non-governmental
humanitarian organizations in the early preparations, for
example in fact-finding missions, for multifunctional
operations. At the same time, care should of course be
taken to avoid compromising the impartiality of
independent humanitarian organizations. There is a need
to establish more effective cooperative liaison between
political, military and humanitarian actors, in order to
avoid confusion of roles and mandates. If humanitarian
organizations are seen to be on the side of enforcement
actions, their mission could be jeopardized, and their
personnel put at risk.

Fifthly, in accordance with humanitarian law, victims
of war have a right to receive assistance, and aid workers
have a right to deliver such assistance safely.
Unfortunately, these rights are being violated with
impunity. To put and end to this culture of impunity,
those who violate humanitarian law and commit war
crimes must be prosecuted actively and sentenced. The
international community must provide the cooperation and
the resources needed for international criminal tribunals
to be effective. Norway supports the establishment of a
permanent international criminal court in order to expedite
the prosecution of those violating humanitarian law.

These are some of the issues that my Government
believes require attention in order to ensure effective
protection of humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations. Norway would like to

 

emphasize that close cooperation between the peacekeeping
and the humanitarian elements of a multifunctional
operation, based on a clear and realistic mandate, conducted
with the unified political support of the Security Council
and given sufficient resources, is vital to the success of our
efforts.

