Mr. Kay: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council for the first time since
assuming my appointment as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia, and in fact my
first time ever. I am particularly glad to be here today
with Ambassador Annadif of the African Union, whose
presence represents our close collaboration as we
discharge our two mandates from the Council.

This is a good time for some stocktaking on
Somalia, one year after the new Federal Government
was established and 90 days after the establishment
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM).

Before going into some detail on political and
security issues, let me start by answering the question
all Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
probably hear the most: "Are you optimistic?" The
answer in my case is a resounding "yes". Behind the
twists and turns, the crises and the standoffs, Somalia
has the foundations for progress. The international
community is united behind a credible, legitimate
Federal Government. There are resources available to
meet the most immediate needs. There is the political
will to compromise and manage disputes without
resorting to violence, and the Somali people I have
met are tired of war and deprivation and fed up with
brinkmanship and predatory politics.

The heart of the political challenge is simple to
describe, if rather difficult to solve. After 22 years of
conflict, power and control of resources and revenue
are fragmented. The strong centralist State has ceased
to exist. Different regions and different people now
hold different bits of power. That is why Somalis have
decided that a federal model is the only system that will
work in this new reality. The task now is to reconcile
and agree among themselves exactly how federalism
will work in practice. How will they share power,
revenue, resources and responsibilities in a way that
benefits all of Somalia? Those are difficult issues, but
ones that need political solutions.

That is why, in my first three months, I have
prioritized the need for progress on the constitutional
review and constructive engagement with the regions,
travelling to Puntland and Somaliland and engaging
closely with stakeholders on the Juba question.

If a week is a long time in politics, the 90 days of
UNSOM. in Somalia is an age. Allow me to brief the
Council on a number of important recent developments
since the issuance of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/521).

The situation in the Juba regions was one of the
most serious issues to face the Federal Government. In
early June, the risks were very high of a collapse in
security and political stalemate in Kismaayo, as well as
between the Juba parties and Mogadishu. However, an
agreement was finally reached on 28 August in Addis
Ababa, under the active mediation of Ethiopian Foreign
Minister Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus on behalf
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), which set out interim governance, security and
economic arrangements. I supported the negotiations in
the closing stages and attended the signing ceremony in
Addis Ababa. Some outstanding issues still remain, and
implementation will require goodwill from all parties
and significant support. UNSOM, I am glad to say,
has established a presence in Kismaayo to ensure it is
able to help as required across all areas of its mandate,
working closely with the African Union (AU). We are
concerned to hear of the attack today on the convoy
of the interim leader of the Juba administration, and I
have called for calm and restraint from all sides.

To the north, the relationship between Somaliland
and Somalia remains sensitive and fragile. Nevertheless,
there is progress to report. With the mediation of
Turkey, the two parties have had two sessions of talks
this year. The agreement on the shared management of
airspace could be a model for other areas of mutually
beneficial cooperation. We urge both sides to focus on
solutions, however modest, rather than problems. The
presence of UNSOM. in Somaliland is still on hold at
the request of the local authorities, who do not accept
that UNSOM. has a mandate in Somaliland. I remain
committed to finding a way to break that impasse. I am
also offering my good offices to Puntland for its internal
political processes, and to assist in confidence-building
between the Puntland administration and the Federal
Government. I am again working closely with the Chair
of the IGAD Council on this.

One of the key tasks facing Somalia is agreement
on a final Federal Constitution. The United Nations is
supporting a broad process of popular consultations
that should clarify several key areas that remain
contentious. A long, hard process of consultation and
negotiation lies ahead, which we shall support. On
2 September, UNSOM. backed the launch of a national
political conference entitled "Vision 2016', at which the
President of Somalia restated his commitment to a new
Constitution and elections by 2016.

In less than a week from today, another key
building block of Somalia's stabilization will be put
in place. Some 200 delegates will gather in Brussels
on Monday, hosted jointly by the European Union and
the Federal Government. The New Deal compact is
a Somali-led and Somali-owned set of priorities and
milestones for achieving them, and an architecture for
international support, coordination and funding. In
Brussels, the Somali Government and the international
community will endorse the compact to confirm mutual
commitment to those priorities. The true test of the
compact will be in how it makes a difference in people's
daily lives. The United Nations in Somalia will play its
part to the full, especially in helping the Government
to coordinate international assistance. I thank the
European Union for its key role in the process and will
continue to work closely with it in this and other areas
of our support to Somalia in general. I hope that we
will see real commitment from partners, especially to
the new financial and coordination mechanisms being
proposed.

So there is progress on the political front. Parliament
has shown itselfto be a key driver. But there is no room
for complacency. There is still time to agree on a new
Constitution through an inclusive process, vote on it
and then hold free and fair elections in Somalia. But it
is a big hill to climb and we must all pick up the pace.

Other than politics, much of our initial focus has
been on security. Our presence in Mogadishu is to a
large extent possible only because of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), and I pay tribute to the
courage, determination and sacrifice of the troop- and
police-contributing countries and the leadership of the
African Union Commission. The next phase will require
more support. The exact needs for force enablers and
multipliers, sufficient and predictable financing and a
new concept of operations will emerge from the report
of the joint United Nations-AU benchmarking mission
in October. As the Council will hear from my friend
and colleague Ambassador Annadif, the military and
security dimension of defeating Al-Shabaab in Somalia
is by no means over. The Somali national army is ready
to do its part, and must be properly backed. I call on
the Council to ensure that greater priority is given to
strengthening the Somali national security forces and
their ability to deploy and sustain joint operations
with AMISOM. I trust that will be one of the main
conclusions of the benchmarking team.

Beyond the challenges of politics and security,
the United Nations is also actively engaged on
other issues of vital importance to Somalia and the
region - addressing humanitarian needs, human
rights, gender equality and piracy. Access remains
a major impediment and has contributed to the rapid
spread of polio. Somalia now has more than 160
confirmed cases, more than half the world's caseload.
Vital national immunization campaigns have taken
place with local health-care workers negotiating access
to hard-to-reach communities. The pullout of Medecins
sans frontieres is a severe blow to the health sector and
a reminder of the importance for all parties of respect
for international humanitarian law and humanitarian
principles. While we have seen some improvements,
the food-security situation remains precarious. For the
first time in five years, the number of people in crisis is
below 1 million, but the number ofpeople on the margin
of food insecurity has increased to 2.3 million. That
may be further exacerbated if the lifeline of Somali
diaspora remittances is cut by international banks.

Some 1 million refugees are hosted in Somalia's
neighbouring countries. While there has been a push
lately for refugees to return to Somalia, it is not yet
time for a large-scale repatriation. Spontaneous and
voluntary returns in safe areas, however, must be
supported with durable solutions.

We are pleased to be backing the Government's
human-rights road map, its plan of action to be brought
to the Human Rights Council in Geneva later this
month. As a critical step in that action plan, I have called
on the Somali Government to ratify the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. Childhood in Somalia can
be a frightening experience. We continue to monitor
with concern numerous grave violations of children's
rights. In a more positive note for Somalia's children,
a United Nations-supported go-to-school campaign
was launched last Sunday, aimed at getting 1 million
children into classrooms in the next three years. As a
first step, for the first time in a decade, free schooling is
being provided by the Government to 100,000 children
today.

Sexual violence is one of the most serious and
urgent human rights challenges facing the Government
and people of Somalia. The commitment of both the
Somali President and the leadership of AMISOM. to a
policy of zero-tolerance of sexual abuse is encouraging.
It is clear, however, that much more robust systems of
investigation and prosecution are needed, which should
include the protection of survivors and witnesses.

While piracy is on the decline, the onshore networks
that profited from it have not been dismantled. Law
enforcement and corrections systems on land, as well
as job opportunities, must be supported so that we treat
the root causes of the problem. At a conference hosted
by the United Arab Emirates in Dubai just yesterday,
a maritime strategy covering security and sustainable
resource management was strongly endorsed. The
United Arab Emirates deserves our thanks for that
valuable initiative.

I want to thank the Council for its vision in
establishing UNSOM. We are making good progress in
setting up the Mission, with about 50 staff on board
so far. Much greater capacity is needed to discharge
the mandate, but we will expand only at a pace that
allows us to be effective and reflects the Government's
capacity to absorb our help.

Our effectiveness depends on our relationships. I
have focused in particular on our relationship with the
Federal Government, which I believe is strong. Second
is the United Nations relationship with AMISOM.
Ambassador Annadif and I are determined that our
teams should work hand in hand. It is not a coincidence
that we have come to brief the Council together today.
We also work closely with IGAD. I look forward to the
IGAD Partners Forum, to be hosted here in New York
on the margins of the General Assembly.

Within the United Nations system I have also
focused on relationships, which are key to UNSOM's
mandate to provide one United Nations door for
the Federal Government. We are on course to be
formally integrated as a mission by 1 January, and are
already working on the rule of law and security and
constitutional review and human rights in joint teams.
We are already working as a single United Nations
senior management team.

Our United Nations family in Somalia experienced a
dark hour when our common compound was attacked on
19 June. We lost one staff member of the United Nations
Development Programme and seven contractors and
guards. That tragedy has only deepened my resolve and
commitment to the Mission. We are reviewing security
arrangements for our staff, and I remain urgently in
need of a fully functioning guard-force capacity, as
has been recommended by the Council. The African
Union-United Nations benchmark exercise looked at
some options, which are currently being considered.

I would like to leave the Council with three key
messages for its consideration. First, in Somalia the
people, Government and international partners are on
the brink ofachieving great things - truly great things.
In terms of rebuilding a shattered State and rescuing
millions of people from conflict and poverty, we are
standing on the very edge of great success.

Secondly, where we stand is also precarious.
Success is not guaranteed. In no sense at all is the
Somalia crisis over. We cannot afford to lessen our
focus or investment, despite the many competing claims
for our attention in the rest of the world. If we fail and
Somalia slips back and Al-Shabaab prevails, we shall
feel the security impact from Bamako to Bangui and
beyond Africa. Ideology respects no borders.

Thirdly, to get over the threshold and achieve great
things, we need more. Much has been given in terms
of support - and even more promised - but there are
three areas in which we need to boost our effort if we
are not to fail. First is support for the Somali National
Security Forces - we have not achieved critical mass
in terms ofbuilding their capacity; second are enhanced
capabilities for AMISOM; and third is a well-resourced
and coherent United Nations role in the exit strategy for
AMISOM, which includes support to UNSOM. and the
United Nations Support Office for AMISOM, as well as
the work of United Nations agencies in Somalia.

Working in Somalia is expensive. Keeping our staff
safe costs real money. Ensuring success will cost more,
but not very much compared to what the international
community has spent in Iraq, Afghanistan and more
recently Mali. Failure in Somalia is, however, still a
risk. It is, I submit, a risk we cannot afford.

