Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): I should like at the outset
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency for this month. Given your openness and
clear insights and your sensitivity to the causes and
consequences of many conflict situations before this
body, as well as your vast diplomatic experience, we
are, indeed, in good hands. May I also express our deep
gratitude to your predecessor, Ambassador Jean-David
Levitte of France, for steering the Council's
deliberations last month to a successful conclusion.

It is also with great pride and a distinct feeling of
honour that I welcome Prime Minister Ali Khalif
Galaydh and his delegation here this morning. I
commend him for his patience and strength in the face
of formidable odds and for his strenuous and tireless
efforts. He has made tremendous personal sacrifices in
pursuit of national reconstruction, cohesion and
reconciliation.

It is important to mention that the Arta Peace
Conference and the subsequent formation of the
Transitional National Government attracted hundreds
of qualified, talented and highly experienced Somali
professionals from all parts of the world, particularly
from Europe and North America. These individuals left
behind their families, careers, well-paying jobs and
secure and comfortable lifestyles, in order to meet the
challenges and to nurture the nascent Government in its
crucial task of nation-building.

Like the international staff in Somalia, they have
a deep sense of appreciation of the true dimension of
security. They deeply care about security as they toil
daily to restore a semblance of hope, sustenance and
normalcy. Obviously, there is no better barometer of
security than these patriotic individuals, who are not
there for pay, comfort or power. More than anybody,
they know what is at stake and what is justifiable or
reasonably risky. They know what is exaggerated or
irrational. We need to take into full consideration the
sacrifices and determination of this truly international
staff in determining the broader scope of security in
Somalia.

After a long wait and anxious moments, we have
the Secretary-General's report on Somalia at last. We
wish to express our gratitude to the Secretary-General,
who has always displayed keen interest in restoring
peace and stability to Somalia. We also recognize the
Secretariat's efforts, in particular, those of Mr. David
Stephen and his staff, including the many humanitarian
aid workers in Somalia. It is almost a year since we last
had a report on Somalia, and that long interval itself
says much about where the international community
stands in its support for the new institutions in
Somalia.

The entire world is too familiar with the events in
Somalia over the last decade, in particular, its plunge
into chaos, civil strife and near disintegration. No one
will deny the contribution of numerous factors to this
spectacle. Yet, likewise, no one will deny the
overwhelming share of blame that must be placed at
the feet of self-serving, greedy and criminal
individuals. Through their domestic terrorism,
divisiveness and continuous assaults on peace and
security, they succeeded in driving Somalia beyond
ruin to a virtual pariah status. So catastrophic were the
suffering and national unravelling that the international
community had to intervene. As the Secretary-
General's report (S/1999/882) on Somalia of 16 August
1999 stated, the country had degenerated into a "black
hole" of anarchy.

Time and time again the so-called leaders of
Somalia, the rabble of warlords, were brought together
in attempts at reconciliation, disarmament and
restoration of government. We recall the successive
conferences held until the end of 1997. The more they
met and signed agreements, the more they disagreed
subsequently. Many countries and organizations have
worked tirelessly and relentlessly to restore a measure
of governance in Somalia. The focus, though, has
always remained on ways to bring together these
feuding warlords in order to assist them to reach an
agreement that will end their stalemate. All these
efforts, however, as we all know, ended in vain. In
Somalia, as in similar conflict situations elsewhere,
more than 90 per cent of casualties in the last decade
have been civilians. A whole generation of Somalis has
grown up in cultures of warfare.

It was against this backdrop that my President
initiated a series of proposals at the General Assembly
in September 1999. In a nutshell, he stated plainly that
appeasing the warlords had not worked and never
would. He exhorted the people of Somalia to come
together to consider his proposals as an alternative to
the never-ending squabble, prevarication and
impotence of warlords. In initiating this national
dialogue, Djibouti was unambiguous. The process
would be comprehensive in addressing all facets of
Somalia's ills; it would be transparent, inclusive and
independent of undue influences.

The participation of leaders of factions and
administrative regions was sought and aggressively
pursued directly and indirectly throughout the
Conference and since the formation of the new
Government. The criteria for their participation were
never spelled out in advance. The door has always been
open, and it will continue to be open. But it was
implicit that they had to affirm the unity and territorial
integrity of the country, that they had to agree to peace,
reconciliation and the primacy of law, and that they had
to commit to complete and verifiable disarmament. Not
only did they opt to stay away, but they also embarked
on obstructing and undermining the Conference in
order to maintain the status quo. Despite their absence,
genuine representatives from every district, region,
clan, sub-clan and minorities converged at Arta,
Djibouti. Indeed this was a people-oriented, people-led
and people-driven process, embracing all segments of
Somali society.

This Council followed the Arta process with great
interest from its inception. In its first statement on the
matter, in November 1999, the Council welcomed the
initiative of President Guelleh aimed at restoring peace
and stability in Somalia. It endorsed the President's call
on warlords to recognize fully and accept the principle
that the people of Somalia are free to exercise their
democratic right to choose their own leaders.

In June 2000 the Council's statement urged States
and international organizations in a position to do so to
give the Arta process political support. Furthermore,
the Council expressed its readiness to consider taking
appropriate steps against warlords and faction leaders
who continued to obstruct and undermine efforts to
achieve peace. In its press statement of 11 July 2001,
the Council called upon all armed groups in Somalia to
put down their weapons and to engage in peaceful
dialogue with the Transitional National Government.
As the Secretary-General's report states, the
Organization of African Unity summit in Lusaka
strongly condemned warlords who persist in their
stubbornness in blocking the peace efforts in Somalia.

That brings me to share our views on the
Secretary-General's report. In a number of paragraphs
mention is made of the so-called Somalia
Reconciliation and Restoration Council (SRRC) and its
formation, objectives and communications with the
Secretary-General. As far as we are concerned, this is
not an entity that has an existence, context or
relevance. If there is anything there, it is the
rehabilitation, reincarnation and resuscitation of the
otherwise vanishing phenomenon of warlordism in
Somalia. The objective is nothing other than to hasten
and bring about the early demise of the Transitional
National Government itself.

Let us not forget that the TNG represents the will
of the people of Somalia, irrespective of its fragility, its
lack of resources and the lack of meaningful and
credible support from the international community
despite being the only recognized Somali national
framework in existence today. The so-called
Reconciliation and Restoration Council, in other
words, has been condemned many times and has been
warned to desist from obstructing and undermining
efforts to achieve peace. Suffice it to say that we are
deeply concerned not only by the casual manner of
according a parallel status to this bunch of discredited
criminals, but also by the dilution of and utter
disregard for the popular will of Somali civil society,
which has throughout borne the full brunt of egregious
human rights violations perpetrated by the same
individuals.

On the proposal for setting up a Committee of
Friends, we have no objection in principle, if the
overriding motivation behind it is to support the TNG
in consolidating peace, stability and reconstruction, and
if the TNG is seen, as it should be, as the cornerstone
of future activities. The TNG, first and foremost, needs
to be supported by all and accorded the requisite
legitimacy, as this Council has done and continues to
do, in Guinea-Bissau, the Central African Republic,
Sierra Leone and Liberia. We therefore cannot accept
any equivocation, destruction or diversion from this
central prerequisite. Normally a group of friends of a
certain country constitutes a voluntary get-together of
like-minded countries, as opposed to a gathering of
divergent viewpoints and interests. No doubt, such a
group could help to facilitate the exchange of
information about Somalia among interested parties,
and we welcome that, but the TNG's paramount role
need not be compromised.

We strongly encourage the Council to forge a
common view on Somalia with regard to assisting the
people, including a reasonable and flexible response to
the security issue, which is becoming the stumbling
block to establishing a post-conflict peace-building
mission. It would also be constructive to make a
comprehensive security assessment, directed from New
York Headquarters.

Somalia today means different things to different
people. For many, the wounds and misfortunes of eight
years ago remain raw, as if inflicted only two or three
months ago. Somalia had undergone tremendous cycles
of bust and promise at that time. And, believe it or not,
the people of Somalia are determined to press on for
attention, even if they continue to receive indifference,
neglect or bias. Somalia will not go away. Like many
other nations emerging from long periods of conflict,
Somalia remains a challenge that we ignore only at our
own peril. Beyond moral and humanitarian concerns,
Somalia has continued to be shunned; it has become
yet another threat of unfathomable security dimensions,
a breeding ground of terrorism and drug-trafficking and
a centre of arms trade. So as we build a global coalition
to root out international terrorism, we also need to
think seriously about restoring hope and rebuilding
shattered societies into tolerant, stable and peaceful
places, rather than watching them degenerate slowly
into cells of extremism, fundamentalism and terrorism.

The transition from war to consolidated peace is
not without its problems. Quite often, it is associated
with insecurity, an uncertain future and repeated cycles
of violence. That is what Somalia is. This is not a
situation never seen before. So it all depends on how
the international community comes to look at Somalia
again - in a different light. We hope it will do so, and
do so soon, to avert the re-emergence of violence.

For all genuine regional and international efforts
to succeed in Somalia, it becomes necessary that all
actors reach a common, objective and unbiased vision
about the real tasks ahead. The TNG will need to
continue to reach out to all concerned, with a View to
achieving lasting peace.

Finally, the President, the Government and the
people of Djibouti have made the utmost efforts in
every possible way to create a climate conducive to the
re-emergence of Somali nationhood. Thanks to the
tireless efforts and sacrifices of Somalis themselves,
we have a national representative outfit that deserves
this Council's unswerving support.

Members of the Council, it is in your hands for
this entity to survive, to grow and to usher Somalia into
tangible peace, reconciliation and stability. We have no
doubt you will also play your part.

