Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom shares the Secretary-General' s assessment of the
situation in Angola. We support his recommendation to
withdraw the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) and to establish a follow-on United
Nations observer mission. We agree that the operation
should retain a military element while demobilization
continues, in order to provide much-needed stability. We
also welcome the increased capacity for monitoring and
investigating human rights abuses.

This is an important moment for Angola. The move
from a peacekeeping operation to an observer mission is,
in itself, recognition of important progress in the peace
process. A new Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation has been formed, and UNITA deputies
have now joined the National Assembly. We commend

 

the spirit of cooperation and tolerance in which these events
have taken place.

But we are concerned at the slow pace of extending
State administration and at the continuing mood of mistrust
between the parties. The initial positive momentum must be
regained and maintained to ensure long-term peace and
stability. Both parties need to pursue a constructive
dialogue in order to achieve this. In this context, we urge
President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi to meet as early as
possible.

In recent weeks military clashes have jeopardized the
peace process. We are concerned at the build-up of military
forces in northern Angola. Tensions clearly remain high.
We hope that the remaining United Nations military
presence will help to prevent renewed hostilities and that
they will be given full access to areas which they wish to
investigate.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
has drawn our attention to attacks by UNITA against the
staff of UNAVEM. III. These are totally unacceptable. All
United Nations staff must be accorded complete safety and
security.

We agree with the Secretary-General that there is an
urgent need to complete the demobilization process without
further delay. This is an issue to which the United Kingdom
attaches great importance. Since 1995, including food aid,
the United Kingdom has provided over $8 million towards
the demobilization process, of which over $1.5 million has
gone directly to the International Organization for
Migration. We are aware of their continuing needs, and we
are taking these into account in considering our response to
the United Nations consolidated appeal for Angola for
1997.

Finally, as the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola begins we would like to pay particular tribute to the
Special Representative and to the men and women of
UNAVEM. III for their work in bringing peace and stability
to Angola. Forty-one members of the Mission have been
injured in the course of duty, and 32 have died. But they
have each made a significant difference to the lives of all
Angolans and to their future prospects. They deserve our
unreserved thanks for a job well done in difficult and
dangerous circumstances. We look to the leaders of Angola
to ensure that the efforts and sacrifices of the United
Nations were not in vain.

