Mr. Annadif (spoke in French): I would first like
to thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to introduce the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali
(S/2018/273), covering the first quarter of 2018.

I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome
the presence of Mr. Tieman Hubert Coulibaly, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation
of Mali.

As noted in the report, the first three months of
2018 were marked by the appointment on 30 December
2017 of a new Prime Minister, Mr. Soumeylou Boubeye

Maiga. This period was also characterized by the
strengthening of trust between the signatory parties of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
of which the Prime Minister's high-profile visit to
the northern regions is a perfect illustration in that it
concretized the gradual return of the authority of the
State to those regions, particularly in Kidal.

Likewise, a degree of progress in the peace process
deserves to be welcomed. This includes, among other
things, the adoption by the Government on February
28 of laws establishing territorial communities in the
regions of Me'naka and Taoudenni, and the signing on
22 March of a road map to operationalize the timeline
of priority actions that was endorsed by the Agreement
Monitoring Committee at its twenty-fourth session, held
on January 15 and 16 in Bamako. I am convinced that
the concretization of these various actions recorded in
the road map, in particular the full operationalization of
the Operational Coordination Mechanism in Kidal and
Timbuktu, as well as ensuring the effective functioning
of the interim authorities by endowing them with
material and financial means confidence-building
measures that could further support the Malian people
in the implementation of the Agreement.

Workshops on the preregistration of combatants
eligible for integration or the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, held
successively in Kidal, Timbuktu, Menaka and Gao
during the last week of February, constitute real
progress, including the convening of the high-level
workshop on security sector reform, which allowed for
a shared vision as an important lever for the security
component of the Agreement.

In parallel with these initiatives, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and its partners continue
to strengthen the capacities of regional authorities in
the north and the centre of the country at the logistical,
technical and political levels, as the interim authorities
represent an important link in meeting the needs of
the population, in particular in terms of basic social
services, the return of refugees and displaced persons,
and support for the electoral process, pending their
replacement by elected authorities.

This positive dynamic in the implementation of
the Agreement should not, however, make us forget
that this is an election year in which the presidential
elections are scheduled for 29 July for the first round
and 12 August for the second, while the legislative
elections are scheduled for November and December.
In that perspective, and in accordance with its mandate
of good offices and support for the electoral process,
MINUSMA undertook inclusive contacts with the entire
Malian political class and the signatory movements in
order to call on them to engage in a consensual process,
leading to peaceful and credible elections.

In that regard, on 1 and 2 March MINUSMA
facilitated the holding of a workshop on the revision
of the electoral law of 17 October 2016 with several
innovations, taking into account most of the demands
of the opposition and civil society and many of the
recommendations from the 2013 election observation
missions of the European Union, the African Union, the
International Organization of la Francophonie and the
Economic Community of West African States. These
include the introduction of a biometric electoral voting
card, replacing the national identity card, and the
assignment by the State of one monitor of the opposition
and one of the majority to every polling station. At the
same workshop, the Government agreed to conduct
an independent audit of the electoral register, which
should take place in April.

MINUSMA continues to undertake a further series
of activities aimed at preventing post-election tensions
and at supporting the revision of electoral lists so as to
ensure that the entire process, as I have said, will be as
consensual, inclusive and credible as possible.

The period covered by the report saw a deterioration
of the security situation, particularly in the centre of
the country, with sometimes quite serious human rights
abuses, as pointed out by MINUSMA in its communique
of 30 March. The same concerns were noted recently in
the report of the Independent Expert on the situation of
human rights in Mali, Mr. Suliman Baldo, during his
visit from 12 to 16 March, and unfortunately remind us
of the extent of the challenges in this domain.

The establishment of the International Commission
of Inquiry on Mali and the Government's endorsement
of the Safe Schools Declaration on 1 February are
commendable positive steps. We also welcome the
Government's adoption, on 7 March, of a new national
policy on Mali's borders.

A draft law of national understanding is being
considered. It will probably be submitted to the National
Assembly at its April session. Despite reservations on
this particular issue, it should be noted that it would
be a significant step towards national reconciliation.
The transfer of Mr. Al Hassan Ag Abdoul Aziz Ag
Mohamed Ag Mahmoud to the International Criminal
Court on 31 March also proves that reconciliation does
not necessarily mean impunity.
In order to support the Government plan intended to
make the centre of the country more secure, MINUSMA
and the United Nations country team have launched
several initiatives to promote social cohesion and the
restoration of State authority, economic recovery and
the provision of basic social services, including quick-
impact projects. It is important to note that a purely
security-oriented approach is not and will not be
sufficient and could even have the opposite effect.

In that connection, MINUSMA continues to
provide constant support to the Specialized Judicial
Unit against Terrorism and Transnational Organized
Crime. That collaboration has led, for the first time, to
those accused as a result of investigations of the Unit
being brought before the Court of Appeal in Bamako.
The same cooperation has allowed the national policy
and action plan on preventing and combating violent
extremism and terrorism for 2018-2020 to be adopted.

In accordance with resolutions 2295 (2016)
and 2364 (2017) and drawing on lessons from
the recommendations of the Santos Cruz report,
MINUSMA is undertaking an increasing number of
major patrols, particularly in the centre of the region,
to reassure the population, assess the human rights
situation and interact with community leaders in some
remote and hard-to-reach areas. That was the case for
Operation Furaji from 15 to 27 January and Operation
Foronto from 4 to 15 March.

Nonetheless, these achievements by MINUSMA
have been tarnished by the number of victims, which
has steadily increased in recent months, mainly as a
result of landmines and improvised explosive devices,
but also because of indirect targeting of shells and
rockets, as was the case last week at the Aguelhok
camp, which claimed the lives of two peacekeepers
from Chad. We place great hope in the arrival of the
recently deployed combat convoy companies, although
they are not yet fully operational.

We recall the importance of giving priority to
training and equipment for troops, including armoured
vehicles. We currently lack approximately 100
armoured vehicles, which leaves us vulnerable. Troop-
and police-contributing countries, whose efforts we
commend, are asked to do what they can to fill those
gaps. We must also not forget the important shortfall
in both combat and utility helicopters. There too, we
place a great deal of hope in Canada's pledge to deploy
six helicopters in the coming months, but that offer,
as welcome as it is, still falls short of the number of
helicopters we need.
During the period under review, we also had
the pleasure of hosting, from 14 to 25 March, the
independent MINUSMA strategic review team led by
Ms. Ellen Margrethe Loj, former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, who engaged in several very
constructive exchanges about the challenges being
faced by the Mission.

We await with great interest the recommendations to
be submitted shortly to the Secretary-General. We dare to
hope that the recommendations will guide the Council's
deliberations in the framework of the discussions on
the renewal of MINUSMA'S mandate and enable a
better alignment between the mandate entrusted by
the Security Council with the realities and constraints
on the ground, as well as with the expectations of the
people of Mali. These recommendations will also guide
the ongoing considerations in drafting MINUSMA's
strategic plan, as requested by resolution 2364 (2017).

In the meantime however, the Mission continues
to work in close cooperation with the country team, in
particular to respond to the needs ofthe Malian people,
especially women and young people, through the
tools available to us and their practical priorities. The
task force on elections, the working group to support
the interim authorities, as well as the coordination of
activities in the Mopti region level are examples of this
close cooperation. We also welcome the start ofthe work
of the Panel of Experts of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali
on the sanctions regime. The Panel, which is another
important tool in supporting the peace process, has
already carried out two missions in Mali.

The Office of the Independent Observer is now
almost operational. We also hope that its first report
will help to attribute responsibilities and thereby
accelerate the peace process.

The effective establishment of the International
Commission of Inquiry on Mali is also eagerly awaited
by the Malian people, in addition to the outstanding work
that the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission
continues to carry out. Those mechanisms complement
the Agreement's monitoring architecture and provide
new tools, in particular through the sanctions regime,
which can strengthen the accountability and adherence
of parties to the Agreement, while reminding them of
their obligations.

In a context as complex as that of Mali, cooperation
with other partners, first and foremost the Government
of Mali, remains a priority for the United Nations.
While continuing to support the Malian armed forces
in accordance with the memorandum of understanding
signed in November 2017, MINUSMA is working closely
with the National Council for Security Sector Reform
on the concept of establishing reconstituted security
and defence forces, which is one of prerequisites for
sustainable security in Mali. The high-level workshop
that was held in Bamako from 27 to 28 March is a
perfect example of this. The workshop not only brought
together all the key actors of the Agreement, but also
allowed frank and open exchanges among Malians in
order to arrive a shared vision on the future of their
defence and security forces.

Furthermore, in accordance with resolution 2391
(2017) and thanks to the signing of the technical
arrangement on 23 February in Brussels among the
United Nations, the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the European Union,
MINUSMA has already sketched out the framework of
its support to the joint G-5 Sahel Joint Force. With the
deployment of a team to the headquarters of the G-5
Sahel Joint Force in Sevare, the mechanisms for medical
evacuations, engineering and logistical support are
already operational. Of course, all this has been done
while ensuring compliance with the human rights due
diligence policy.

In the context of regional cooperation, we
welcome the important work being undertaken by the
Peacebuilding Fund through the disbursement initiative
of $3 million to promote the security oflocal populations
and social cohesion in Liptako-Gourma, which is a
region straddling the borders of Mali, Burkina Faso and
the Niger, where a large number of terrorist elements
are operating.

As the report before members underscores, 2018
is an election year. However, Malian actors should not
lose sight of the fact that the implementation of the
Agreement must remain a priority; it must not become
a political football. We must endeavour to bring to
completion both undertakings in a complementary
manner by relying on the fresh momentum provided
by the new Prime Minister, which is necessary but not
sufficient given the delays that have been noted. The
international community must provide support and
encouragement in this respect.

The Peace Agreement process is a complex one,
and the Council must therefore call on the signatory
parties to ensure that the road map signed on 22 March
does not become a dead letter. It is time to move from
pledges to action by respecting the deadlines that have
been set.

Regarding the electoral process, all Malian political
actors are unanimous in their belief that the elections
need to be held on the dates set, with full transparency
and credibility. The international community shares
these same concerns. Just as the 2013 elections
re-established constitutional order in Mali, those of
2018 must irreversibly anchor democracy in the country.

In terms of preparations, an agreement has been
reached to review the current electoral law, which has
led to a consensus-based draft that is currently before
the National Assembly. An order for 8 million ballot
cards is currently also being prepared. In line with
its mandate, MINUSMA has begun to lend technical
and logistical support where it is deployed and within
resource constraints, including by transporting election
materials and dispatching staff.

We have also begun to work to ensure secure
elections and that any electoral disputes are properly
handled. However, given the tight electoral schedule,
concerns remain, including ensuring that the 8 million
ballot cards are available and distributed in a timely
manner, and that the voter list audit is carried out within
the set deadline, thereby strengthening confidence.

The Council must call on all Malian politicians to
respect the timeline and encourage them to approach the
elections in a spirit of consensus, peace and credibility.
Failing to do so would exacerbate the crisis, with the
enemies of peace emerging as the winners. They are
undeserving of such a gift.

