Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We would like to express our
appreciation to the Kuwaiti presidency for organizing
today's open debate on the working methods of the
Council. We thank Mr. Ian Martin for his briefing on
the progress that has been made in improving those
working methods, and we commend Security Council
Report for the research paper it published last month,
providing useful background information. I should also
thank you, Mr. President, for inviting Ian to brief us for
this debate, since he is the best person one could think
of for the purpose. We would be remiss if we failed
to recognize the excellent work done by Japan and
Ambassador Koro Bessho, as the former Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, in reviewing and adopting the
new note of the President (S/2017/507, annex), agreed on
in August last year. The note has introduced a number
of improvements into the working methods of the
Council, which we hope will enhance its inclusiveness,
efficiency and transparency.

The world is changing fast. There are new and
emerging challenges to international peace and
security that require the Council to be better organized,
not only to keep pace with the changing times but
also to be responsive and effective in carrying out its
responsibilities. There is no question that the past year
has enabled us to better understand how things work
in the Council and what might be improved or further
consolidated as a way to ensure greater efficiency and
effectiveness. We would like to take this opportunity to
highlight some of those issues, which Mr. Martin also
raised in his briefing. I will address six items related to
the programme of work.

It is self-evident that the programme of work is
composed of items based on the reporting cycle and the
priorities of each presidency. It includes several items
that we continue to discuss although there are no new
developments in them to speak of. I believe that we
therefore need to consider what we can do to streamline
our work and prioritize issues that require the Council's
urgent attention and response. We feel that is something

we should look at seriously. In terms of the discussion
of thematic issues proposed by Council presidencies,
we see a growing tendency to bring up issues that are
not necessarily within the Council's purview. While
we certainly cannot overlook the nexus between peace,
security and development, it is becoming increasingly
important to ensure that the Security Council operates
in line with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and in full respect for the various mandates of
other United Nations bodies, based on the principle of
complementarity and subsidiarity. That has become a
bone of contention among Council members and should
be addressed.

Secondly, with regard to Council meetings,
we appreciate the efforts being made to enhance
transparency by holding more and more meetings in
the open Chamber. At the same time, putting a divided
Council on display may not necessarily be helpful with
some of the most important and sensitive issues. What
is even more critical in that regard is that members
would be unlikely to be more willing to raise issues that
are sensitive but useful in open meetings rather than in
consultations. Without totally discounting the value of
open briefings and debates, the value of holding closed
consultations in order to have frank exchanges of views
cannot be ignored. It is therefore important to strike
the right balance between enhancing transparency on
the one hand and holding candid behind-the-scenes
interactions on the other. That is also something that we
will continue to grapple with, and I hope the Informal
Working Group will reflect on it and try to come up
with useful recommendations.

Thirdly, I would like to turn my attention to reports
and other communications with the Secretariat. The
Secretary-General's reports are very useful, especially
for elected members, who may not have other means of
gathering adequate information. The challenge is how
to ensure that those reports are more concise, timely,
relevant and to the point, in order to help members
achieve a better understanding of issues and make
meaningful contributions in discussions. We believe that
there is room for improvement in that regard. Briefings
by Special Representatives should also be concise and
to the point, highlighting the latest developments and
drawing attention to issues that may require a response
or action on the part of the Council.

The practice of bringing in briefers from other
regional organizations, such as the African Union and
its regional mechanisms, is particularly important
in ensuring a regional perspective. We think this
practice should be institutionalized. In the future,
perhaps, instead of listening to United Nations Special
Representatives and African Union speakers on the
same issues, they could be asked to speak on different
issues based on their respective advantages on the
ground, so as to make their contributions more relevant
to the Council's work of the Council and use the time
more efficiently.

Another issue in this area is about communications
from the Secretary-General on the appointment of
Special Representatives and others. It is unfortunate
that elected members often first hear about such
appointments from the media. This concern has been
raised before, but while some small steps may have
been taken to address it, we hope it will now be dealt
with more seriously and rectified more effectively.
My fourth point is about outcome documents.
We all know that the issue of penholdership has
under discussion for quite some time. The idea of
co-penholdership should be seriously explored, since it
would not only enable elected members to contribute
to shaping the Council's outcome documents in areas
where they have intimate knowledge and expertise,
but also help to improve unity and consensus among
members of the Council. Of course, the importance of
allowing adequate time for consultations on Council
resolutions and decisions has been an issue, and
penholders have a special responsibility in that regard.
Mr. Martin explained that point very eloquently, and we
could not agree with him more.

Fifthly, consultations with troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) and police-contributing countries
(PCCs) before the renewal of mandates have not really
been very productive or effective. Efforts have been
made by members of the Council to facilitate informal
interaction with TCCs, which we have found to be
much more productive and effective. This needs to be
encouraged. But the issue of how formal consultations
can be improved should be looked at seriously if these
are to be more relevant to the work of the Council
and allow TCCs to make meaningful inputs into the
mandate-renewal process. For example, the sharing of
advance copies of the reports of TCCs and PCCS prior
to informal and formal meetings could be envisaged.

Sixthly, and last but not least, I turn to the issue
of the United Nations Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council annual
consultations. As Chair of the Ad Hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa, we
have the responsibility of facilitating the joint annual
meeting of the United Nations Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council. In this
connection, the acknowledgement in the revised note
507 of the importance of the annual joint consultative
meeting and informal dialogue between the Security
Council and members of the African Union Peace
and Security Council is very welcome. However, we
believe that there is a need for improvement in terms
of agenda-setting and format in the conduct of the
joint consultations to ensure that frank and meaningful
exchanges of views can take place on matters relating
to peace and security in Africa.

The outcome of the joint consultations is usually
negotiated, but it does not seem to have any relevance
in terms of future reference once it has been adopted. In
fact, the outcome ofthe lastjoint consultation has so far
not been adopted. There is a need, therefore, to reflect
on this and see if it is possible to be innovative in this
regard. Of course, the other party, that is, the African
side, also has a responsibility to contribute to making
the annual event more effective and productive.

In a nutshell, these are some of the issues that
we would like to flag based on our experience in the
Council over the past year, and we hope that the group
will consider them seriously and come up with useful
recommendations to further improve the working
methods of the Council.

