Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this timely and important
debate. It is most suitable that we address this issue
under your presidency, given your country's
remarkable transition from the post-conflict stage to a
stable democracy. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his important statement.

I wish to extend a most cordial welcome to
Mr. Jose Luis Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste, a country that is also a paradigm of
today's subject and a success in the United Nations'
peacebuilding efforts. Today, less than eight years after
its independence, Timor-Leste is a democracy with
stable institutions, looking confidently towards the
future. That is due to the success of the peacebuilding
efforts carried out in Timor-Leste, with institution-
building at the centre. But it is mainly due to the will
of the Timorese people and their political leaders'
vision of national ownership and leadership. Portugal
is honoured, alongside the other members of the
Portuguese-speaking community, to be deeply
associated with the successful path Timor-Leste has
followed.

In the early stages of the United Nations reform
process, Mozambique and Portugal jointly proposed
the creation of a framework within the United Nations
system that would help to bridge the gap between
security needs and the need to rebuild stable
institutions that would allow Governments in post-
conflict situations to effectively pursue their main
tasks. Without that, stability would be elusive and
relapse into conflict would be a serious possibility. In
time, that proposal led to the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), which has been
chaired by our colleague Peter Wittig, whom I
congratulate on his commitment and leadership. I must
say that I share his analysis and suggestions concerning
enhancing the role of the PBC.

It is now a common assumption that
peacekeeping and peacebuilding should be seen as an
integrated effort and no longer as sequential activities,
and that peacebuilding activities should begin as soon
as the situation on the ground so permits, well within
the span of the foreseeable duration of a peacekeeping
operation and throughout its cycle.

The United Nations must enhance its capacity to
define integrated strategies from the outset and to
coordinate the activities of the different actors on the

ground - those in charge of security and the
development agencies and non-governmental
organizations - enhancing interaction with all the

relevant stakeholders, including regional and
subregional organizations, neighbouring countries,
peacebuilding configurations and troop- and police-
contributing countries. Much has been done in that
sense, but more still needs to be done.

Only with legitimate, credible and resilient
institutions will a State be able to discharge its
functions and meet the expectations of its citizens.
Only such institutions will be able to address the many
issues that remain in post-conflict situations and to
bring the resolution of political disputes into the
political process.

Each country is a different and specific case.
General recipes are dangerous, to say the least. But two
further elements are common and equally important in
all peacebuilding strategies: economic and social
development, and national ownership.

Institution-building alone will not suffice, since
no country will achieve sustainable peace and stability
without economic and social development.
Unemployment, especially youth unemployment, must
be addressed at an early stage of peacebuilding efforts
through concrete, focused initiatives. International
economic aid should be concentrated on projects that
take into account the economic, social and even
cultural realities of the country, its specific capacities
and the potential they offer for foreign investment.
Adequate management of natural resources should also
be incorporated early into development programmes
and infrastructure reconstruction. Development of
national capacities must be a constant objective in all
areas.

There is an obvious link between development
and peace. The nature of that link is perhaps not totally
clear, nor can one build upon a casual relationship
between the two. But they are surely mutually
reinforcing.

No one can better understand the situation in a
country than the people who live there. No foreign
commitment can replace their will, without which no
peacebuilding effort will be sustainable. The centrality
of national actors is therefore indispensable.

The importance of national ownership in post-
conflict peacebuilding is well known to all of us. The
partnership between the State and the international
partners must be based on a shared strategic
understanding of the objectives and the way forward,
with clear common goals, permanent and effective
dialogue and interaction with the people of the
country - the authorities, opposition parties and civil
society as a whole. It must include a smooth exit
strategy for the international actors. Gender issues and
the instrumental role that women play in economic
recovery, social cohesion and political legitimacy,
expanding the scope of national capacities, are also of
particular importance.

ll-2l268
Peacebuilding is also an exercise in managing the
expectations of the authorities and the civil society of
the country in question and those of the mission and
other international stakeholders. That can be done only
through constant dialogue and through a real grasp of
political, social, economic and cultural realities and
their dynamics and evolution.

National ownership contributes to institution-
building, and, on the other hand, institution-building
reinforces national ownership and national
responsibility, thus paving the way for a successful exit
strategy of the international partners and self-sustained
peace and stability.

The European Union has long been committed to
supporting institutional development in post-conflict
countries. In that regard, as a member of the European
Union, Portugal naturally shares the position that will
be expressed by its representative during this debate.

In concluding, I would like to recall an
expression of Sergio Vieira de Mello, who personifies
United Nations involvement both in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Timor-Leste. He said "The UN is
an instrument, a frame, an engine, a dynamic, as
conciliatory, as innovative, as successful as Member
States wish it, allow it and make it be." That is our
common challenge and our shared responsibility.
Bearing that in mind, let me assure the Council of
Portugal's commitment to contribute to a more
effective and coherent international responsible to
post-conflict peacebuilding.

