Mr. Kamau (Kenya): I am pleased to be here
today to present the annual report (S/ZOl7/76) of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) on its tenth session.
I congratulate you, Sir, for your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council, and commend you
for the manner in which you have conducted its affairs.

I should like to commend the representative of the
Republic of Korea, as Chair of the PBC at its eleventh
session, for his leadership, and all the PBC members,
including members of the Council, for their continued
commitment to the work of the Commission. I also
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for your decision,
to convene the annual informal interactive dialogue
between members of the Security Council and the PBC
immediately after this briefing this morning. We look
forward to that informal exchange as an opportunity to
further enhance the advisory role of the Commission to
the Council.

I will now turn to the presentation of the
Commission's annual report on its tenth session. The
year 2016 was an important one for the Peacebuilding
Commission, marked by the adoption of the resolutions
on the review of the peacebuilding architecture and
several activities that the Commission undertook to
implement those resolutions. In April 2016, the General
Assembly and the Security Council not only reaffirmed
the relevance of the Peacebuilding Commission as an
intergovernmental advisory body, but also stressed the
Commission's importance in promoting an integrated,
strategic and coherent approach to peacebuilding and
bringing sustained international attention to sustaining
peace, thereby serving as a bridge among the principal
organs and a platform to bring together United Nations
States Members and a broad range of partners who are
interested in peacebuilding. I should like to direct the
attention ofthe Security Council to the following points.

First, during the period covered by the report, the
Commission diversified its engagement and expressed
its ability to be flexible in response to requests by
Member States. It convened a range of country-specific,

regional and thematic discussions. The Commission's
consideration of peacebuilding opportunities and
challenges after the outbreak of the Ebola epidemic in
West Africa was well informed by a visit by the Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission to the region, which
explored the subregional peacebuilding opportunities
and challenges. Throughout that time, the Commission
provided an important platform to address requests of
Member States to discuss cross-border and subregional
challenges and, at the same time, to improve coherence
among various stakeholders. The Commission also
benefited from expert briefings from the Department
of Political Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Development
Programme, thereby providing evidence of a further
step forward in the Commission's efforts to enhance a
coherent approach to peacebuilding across the system.

Secondly, the value of the Peacebuilding
Commission lies in its ability to fully utilize its diverse
membership to reinforce its bridging role among the
principal organs and entities of the United Nations.
We all agree that development, peace and security, and
human rights are interlinked and mutually reinforcing,
while acknowledging that development itself cannot
guarantee peace, like peace alone cannot guarantee
sustainable development. That is why we worked
with the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council to discusss possible synergies among
peacebuilding, sustaining peace and sustainable
development. When requested, we provided advice
to the Security Council in a holistic manner - for
example, in the case of Liberia and Guinea-Bissau

Thirdly, throughout the tenth session, the
Commission also made important progress in building
stronger relations with key partners, including
international financial institutions, regional and
subregional organizations and other bodies within the
United Nations system. The Chair engaged the African
Union Peace and Security Council on issues of mutual
interest and potential areas of future cooperation
with the Commission, as required in the twin
resolutions - General Assembly resolutions 70/262
and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016). I urge the
Commission to continue in that direction and to look
for opportunities to strengthen its collaboration with
Member States, civil society organizations and, where
relevant, private sector actors.

Fourthly, peacebuilding efforts require predictable
and sustained resources. In that connection, in 2016,
the Commission continued its efforts to strengthen the
synergies with the Peacebuilding Fund. During the tenth
session, we had several opportunities to build those
synergies. The meeting on financing for peacebuilding
in Kyrgyzstan, in October 2016, is only one example
of how the Commission can provide a platform to the
Peacebuilding Fund recipient countries to discuss the
impact of the Fund in support of national peacebuilding
efforts. I hope that Kyrgyzstan will be followed by
other countries in actively seeking engagement with
the Peacebuilding Fund as a platform to share their
peacebuilding experiences and success stories.

Fifthly, the General Assembly and the Security
Council encouraged the Peacebuilding Commission to
consider diversifying its working methods to enhance its
efficiency and flexibility. Following the adoption of the
resolutions of April 2016, the Commission conducted a
review of its rules of procedure and working methods
with a view to, inter alia, examining possible forms
of engagement by the Commission and enhancing its
advisory role, including by aligning its work to relevant
Security Council meetings.

Beyond those five points, there is a lot more that
the Commission did in 2016 to support peacebuilding
and sustaining peace, including through its country-
specific activities, as indicated in the annual report
(S/2017/76). I am confident that, under the capable
chairpersonship of the Republic of Korea, the
Peacebuilding Commission will continue to evolve into
an even more dynamic and important platform for the
membership to engage on challenges and opportunities
for building and sustaining peace.

In conclusion, allow me to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco and his
entire team at the Peacebuilding Support Office for
their support throughout the tenth session and their
dedication to peacebuilding and sustaining peace. I
would also like to wish my Ambassador Cho Tae-yul
every success as Chair in 2017.

