Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful to Mr. Guehenno for the information he has
provided, which helps us get a clearer picture of the
events of recent days. Before I address some of the
points made by the Under-Secretary-General, I wish to
refer to the Secretary-General's report (S/2002/1126),
in which we see progress in various areas. We
commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Steiner, and the members of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) for the excellent job they are doing.

We wish to mention three specific points. The
first point is on the return of refugees. It is good to note
that the number of organized and individual returns is
continuing to grow. The comprehensive fashion in
which this issue is being handled has ensured that the
people returning have at least the minimum security
and development conditions that enable them to re-
establish their lives. For that reason, we believe that
the initiative of the Special Representative to create a
Task Force on Returns will make it possible to appraise
and improve that policy in order, as Mr. Steiner has
said, "to turn this priority into reality".

My second point pertains to the situation in
Mitrovica. We acknowledge that the situation in the
Mitrovica area has improved substantially. I am
speaking not only of the security situation, but also of
the work in which UNMIK is engaged, together with
the population, in an effort to dismantle the existing
parallel structures and to incorporate this region into
the framework that is being applied to the rest of
Kosovo. For this reason, we regard the seven-point
plan proposed by the Special Representative on 1
October as an important step in the right direction.

The third point relates to the political situation.
There has been marked improvement in the
consolidation of executive and legislative power. The
commitment of the people working in these areas will
make the decisions that they are making more efficient
and effective. We appeal to those just elected to join in
this endeavour and to work to bolster the institutions in
a way that will ensure the formation of a multi-ethnic
society.

There was a very high rate of abstention in the 26
October elections. We regret that majorities decided
not to participate to any great extent in the electoral
process. That decision, specifically that of the Kosovo
Serbs, is directly detrimental to them, since it reduces
their ability to influence and participate in decision-
making processes. Unfortunately, the decision of
certain Serb politicians to encourage a boycott by
Kosovo Serbs through a disinformation campaign
prevailed over the efforts of other leaders and of the
international community.

These results should be cause for further
reflection, because we believe that they may have been
the consequence of a variety of factors, including the
following: electoral fatigue; rejection of UNMIK's
policies; indifference to democratic mechanisms; lack
of information; the influence of electoral groups in the
region; and lack of commitment on the part of local
leaders to induce electors to vote. That list of concerns
could go on. So we believe that these results should not
be taken lightly, because through analysis of their
implications and causes it may be possible to identify a
promising space within which to design policies that
better reflect reality.

We regret that the Special Representative's
presentation of an administrative decentralization
programme had to be postponed in view of the
electoral results. We consider the principles of
decentralization to be very important for the future
administration of Kosovo. Accordingly, we are sure
that Mr. Steiner will continue to try to implement his
programme, with the necessary reforms. We support
the initiative of proposing that the Council of Europe
present a programme in this regard.

In conclusion, we would like to mention the work
that has been done with neighbouring countries and, of
course, with the Government of Yugoslavia. The
regional perspective ensures that the programmes
developed by UNMIK are not isolated and that they
enable the institutions that are being created to be self-
sustaining over time.

