Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this briefing, which allows me to review the work
accomplished as Chair of two subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council in 2013 and 2014.

I would like to begin by sharing my ideas as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006) on the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. It has been my honour and pleasure to chair
that Committee over the past two years. I will divide
my briefing into two parts: a summary of the work
accomplished over our two-year term, followed by
my assessment. The first part of my briefing will
reflect the two principal areas work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), namely,
the implementation of resolutions and the response to
non-compliance with the measures, on the one hand,
and outreach, assistance and cooperation, on the other.

The past two years were particularly intense and
active in terms of non-proliferation issues concerning
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. A nuclear
test by that country took place on 12 February 2013 and
a number of ballistic missile launches were conducted
throughout 2014, in contravention of the international
obligations of the People's Democratic Republic of
Korea. In early 2013, the Security Council adopted
resolutions 2087 (2013) and 2094 (2013), strengthening
and broadening the sanctions regime with respect to
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. One of
the main tasks of the Sanctions Committee during
the period under review was to monitor the effective
implementation of the newly agreed measures and to
provide assistance and practical guidance to that end.
By the end of this month, the 1718 Committee will
have held a total of 15 informal advisory sessions
over the past two years, representing a considerable
increase with respect to prior years and demonstrating
the continued commitment of all members of the
Committee to advancing on the matters of its mandate.

Over the past two years, the Committee has been
called upon to address the most serious incident
that had been brought before it to date. In July 2013,
Panama alerted the Committee to the inspection and
seizure of a large shipment of conventional weapons
aboard the vessel Chang Chon Gang. The incident
highlighted the continuing shift in the techniques used
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to avoid
sanctions, as well as the important role of Member
States in moving to intercept suspect shipments in a
timely fashion.

The Chang Chan Gangincident required an appropriate
response from the Committee, commensurate with the
gravity of the violation. In implementation of paragraph
27 of resolution 2094 (2013), under which the Security
Council has tasked the Committee with implementing
the necessary consequences for violations ofthe relevant
resolutions by designating additional individuals and
entities that have contributed to the nuclear or ballistic
missile programmes of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, or to other activities prohibited by
those resolutions.

On 28 July, the Committee concluded its deliberations
on the designation of an additional entity, the Ocean
Maritime Management Company, Limited, which
played a key role in the organization of the transport
to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea of the
shipment of weapons and related materiel discovered
on board the Chang Chan Gang in July 2013. Through
its actions, Ocean Maritime Management contributed
to activities prohibited by the resolutions by violating
the arms embargo imposed under resolution 1718 (2006)
and modified by resolution 1874 (2009), and assisted
in evading the measures imposed by those resolutions.
Similarly, on 28 July the Committee adopted a
detailed implementation assistance notice based on the
resolutions. Implementation assistance notice No. 5,
entitled "The Chang Chan Gang incident", provides
information on that incident and clarifies certain
provisions of the resolutions.

In April, the Committee approved the updated
list of items whose import into or export from the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea is prohibited,
as well as the list of designated individuals and entities,
in accordance with paragraph 21 of resolution 2094
(2013) and presidential statement S/PRST/2012/13 of
16 April 2012. The Committee thereby fulfilled its
responsibilities by strengthening the relevance of the
measures adopted, thanks to an improvement in the
quality of the list of prohibited items and the list of
designated individuals and entities.

I shall now address the awareness-raising and
cooperation activities. In 2013, a large share of
the Committee's activities was devoted to the
implementation of the two new resolutions adopted by
the Council, as well as to enhancing Member States'
awareness of the obligations they entail. In that regard,
the Committee updated its existing implementation
notices to provide Member States with practical
guidance to ensure their compliance with resolutions
2087 (2013) and 2094 (2013). With a view to making the
sanctions regime more reader-friendly, the Committee
also developed a fact sheet that gives an overview of the
measures imposed by the four resolutions that concern
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and their
ensuing obligations for Member States.

In February, the 1718 Committee adopted an
additionalimplementationassistancenoticethatprovides
practical information on the correct implementation of
the interdiction regarding the transport of any item to
or from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
if a Member State determines that said article could
contribute to the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea's nuclear or ballistic missile programmes. The
Committee is still in the process of considering a draft
notice regarding the neutralization of seized goods. The
Chang Chan Gang incident highlighted the need for the
Committee to provide practical guidance to Member
States in that regard. I hope that the Committee will
soon conclude its deliberations on that matter.

The 1718 Committee, with the help of its Panel
of Experts, held two open briefings, in June 2013 and
July 2014, respectively. The aim of those meetings
was twofold. They sought, on the one hand, to share
information on the work of the Committee and the Panel
of Experts, and, on the other, to identify the assistance
the Committee is able to offer Member States with
respect to their implementation of resolutions and the
submission of their national reports. I believe that this
was an important demonstration of transparency that
gave Member States a deeper understanding of their
obligations pursuant to the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

I recall that all Member States are required to report
to the Security Council on the specific measures they
have adopted to effectively implement the provisions of
the resolutions. The number of Member States that have
filed their reports has now risen to 98. I have engaged
on a bilateral basis with the States that have not yet
submitted their reports to the Security Council in order
to encourage them to do so.

Concerning increased awareness, I note the open
briefing convened on 18 November 2013 by the Chairs
of the anti-terrorism committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001), along with
the Chairs of the committees engaged in the fight to
curb the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery, established pursuant to
resolutions 1540 (2004), 1718 (2006) and 1737 (2006).
The briefing was organized with the President of the
General Authority for Investment (GAFI) in order to
explain the respective roles of the Security Council
and GAFI in the implementation of financial sanctions.
During the period under review, the 1718 Committee
also responded to numerous requests from Member
States and international organizations for clarification
or interpretation of the sanctions measures.

1 come now to the second part of my briefing,
which concerns my personal reflections, which my
team shares. In the light of the experience gathered
over the course of the past two years, it is my view
that the 1718 Committee faces two key challenges.
Member States and other concerned actors need to be
more aware, and our measures need to be effectively
implemented in all countries and throughout the world,
with assistance and advice provided where needed to
ensure success. The Panel ofExperts, in its final report,
observed that the existing measures provided for by the
Council support the prevention of proscribed activities
so long as they are correctly implemented. With respect
to such challenges, I can only reiterate the importance
the Committee ascribes to enhancing dialogue and
cooperation with Member States in order to strengthen
their capacity to implement the measures adopted by
the Council.

To that end, the Committee should continue the
practice of holding open briefings for Member States
and should engage more directly with Member States
faced with particular difficulties in the implementation
of the measures. The effective implementation of
Security Council resolutions requires the commitment
and full cooperation of all Member States. It is equally
important for the Committee to continue to fully
shoulder its responsibilities in the implementation
of the sanctions regime by acting in a timely fashion
and, as needed, by taking the necessary measures to
respond with appropriate firmness in the case ofproven
violations of Council resolutions.

The Security Council's recent open debate on
horizontal matters related to sanctions (see S/PV.7323)
made it clear that, despite the high number of similar
concerns shared by the various sanctions regimes,
the Committees and their secretariats barely interact
or communicate with one another. I therefore fully
agree with the objective of seeking better coordination
within the Secretariat so as to streamline its work
and make support to the Committees more effective,
thereby improving the implementation of the measures
imposed by the Council. The efforts made in this regard
by the Department of Political Affairs, especially the
Security Council Affairs Division, are commendable. It
is important to continue to identify good practices and
to facilitate their exchange among the various sanctions
committees.

I welcome in particular the work carried out by
the Secretariat to standardize the format of all United
Nations sanctions lists and establish a consolidated
list of the Security Council sanctions in all official
languages of the Organization. This will facilitate their
implementation by Member States and private-sector
actors. For the 1718 Committee, this task was completed
in October.

It was also in October that, at the request of the
Chair, the Secretariat updated the Committee's
guidelines for the conduct of its work in order to
bring them into line with current best practices. Such
technical exercises had already been carried out by the
majority of the sanctions committees. Once they have
been approved by the Committee in 1718, which I hope
will be soon, the revised guidelines will be posted on the
Committee's website. Clarifying and streamlining the
procedures for the conduct ofbusiness, these guidelines
should allow the 1718 Committee to discharge its duties
yet more efficiently.

I also believe that the Council and its sanctions
committees could benefit from increased interaction
with relevant international and regional organizations,
whether in the form of joint meetings or practical
cooperation. I would point to the example of the
cooperation between INTERPOL and several
sanctions committees concerning the publication of
special notices. These notices are used to disseminate
information about individuals on sanctions lists to
actors on the front-line of implementation. Luxembourg
supports this tool for disseminating information that
better informs Member States with regard to their
obligations under the sanctions regimes. With the aim
of promoting consistency in the work of the various
sanctions committees, I believe that it could be useful
for the 1718 Committee to consider, in turn, closer
cooperation with INTERPOL.

I would like to thank the Panel of Experts for its
valuable contribution to the work of the Committee and
for the thorough and professional manner in which it
fulfils its mandate. Despite the often difficult political
context in which it must operate, the Panel has always
been a reliable source of information for the Committee
in monitoring the application of sanctions. Throughout
the past two years, my team and I have been able to
count on excellent cooperation and interaction with the
Panel. In fulfiling its mandate, the Panel relies on the
cooperation of Member States. I take this opportunity
to encourage Member States to promptly provide
the Panel with all the information necessary to its
investigations - confidentially, when the need arises.
Likewise, I call on the Member States to cooperate
fully with the Panel and to facilitate expert visits.

Finally, as Chair of the 1718 Committee, my aim
has been to guide the work of the Committee in the most
effective manner, while seeking to facilitate consensus
on the actions to be taken and establishing open dialogue
with Member States and other partners. Here I wish
to thank the Committee members for their excellent
collaboration and the collegial and friendly relations
they established with my entire team. Together, we
have made significant progress in the implementation
of the measures decided upon by the Council. Even if
we do not always agree on everything, we are united
by the common desire to ensure compliance with the
objectives of Council resolutions. In this sense, our
discussions have always been rewarding. I believe I
speak for all members ofthe Committee when I say that
together we have managed to make the 1718 Committee
more effective in its functioning and more transparent
and accessible to all Member States.

I will turn, more briefly now, to the work achieved
chairing the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. For 15 years, the Security Council has been
paying increased attention to children affected by
armed conflict. Situations regularly appearing on the
agenda of the Security Council 4 those in Syria, the
Central African Republic or South Sudan, to name just
three examples - remind us of the urgent need to make
every effort to protect children from the consequences
of conflict.

While the issue of children and armed conflict was
essentially equated with that of child soldiers at the time
when resolution 1261 (1999) was adopted, it has since
undergone a considerable evolution, with the gradual
implementation of an apparatus that takes into account
the great many repercussions of conflict on children and
the whole range of serious violations committed against
them. The Security Council therefore established, with
resolution 1612 (2005), the monitoring and reporting
mechanism to provide reliable and comprehensive data
on violations committed against children in all countries
concerned, on the one hand, and the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict to develop conclusions
and recommendations to parties to conflict, on the
other hand.

The Working Group's adoption on 26 November of
conclusions regarding the plight of children in armed
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic shows that, despite
the differences of opinion within the Security Council
on the Syrian conflict, the Working Group has been able
to fulfil its mandate responsibly and in solidarity. Here
I express my hope and wish that the spirit of consensus
and unity that characterized the Working Group can be
maintained in the future.

Luxembourg has worked to strengthen the protection

of children by strengthening existing mechanisms while
making more systematic use of other tools available to
the Working Group. Our work has focused on three
priorities. First, we have attached great importance to
the consistent integration ofthe issue of child protection
into the work of the Security Council. Provisions for
the protection of children become of practical use when
transposed into the mandates of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations. Luxembourg has worked with
determination to ensure that the protection of children
in armed conflicts is duly taken into account when all
existing mandates come up for renewal, as well as in
the establishment of new mandates. Luxembourg has
also endeavoured to ensure that the issue of children
affected by conflict is reflected in all other relevant
resolutions and presidential statements adopted by the
Council.

During the deliberations of the Security Council
on the situation in the countries concerned, we have
consistently raised the issue of children and armed
conflict. Furthermore, when a specific situation has
required more information - as was the case for
Syria and the Central African Republic - and we
have deemed it beneficial for the Security Council
to hear from the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, we have ensured that Ms. Leila
Zerrougui was able to speak before the Council.

Finally, I would like to mention the importance of
consistently including violations and abuses against
children, including the recruitment and use of children,
in the listing criteria of sanctions regimes - as we did
in resolution 2134 (2014), adopted on 28 January 2014,
for the Central African Republic.

As a second priority, as Chair Luxembourg sought
to reinvigorate the activities of the Working Group
by organizing regular update briefings. The Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflicts has
thus briefed the Working Group regarding the latest
developments in the countries on its agenda -to name
just a few, the Central African Republic, Mali, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, Syria,
Iraq and Yemen. Such briefings usefully complement
the more substantial but less frequently updated
information contained in the periodic reports of the
Secretary-General.
We have also invited, in full accordance with the
mandate of the Working Group, qualified individuals
who could participate in its work. The African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Ambassador
Smail Chergui, briefed the Working Group on
cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union in the protection of children in times of armed
conflict. The participation of Ambassador Chergui was
also in the spirit of greater involvement of regional
organizations in the protection of children in armed
conflict, which we sought to promote both in
presidential statement S/PRST/2013/8, of 17 June 2013,
and in resolution 2143 (2014) of7 March 2014, to which
I will return in a moment. We also heard a briefing
by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, regarding the important
work carried out by the ICC in bringing to justice
those who have committed grave violations against
children in situations of armed conflict. Finally, on
2 June we were able to talk via video-teleconference
with the special country team of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism for South Sudan, after which a
press statement (SC/ 11429) was adopted.

In the same spirit, in order to allow better
interaction between the Working Group and the
actors responsible for child protection in the field, we
revived the practice of conducting field missions. The
Working Group visited Myanmar from 30 November to
4 December 2013 at the invitation of the Government
of Myanmar. Last week, I had the opportunity to lead
a mission of the Working Group to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. During both visits, members of
the Working Group, many of whom participated, were
able to meet the relevant ministers, United Nations
officials, representatives of civil society and affected
children, thereby demonstrating the importance that
the Council attaches to the issue of the protection of
children affected by armed conflict. I hope that, like
the sanctions committees, field visits of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict in the near
future will be covered by the United Nations budget.
We believe that the exchanges I have just mentioned
enrich the actions of the Working Group, helping it to
better fulfil its role. We hope that these practices will
be continued in the future.

On the third priority, Luxembourg has worked
to strengthen the normative framework on the matter
of child protection with the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2013/8 on 17 June 2013, and of
resolution 2143 (2014) on 7 March 2014, during the
Luxembourg presidency of the Security Council. The
resolution condemns in particular the use of schools
for military purposes and encourages all States to take
concrete measures to deter armed forces and non-State
armed groups from using schools. Resolution 2143
(2014) also recommends that Member States include
child protection in training programmes, military
orders and military directives, and that United Nations
entities and troop- and police-contributing countries
involved in United Nations peacekeeping be provided
with targeted and operational information so as to
better prepare their staff to contribute to the prevention
of violations against children.

Through the open debate in which resolution
2143 (2014) was adopted (see S/PV.7129), we called
for discussions on how to progressively implement
the full realization of the children and armed conflict
agenda. New challenges are on the horizon. At the
same time, recurring problems persist. The Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict must redouble
its efforts to solve them. These problems include the
issue of persistent perpetrators, to which we dedicated
a thematic meeting in May 2013 in order to explore how
best to address the fact that some parties to a conflict
have been identified in the annexes to the Secretary-
General's annual reports for five consecutive years,
or even longer. Among these persistent perpetrators
are a large number of non-State actors. Now that
the Children, Not Soldiers campaign, launched by
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict and UNICEF in March, is beginning to bear
fruit, we must tackle head-on the problem of non-State
actors, who make up the vast majority of the parties
listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General's annual
report.

In conclusion, let me thank very warmly the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
and her formidable team, as well as UNICEF, for the
praiseworthy work they do every day at Headquarters
and especially in the field. Luxembourg is proud to
have been able to make a contribution on behalf of
children affected by armed conflicts during the past
two years. I also wish to thank all members of the
Working Group and the Council, who have contributed
to re-establishing Security Council unity on the
imperative need to protect children. As our term draws
to a close, I assure the Council that we will continue to
commit to this noble cause, which concerns us all.

