Mr. Sandoval Cojull'ln (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Guatemala welcomes the holding of this
debate on the situation in Haiti. I take this opportunity
to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his report
(8/2016/225). I also thank Ms. Sandra Honore for her
briefing as the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

Guatemala aligns itself with the statement made by
the delegation of Peru on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Haiti.

We take note of the efforts of MINUSTAH to
carry out its mandate, including establishing a secure
and stable environment, assist in monitoring and
restructuring, support the political and constitutional
process and contribute to the task of organizing and
overseeing free and fair municipal, parliamentary
and presidential elections. Guatemala is proudly
contributing to supporting the stabilization of the
country. At the same time, however, we stress the
importance of public officials continuing to work to
promote political and social stability, which Haitians
very much deserve.

With regard to free and fair municipal, parliamentary
and presidential elections, Guatemala notes that recent
events that led to the postponement of presidential
election, which provoked an institutional crisis, do not
help the country to regain the much-needed democratic
path Haiti. We are concerned about such acts, which
promote greater instability in the country.

We welcome the agreement reached among the
parties that provides the necessary structures to
preserve institutional continuity in Haiti and a road
map for the swift conclusion of the ongoing electoral
cycle. We emphasize the importance that the parties
comply with the agreement of 5 February, which aims
to protect Haiti's constitutional continuity, so that the
final round of elections can take place on 24 April and
a new presidential term can begin on 14 May.

We also support the view of the core group
of the international community based in Port-au-
Prince - made up ofBrazil, Canada, France, Spain, the
United States, European Union and the Organization
of American States - with regard to the need to
underscore the importance of completing the electoral
process within the agreed time frame. In that regard,
we welcome the election, on 14 February, of an interim
President in order to safeguard institutional continuity
and continue the electoral process in Haiti. At the
same time, it is important that all the parties maintain
a constructive dialogue to guide the country towards
a stable and democratic future, which is essential to
addressing the challenges facing Haiti and taking
measures aimed at promoting calm and stability. It is
important that the political sector continue contributing
and carrying out its task in order to achieve the political
stability that the country so badly needs, which will
contribute to its development.

In another vein, we note with concern the dire
humanitarian situation in the country, including the
24 per cent increase in the number of cholera cases
from 2014 to 2015.

In conclusion, we welcome the fact that security on
the ground in the framework of the electoral processes
have been mainly handled by the Haitian National Police
(HNP) and that only twice was MINUSTAH called on
to assist - a clear example of the strengthening of
the HNP.

