Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General on UNMIK
(S/2010/l69) and for his efforts in the complex
situation in the district. We welcome the participation
in today's Council meeting of Mr. Vuk Jeremie,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and we share his
assessments.

We also listened attentively to Mr. Hyseni's
statement, which, once again, was not distinguished by
its objectivity or compliance with resolution 1244
(1999).

Our position of not accepting Kosovo's unilateral
declaration of independence (UDI) is well known.
Russia supports the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of the Republic of Serbia. We are convinced of the
need for strict compliance with resolution 1244 (1999),
which remains fully in force. It remains binding for all
as an international and legal basis for a settlement in
Kosovo and for ensuring security in the district. Not
understanding or accepting that means not accepting
international legality.

The Russian Federation fully supports the work
of UNMIK in Kosovo in discharging its mandate. The
Mission must continue to play a leading role vis-a-vis
the other international presences in the district, as set
forth in the November 2008 report of the Secretary-
General (S/2008/692). Nobody is entitled to hinder the
use of its vested authority, including in helping to
ensure the rights and security of national minorities
and in achieving the international community's
democratic standards for Kosovo. This applies equally
to the Mission's duty with respect to the external
representation of Pristina in regional and international
mechanisms. We note the irreplaceable role of the
Mission in promoting intercommunal dialogue,
especially in the northern part of the district. In this
context, we welcome its efforts to establish special
working groups to attract all interested parties with a
View to solving practical problems encountered by the
local population.

We see no particular improvement in the relations
between the Mission and Pristina in spite of continuing
protocol contacts between the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the Kosovo authorities.
The Kosovars are still ignoring the United Nations
Mission in spite of the principles for a settlement set
forth in resolution 1244 (1999).

The situation in Kosovo causes us serious
concern, first and foremost the attempt of the Pristina
authorities to implement, come what may, the "strategy
for northern Kosovo". We are convinced that any
unilateral steps in this area could ignite the already
complex inter-ethnic situation in the district, especially
against the backdrop of the growing dissatisfaction in
the socio-economic situation and the high level of
crime and corruption.

In addition, we are just as concerned by the
Kosovars' attempts to instigate steps by the
international presences, especially the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), to
dismantle the repeater stations of Serbian mobile
communications operators as well by Pristina's
intention to adopt legislation establishing a system by
which Serbian citizens could enter Kosovo only on
foreign passports. It is vital that there be a legal and
political assessment of these actions by the Kosovo
authorities. Otherwise, they could lead to a sharp
increase in intercommunal tension.
We still find the situation of returns to Kosovo by
internally displaced persons to be unsatisfactory.
Unfortunately, there still are numerous instances of
Kosovo Serbs being forced to sell their property and
leave the district, a situation to which no attention has
been paid. All of that demonstrates no trend in Kosovo
towards increasing inter-ethnic tolerance. Quite the
contrary: the situation has regressed. The territories of
large Serbian enclaves are gradually shrinking, and the
small ones are simply dying off.

The situation with respect to protecting Serbian
religious and cultural heritage is alarming. Of course,
we have a positive view of the appointment of
Ambassador Moschopoulos of Greece as European
Union facilitator on these issues. However, we note
that the desecration of Serbian graveyards and
cathedrals in Kosovo continues. In this context, we are
especially concerned about NATO's transfer to the
Kosovo police of responsibility for guarding important
Serbian cultural sites, a transfer which has begun, and
about the general trend towards reducing the numerical
strength of the Kosovo Force.

We would especially like to emphasize that
EULEX's catering to Pristina authorities, and at times
its inactivity, has harmed the authority of that mission,
which has been practically exceeding the neutral status
set out in its mandate. In these conditions, EULEX
must scrupulously comply with the principles of
resolution 1244 (1999) and act in a balanced fashion,
bearing in mind the interests of both parties, and within
the framework of the general coordinating functions of
UNMIK.

The complex situation in Kosovo proves the need
for the Security Council to retain a leading role on
Kosovo. The Council must remain the guarantor of
compliance with international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and its own decisions. Russia confirms
its readiness to continue political efforts to help
develop a legally correct and fair resolution of the
question of Kosovo under resolution 1244 (1999).

