Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
President Mogae and Ms. Sunday for their briefings.

We are outraged by the events unfolding in South
Sudan, especially the widespread violence, ongoing
atrocities and obstruction of humanitarian access.
Rather than committing to the ceasefire called for in
the 2015 peace agreement endorsed by the Security
Council, South Sudan's leaders, both in Government
and in opposition movements, have chosen to undertake
new military offensives and orchestrate militia attacks,
placing their own interests above those of their people.

Last December, some colleagues in the Security

Council arguedthat pressure wouldbe counterproductive
because it would block a renewed political process, but
there has been no progress since December. Instead,
the situation has deteriorated and is even more grave
now. There is ongoing and active fighting. In the past
three weeks alone, 40,000 South Sudanese have been
displaced to Uganda, with almost 500,000 displaced
since last July. There are almost 5 million people facing
severe hunger, and famine has been declared in two
counties, with the very real prospect that it will spread.
The famine is not a result of drought; it is the result of
leaders who are more interested in political power and
personal gain than in stopping violence and allowing
humanitarian access.

The Government's continued unconscionable
impediments to humanitarians seeking access to assist
famine-stricken populations may amount to deliberate
starvation tactics. There are reports of civilians being
deliberately targeted on an ethnic basis, rampant sexual
violence, widespread unlawful recruitment of child
soldiers, the destruction of homes and the looting of
property. It is not the first time in this now three-year-
old conflict that Government forces have employed a
scorched-earth campaign. Since September 2016 alone,
almost 17,000 structures have been destroyed in just
part of the former state of Central Equatoria.

Our goals are clear. The parties must cease
hostilities, engage in meaningful and inclusive
dialogue and deliver on their repeated promises to allow
unfettered access for humanitarian organizations. Any
political process must be truly inclusive of all South
Sudanese voices in order to be sustainable and credible.
Dialogue must complement the peace agreement, the
core elements of which include a permanent ceasefire,
power-sharing and critical reforms - a road map to
lasting peace. We welcome the continued commitment of
the United Nations and regional organizations to peace
and stability in South Sudan, and we look to the shuttle
diplomacy of the African Union High Representative to
South Sudan, President Konare, and to full engagement
on the part of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development to yield results in the next month. It is
against that backdrop that the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS), the peacekeeping mission
authorized by the Council, is being prevented by both
Government and opposition forces from fully carrying
out its mandate. Moreover, the Council-authorized
regional protection force has encountered unacceptable
delays in deploying. The Council should take seriously
this deliberate repudiation of its Chapter VII mandate.

The international community must make use of
all of the tools at its disposal to address the crisis in
South Sudan and the many obstructions to the work
of UNMISS. We have received warning after warning
about the prospect for further mass atrocities, but we
do not need such warnings to know that the sustained
level of violence and ongoing atrocities in South Sudan
are beyond unacceptable. As has been noted, an arms
embargo is one tool that the Council could use to
address the ongoing violence in South Sudan. Similarly,
our unanimously adopted sanctions resolution 2206
(2015) gives us the ability to designate individuals
whose actions or policies threaten peace in South
Sudan, including those who obstruct the activities of
international peacekeeping or humanitarian missions,
those whose actions or policies expand the conflict and
those who engage in the targeting of civilians, including
women and girls.

Finally, I would like to say a word about
accountability. Progress in establishinga hybrid court
for South Sudan is desperately needed, and we urge the
African Union and South Sudan to expedite progress on
that important mechanism in the coming months. Peace
and justice can and should be pursued simultaneously.

