Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me first of all to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your country's presidency of the Security Council
during the month of July and for such a pertinent choice
of theme: the important issue of the linkages between
international terrorism and transnational organized
crime. I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Kuwait on its successful presidency
in June.

I thank Ms. Michele Coninsx, Assistant Secretary-
General and Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate; Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime; and Ms. Tamara Makarenko, International
Consultant, for their enlightening briefings.

There is no doubt that linkages between terrorism
and transnational organized crime exist, nor are they
new. Terrorist and transnational organized crime
networks have often worked together, acting as service
providers for one another. They coordinate closely to
carry out their heinous and illegal operations, sparing
no continent or country. These linkages have been
accentuated over the course of this decade, which has
seen a resurgence of terrorist acts, along with a rise in
cross-border criminal activities, thereby threatening
the peace, stability, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States and societies.

The flow of foreign terrorist fighters to hotbeds of
tension, particularly in Iraq and Syria, has seen these
two networks further unite in order to facilitate the travel
of foreign terrorist fighters, with the help of traffickers
and smugglers. In addition, terrorist networks have used
transnational organized crime networks to finance their
activities through kidnapping-for-ransom operations,
trafficking in drugs, weapons, cultural property and
persons and illegal immigration activities, inter alia.
This has been highlighted in a number of reports of
United Nations bodies, including the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, and noted in resolutions
including 1373 (2001) and 2368 (2017), as well as in
presidential statement S/PRST/2018/9.

The military defeat of Da'esh triggered the return,
transit and resettlement of foreign terrorist fighters,
which intensified the global terrorist threat on the one
hand and bolstered the linkage between terrorist and
transnational organized crime networks on the other. It
is therefore extremely important to consider their next
destination. Returning foreign terrorist fighters are
heading towards North Africa and the Sahel, among
other regions. This is likely to put significant pressure
on peace and security in Africa, especially the Sahel-
Maghreb area, as they look for hotbeds of tension and
institutional fragility - essentially a State vacuum,
where they can settle, proliferate and sow the seeds of
terror and fear throughout the continent.

This new reality has reinforced the existence of
linkages between cross-border crime, armed groups,
separatist movements, terrorist groups and traffickers
of all kinds in Africa. In addition, drug and arms
traffickers have joined the ranks of terrorist groups,
such as Al-Qaida and its branch in the Islamic Maghreb
and entities affiliated with Da'esh. All of these criminal
networks are interlinked and fuel one another further
as they become more global, thereby increasing their
capacity to destabilize and undermine the territorial
integrity of States. This is undoubtedly a threat to peace
and security not only in Africa, especially in the Sahel-
Maghreb area, but throughout the entire world. This is
a source of concern for my country and one to which
the international community must pay more attention.

This new situation further complicates efforts to
combat terrorism and transnational organized crime.
It requires us to strengthen border security and the
exchange of information, consolidate international,
regional and subregional cooperation and implement
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
the international conventions and protocols on counter-
terrorism, the relevant Security Council resolutions and
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children. The United Nations has a central role to
play, especially with regard to capacity-building.

The Kingdom of Morocco is well aware of the
linkages between terrorism and transnational organized
crime, especially the trafficking of drugs, weapons and
human beings, hostage-taking and the kidnapping of
tourists, humanitarian workers and even United Nations
officials. It was one of the first States to alert the
international community to these dangerous linkages.
We therefore call for vigilance and a combination of
subregional, regional and international efforts to
combat terrorism and transnational organized crime.
We also call on the States of the Sahel and the Maghreb
to take concerted action to stem the already perceptible
adverse effects of such terrorist and criminal activities.

Morocco has developed its own national strategy
based on security governance, upgrading our legal
framework, the fight against social instability and
religious-sector reform in order to combat these
scourges. We have also invested in international efforts,
both within the United Nations and its specialized
bodies and in international counter-terrorism initiatives
and forums, including the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum, which we co-chair with the Netherlands and,
from September, Canada.

Finally, Morocco remains willing to share its
expertise and know-how in the fight against terrorism
and transnational organized crime. We will stand
shoulder to shoulder with our African brothers,
both bilaterally and through triangular cooperation
with the United Nations in the context of South-
South cooperation.

