Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and the Police
Commissioners of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur for their briefings.

In most cases, the term "United Nations
peacekeeping forces" is synonymous with military
troops. Nevertheless, police components also play
a key role in the maintenance of security at three
levels in particular: protection through dialogue and
commitment, protection against physical violence and
protection through the creation of a secure environment.
The roles of the United Nations police in the areas
of protection through dialogue and commitment and
protection through the creation of a secure environment
are well-established in practice and involve advice,
building the capacities of and strengthening the
local police, and access to justice and Government
institutions. However, there is still a lack of clarity
regarding the role of the United Nations police with
respect to the physical protection of civilians.

The United Nations defines police work as a
support function of Government, responsible for the
prevention, detection, and investigation of crimes, the
protection of persons and property, and the maintenance
of public order and security. In this sense, exactly
one year ago we received the report of the Secretary-
General on United Nations policing (S/2016/952)
containing 14 recommendations on police work. Within
the framework of resolution 2185 (2014), it is clear that
police forces for international peace and security are of
increasing importance.

The Secretary-General's approach allows us to
identify different priorities and measures to strengthen
the work of police contingents deployed to the various
peacekeeping missions in order to create a coherent
and adaptable system that is capable of dealing with
emerging conflict and post-conflict situations, in
addition to contributing to planning transition processes
and the development of integrated approaches to the rule
of law in countries where they carry out their activities.

On the other hand, as stated by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in its Guidelines on Police
Operations, the United Nations police can engage in a
wide range of activities, including, inter alia, advice,
reform, restructuring and strengthening of police
institutions, training and instruction, assistance in
electoral processes, disarmament and demobilization,
community-based policing, patrol border management,
public information and education.

Bolivia believes that the multidimensional nature
of missions requires United Nations police officers
to cooperate closely in all areas of conflict and at all
levels, including through interaction at the local level
with military, political, humanitarian and human rights
sectors and other civilian components, but above all
by working closely with the host State in strict respect
of the principles of sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.

We welcome the Organization's efforts to ensure
that countries contributing police contingents meet
the required standards. However, challenges remain
in the areas of deployment and capacity-building
as well as specific tasks. We are confident that such
difficulties can be overcome by improving performance
management on the ground for police and civilian
components as well as military ones. The best way to
manage resources, human, financial or material, is to
focus on improving assessment and planning capacities
and enhancing the ability to provide timely information,
full communication and leadership, thereby effectively
strengthening and operationalizing the work of the
Police Division and the Strategic Force Generation
and Capability Planning Cell of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

In the context of peacebuilding, it is also crucial
to ensure that the work of the United Nations police is
strengthened in terms of the transition and transfer of
full responsibility to host States' police forces as well
as in relation to missions' exit strategies. In that regard,
as a Latin American country, we think it is important
to highlight the Haitian National Police's development
plan for 2012 to 2016, which was implemented by the
police component of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). This plan focused on
improving the capacity and operational readiness of the
Haitian National Police in the areas of crime prevention
and response and activities related to law enforcement,
which not only helped to maintain stability during the
2016 elections, but also made a valuable contribution to
the process of closing MINUSTAH and transitioning it
to MINUJUSTH.

We must strengthen our efforts to incorporate a
gender perspective into the United Nations police,
thereby affirming, ensuring and encouraging
women's equitable participation both in peacekeeping
operations, in accordance with resolution 2242 (2015),
and in peace processes, by playing an active role in
prevention, mediation and dialogue, with the aim of
arriving at solutions that reflect equality and contribute
to post-conflict reconstruction. In that regard, I would
like to ask the Commissioners what efforts and actions
are being undertaken to improve women's participation
in force components, in particular MINUJUSTH,
which consists only of a police component. We also
reaffirm our full support to the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy on sexual abuse by members of
peacekeeping missions.

In conclusion, Bolivia reaffirms its support for
and commitment to peace operations and would like
to thank United Nations staff and the personnel from
the troop- and police-contributing countries for their
work, men and women who risk their lives every day
to build lasting and sustainable peace in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

