Mr. Ping (Gabon) (spoke in French): Like preceding
speakers, I thank you for your delegation's welcome
initiative to include the item which brings us here today in
the Council's agenda: the problem of the massive illicit
traffic in small arms and light weapons.

Today, the illicit traffic in small arms and light
weapons is a real threat to international peace and security.
The Secretary-General has quite rightly focused the
international community's awareness on this phenomenon
and the dangers it represents to the stability of developing
countries, particularly in Africa.

The information we have been receiving from the
United Nations and from other intergovernmental and non-
governmental organizations shows that this is the type of
weapon most often used in the many conflicts that various
parts of the world are currently experiencing.

The use of weapons seems to be motivated by how
easy they are to use and how cheap they are. In addition,
they are easy to conceal and therefore elude the notice of
the customs and security services responsible for controlling
our various borders.

When we think of the incalculable number of civilian
victims that these weapons claim - including women,
children and the elderly - we realize the urgency of
adopting or strengthening measures, on the national,
regional and international levels, enabling us to regulate the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons.

It is clear that without close cooperation between the
countries that produce these weapons and those that buy
and use them, all the efforts that our respective
Governments and the United Nations are making to stem
the illicit traffic in this category of weapons will not
produce the desired results.

Governments in most African regions have taken
measures to combat illicit transfers of weapons of all sorts.
Following the United Nations example, they have created
a subregional register to ensure transparency in terms of the
weapons they have available for legitimate defence
purposes in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations. Others, such as the States members
of the Economic Community of West African States, have
adopted moratoriums on small arms and light weapons.

As one can see, Africa is determined to make its
contribution to combating illicit traffickers in small arms
and light weapons. It expects that the rest of the
international community will show the same
determination.

For its part, the Security Council must see to the full
implementation of its resolution 1209 (1998) of 19
November 1998. Amongst other things, the resolution
urges Member States with relevant expertise to cooperate
with African States to strengthen their capacity to combat
illicit arms flows, including through the tracking and
interdiction of illicit arms transfers; requests the
Secretary-General to consider practical ways to work with
African States in implementing national, regional or
subregional programmes for voluntary weapons collection,
disposal and destruction, including the possibility of the
establishment of a fund to support such programmes; and
encourages the Secretary-General to promote cooperation
among Member States, the United Nations, regional and
subregional organizations and other relevant organizations
to collect, review and share information on combating
illicit arms flows, especially regarding small arms, and to
make available, as appropriate, information about the
nature and general scope of the international illicit arms
trade with and in Africa.

I should like to associate myself with those
delegations that have never ceased to suggest that specific
provisions should be included in the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping and peace-building operations
regarding not only the disarmament of former combatants
but also the collection and destruction of their weapons,
and control over the illicit traffic in arms.

I should like to appeal to all the States Members of
our world organization to take part en masse in both the
preparatory work for the conference, and in the
conference itself on all aspects of the illicit traffic in arms
which the General Assembly has decided to convene in
2001 at the latest.

