Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I should like to begin
by re-emphasizing Croatia's full commitment to close
and unrestricted cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
We recognize the far-reaching importance of the
Tribunal's work and its significance for long-lasting
post-war stability in South-Eastern Europe. As an early
advocate of the Tribunal and its goals, Croatia
continues to maintain a close and constant dialogue
with the Office of the Prosecutor and the Tribunal. We
commend the accomplishments of the Tribunal, but we
reserve the right to state that, when it comes to ICTY
efficiency and practice, sometimes there remains room
for improvement.

Perception is often the only political reality that
matters, regardless of facts and arguments. It is
therefore essential not to allow perception to prevail as
the guiding framework for evaluation of the
cooperation of the countries concerned with the ICTY
and all the problems that might arise from it. Bearing
in mind the high political importance and sensitivity of
the issue, we must insist that any assessment regarding
cooperation with the ICTY - regardless of the country
involved or the political circumstances surrounding it -
must be based on facts proved beyond a reasonable
doubt.

One such fact is that Croatia has achieved full
compliance with respect to the transfer of documents to
the ICTY. That was recognized and confirmed by the
Prosecutor during her recent visit to Zagreb. We can
state with satisfaction that there are no outstanding
issues between Croatia and the ICTY but one. With the
exception of the so-called Gotovina case, Croatia has
fulfilled all its obligations towards the Tribunal. The
fact is that, in the Gotovina case, the indicted person
remains at large. The Croatian Government keeps the
Office of the Prosecutor updated regularly on the
activities it has been undertaking to discover the
indictee's whereabouts and to ensure his presence
before the Tribunal. Consistent with the Rules of
Procedure and Evidence of the Court, on 6 October this
year, the Croatian Government submitted its third
report pursuant to rule 59, describing the actions
undertaken on the matter.

Notwithstanding the importance of resolution
1503 (2003) for the timely closure of ICTY operations
and the successful completion of its work, and fully
respecting the substance of the resolution, we feel
disappointed at connotations stemming from its
operative paragraph 2 or any consequent attempt to put
in equal context the name of the retired Croatian
General Ante Gotovina with those of Radovan
Karadzic and Ratko Mladic. The Tribunal certainly
remains the place where the innocence or guilt of any
and every indicted person must be determined. And,
although technically it might be in conformity with the
law - all three of them have been indicted by the
Tribunal - putting their names in the same sentence
hardly represents an act of historic justice.

I am authorized to state that the Croatian
Government remains determined to take all measures
required within its own borders for prosecuting
perpetrators of all crimes insomuch as they are within
the reach of its judicial system. In addition, the
Croatian Government calls upon all States to share any
information that might facilitate the successful
completion of this case. But Croatia cannot act outside
its sovereign territory. Arrests in ICTY cases are the
shared responsibility of the international community. In
that connection, the case of Radovan Karadzic in
particular comes to mind.

Resolution 1503 (2003) endorsed a plausible exit
strategy for the Tribunal, and Croatia joins others in
support for the envisaged timetable for the completion
of the ICTY's work. Respecting the benchmarks -
starting with the completion of all investigation by the
end of 2004 and a transparent determination of the
final number of new indictments by that date - not
only is a question of the effective administration of
justice, but also will make not a small contribution to
the streamlining of the confidence-building and
stabilization process in the region aimed at new
challenges and perspectives. The final advance along
that road will be marked by the day when ICTY
indictees disappear from the front pages of the local
print media and are replaced by those who are at the
forefront of rapid economic development and full
integration into the European Union.

Strengthening national legal systems, which
figures prominently in resolution 1503 (2003), also
contributes significantly to the Tribunal's completion
strategy. The Croatian judiciary has independently
initiated a number of proceedings against the
perpetrators of war crimes in Croatia. We are ready to
continue to cooperate closely with the ICTY in
conducting such trials. Under existing Croatian
legislation, ICTY representatives are entitled to follow
the proceedings and to have access to Court files, while
evidentiary material obtained by the ICTY can be used
directly in domestic trials. A readiness for broader,
transparent international monitoring of war crimes
trials has been indicated. We are pleased that the report
notes the positive trends in cooperation between the
Office of the Prosecutor and the Office of the State
Attorney of Croatia with regard to prosecution before
national courts.

Finally, while once again emphasizing Croatia's
determination to continue its cooperation with the
ICTY, I should like to make an observation that goes
beyond the legalistic framework and the strict letter of
law. For the countries in the region, the accurate
historical and political record established through the
Tribunal's jurisprudence is no less important than the
legal record and the very punishment of perpetrators.
In the part of the world under ICTY jurisdiction, "law"
and "justice" are two similar, but not entirely equal,
words. What is in strict accordance with the law is not
necessarily always just. The Tribunal must administer
the law and make all the guilty pay for their crimes.
But the Tribunal's final record for history must, above
all, be just, so that all those - people and countries
alike - who suffered so much can find in it eternal
solace and not grounds for new controversies or
discontent. We are confident that, in the very end, both
law and justice will be served well.

