Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): We would like to thank
the Secretary-General for the very detailed report he
has submitted on the work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We also want to thank Special Representative Hans
Haekkerup for his very comprehensive and useful
briefing. We are particularly pleased to note that the
preparations are going on well for the elections, and we
are happy to learn that there is good reason to believe
that 20 per cent of the members of new Kosovo
Parliament will be women.

Let me seize this opportunity to reiterate my
country's strong support for the efforts and the
dedication of Mr. Haekkerup's team for the work they
are doing in Kosovo. We have reached a very crucial
stage in the run-up to elections next month. It is
therefore very opportune for the Council to have this
meeting to review the situation and to give our full
support to the process on the basis of resolution 1244
(1999).

As the elections approach at a hasty pace, my
delegation notes with satisfaction the considerable
progress achieved during the past three months. The
increase in the number of voters registered following
the call by President Kostunica and Prime Minister
Djindjic' to the Serb community to register is most
welcome. My delegation notes with satisfaction the
collaboration of the Yugoslav authorities with UNMIK.
Mauritius also welcomes the initiative of the Kosovo
Serb citizens to form a coalition party that has been
certified to stand for the November elections, which
shows the Serbs community's commitment to be part of
the democratic process and to engage in constructive
dialogue with their Albanian counterparts.

Now that the crucial moment is near, we call on
all Serbs and other minority communities to keep up
the momentum that has been created and encourage
them to cast their votes on 17 November. We call on
the political leaders to publicly condemn violence and
ethnic intolerance and to use their authority to ensure
that the elections are conducted in an atmosphere of
peace and free of intimidation and violence.

The security of the minority communities is
primordial if we want those people to return to Kosovo.
My delegation has taken note of the good progress
made by UNMIK and KFOR to ensure the safe return
of the minorities to their homes. We are, however,
concerned that there is still the threat of violence in
some parts of Kosovo. We call on all parties to exercise
maximum restraint.

The number of incidents involving the use of
weapons, as reported by the Secretary-General in his
report, is of great concern. We have noted that many
people of the minority communities have been attacked
by hand grenades and other light weapons. Activities of
this nature should be curbed, especially during the
period preceding the elections. We urge UNMIK and
KFOR to pay particular attention in this regard.

With the newly consolidated police and justice
pillar and the several pieces of legislation enacted to
regulate the possession of weapons and combat
organized crime, we hope that the minorities will feel
more secure in the province and that more displaced
communities will return to their home. We welcome the
initiative of UNMIK to take full responsibility for
operating bus lines and trains, which will ensure the
safe and free movement of the minority communities in
the province.

My delegation expresses its disappointment at the
slow progress in Mitrovica. This area, which is
considered as the microcosm of the problems affecting
Kosovo as a whole, is still lagging behind, against all
expectations of the Security Council. The strategy put
in place by UNMIK to improve the security and the
quality of life of both communities in the area is being
jeopardized by the parallel structures maintained by the
local Kosovo Serbs, though the issue has been raised
several times with the Yugoslav authorities by UNMIK.
The Security Council has on various occasions
expressed his concern over this issue.
We reiterate our call to the Serb community in
Mitrovica to participate in the UNMIK-led process to
build and guarantee an autonomous safe and peaceful
Kosovo. We also hope that the Yugoslav authorities
will ensure that there are no parallel security and
administrative structures in Mitrovica other than those
administered by UNMIK.

Mauritius fully supports the presidential
statement, and we hope that the elections in Kosovo are
held in an atmosphere free of violence. Once again, we
would like to commend the work of the international
and local personnel operating in Kosovo who are
helping to create conditions for substantial autonomy
in fulfilment of resolution 1244 (1999).

