Ms. Waly: I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the threats posed by drug trafficking and organized crime to peace and security in Guinea-Bissau. I welcome this discussion, which comes at a challenging time of transition for international support to Guinea-Bissau and as the coronavirus disease crisis further heightens vulnerabilities and hampers efforts to deliver much-needed technical assistance. Urgently coordinated action based on shared responsibility is very much needed. As noted by the Security Council and most recently in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/755), tackling transnational organized crime, including drug trafficking and trafficking in persons, is critical to building peace and working towards lasting political and economic stability in Guinea-Bissau. Guinea-Bissau's coastal geography and related border-management challenges have been exploited by organized criminal groups, in particular for trans-Atlantic cocaine trafficking, a situation that has been greatly aggravated by instability, poverty and constrained justice and law-enforcement capacities. Despite these severe challenges, Guinea-Bissau can nevertheless be proud of some recent law-enforcement successes. Last year two operations undertaken with the support of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Operation CARAPAU, in March, and Operation NAVARA, in September, led to the seizure of close to three tons of cocaine. The operations were not a matter of chance or luck. They represent hard-wonachievements enabled by the integration of the Guinea- Bissau Judicial Police into regional and international anti-trafficking platforms. Notably, 19 drug traffickers, including foreign nationals, have been convicted by the judicial authorities since 2019, and assets were seized. But these gains are proving difficult to take forward. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is also concerned about the resurgence of drug trafficking and the re-emerging influence of criminal operations in the country. The recent return of convicted drug traffickers to the country observed by UNODC is a further concern. In addition, the dismissal of key counterparts within law-enforcement agencies threatens to compromise the sustainability of what has been accomplished. Security sector reform, as Ms. Sori-Coulibaly has mentioned, is fundamental and essential to a lasting solution to Guinea-Bissau's chronic political instability and vulnerability to transnational organized crime, which UNODC has sought to support since the Office started implementing activities in the country in 2006. In view of that cardinal objective and as mandated by resolution 2512 (2020), UNODC assistance to Guinea-Bissau will focus on strengthening the capacity of national institutions to combat corruption and enhance criminal justice responses to all forms of organized crime. Our work will be undertaken in the framework of the national strategic action plan on drug trafficking, organized crime and security threats, which was developed with UNODC support and approved by the Council of Ministers in February. The new national strategic action plan is a comprehensive and integrated multilevel approach for the entire security and justice system chain to effectively address drug trafficking, organized crime, corruption and money-laundering. UNODC will start implementing two new projects this summer, in partnership with the United Nations Development Programme, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea- Bissau (UNIOGBIS). Those projects are aimed at supporting specific objectives laid out in the national strategic action plan, strengthening coordination between law enforcement and criminal justice actors and promoting anti-corruption and integrity mechanisms. Moreover, UNODC is providing - technical support to the Ministry of Women, Family and Social Protection and, in partnership with IOM and the United States, our Office has contributed to the design of the trafficking in persons contingency plan for 2020. That plan will further serve as a basis for the preparation of the national action plan for 2021-2026, which will take the important step of including an integrated referral mechanism to identify and assist trafficking victims. At the same time, UNODC will continue supporting the operational law enforcement units our Office has helped to establish in Guinea-Bissau, which have yielded important results on which we can build. The Joint Airport Interdiction Task Force of the Airport Communication Project, created by UNODC in partnership with INTERPOL and the World Customs Organization, is a specialized multi-agency unit in charge of detecting and intercepting drugs and other illicit goods, as well as preventing terrorism and intercepting high-risk passengers in airport settings. In the framework of the West Africa Coast Initiative implemented by UNODC, the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and INTERPOL, we have also helped to establish the Transnational Crime Unit, a specialized inter-agency law enforcement unit tasked with collecting and analysing information on organized crime and producing national operational intelligence to support complex crime investigations. Both those units have helped to include Guinea-Bissau law enforcement agencies in networks of cooperation supporting South- South exchanges and coordination, especially along the cocaine route between Latin America and West Africa. Those are important steps, but much more work needs to be done to sustain and improve operationalization, with the enhanced support and participation of national counterparts. As we approach the UNIOGBIS transition, let us be clear - Guinea-Bissau needs and deserves the renewed and redoubled commitment of the international community. For nearly 15 years, UNODC has responded to the calls of the international community to support Guinea-Bissau's peace and stability. Today, political will and extensive, long-term assistance, backed by sufficient funding, are needed more than ever. UNODC is fully engaged in supporting the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa and UNOWAS in devising effective strategies to contribute to the country's stability. As stated by the Secretary-General in his latest report on Guinea-Bissau, UNODC will continue to closely monitor and report on the drug trafficking and organized crime situation with a view to preventing traffickers from exploiting the current pandemic situation and political dynamics. In that regard, and taking into consideration the evolving political situation, UNODC will continue delivering its large array of technical assistance activities to Guinea- Bissau. That will be supported by an expanded team on the ground. Going beyond that important but largely technical expertise, our Office stands ready to offer more formal advisory services on drugs, organized crime and justice reform to the United Nations country team and the United Nations Resident Coordinator, pursuant to resolution 2512 (2020), which mandates our continued support. The UNODC Regional Office for West and Central Africa, based in Dakar, will also provide technical and advisory support and continue its strategic coordination with UNOWAS and the United Nations country team. Furthermore, UNODC is providing Guinea- Bissau with integrated support that acknowledges and addresses important regional dynamics affecting drug and organized crime challenges. We do that through our cooperation with UNOWAS and the implementation of the UNODC Regional Programme for West Africa, with ECOWAS and global programmes, including the CRIMJUST programme to strengthen investigation and cooperation along drug trafficking routes, and our Global Maritime Crime Programme. UNODC relies on the international community's engagement and resources to advance and strengthen that assistance to Guinea-Bissau in the transition and beyond. In conclusion, I would like to thank the Security Council for continuing to prioritize the fight against drug trafficking and organized crime, and for its repeated calls for increased support for UNODC's work, with and for the people of Guinea-Bissau.
