Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): We wish to thank
Ambassadors Negroponte and Jones Parry for their
comprehensive briefing on behalf of the Coalition
Provisional Authority (CPA) and the efforts being
made by the CPA to restore normalcy to Iraq.

Yesterday we received the report of the Secretary-
General on his fact-finding mission to Iraq
(S/2004/ 140). We are gratified to know that the mission
was able to meet a broad spectrum of Iraqis
representing many particular affiliations and leanings.
While we are still considering the report in our capital,
we have noted the emphasis in the report on the
ownership of various processes by the Iraqis
themselves, and we are encouraged by the willingness
of the United Nations to provide mediation assistance
in consensus-building during the immediate phase and
the more substantive engagement following the
transition of authority in Iraq. We hope that, with the
help of the United Nations, a consensus would emerge
on the best way forward towards restoring Iraq's
sovereignty and bringing stable security conditions to
Iraq.

Pakistan has always maintained that the United
Nations has a central role to play in Iraq in the
restoration of peace and security and in economic
reconstruction and rehabilitation. We share the Secretary-
General's view that, in order to retain its credibility, the
United Nations must keep its clear and separate
identity as an impartial and independent world body.

We also share the Secretary-General's emphasis
on the improvement of the security situation in Iraq in
order for the United Nations to fulfil its mandated
obligations. The issue of security continues to
neutralize the normalization process in the country. It is
important to ask how the question of security will be
addressed in the process of political transition. This
challenge now confronts the international community
and must be addressed.
It is our hope that, in the days ahead, appropriate
structures will be developed for the United Nations
involvement in Iraq. We also welcome the recent
meeting of Iraq's neighbours in Kuwait. The role of
Arab States and other Islamic countries will be crucial
in helping to promote peace and stability in Iraq. For
our part, Pakistan will remain committed to providing
all necessary assistance to the United Nations and the
Iraqi people in their endeavours to restore stability.

We have noted in the Coalition Provisional
Authority's briefing that transitional law is near
completion. We hope that during the completion phase,
the observations and views of Iraqis contained in the
fact-finding mission report will be kept in mind. The
transitional law must not underestimate the historical,
cultural and religious make-up of Iraq and should be
owned and supported by all Iraqi groups.

Finally, we condemn the ongoing pattern of
attacks on unarmed and innocent Iraqi men, women
and children, who have become victims of senseless
violence in Iraq.

