Mr. Benitez Verson (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I
have requested the floor in order to respond to the
comments that have just been made by the
representative of the United States.

What is unjustifiable cannot be justified. It has
been claimed that her country has taken legal actions
with respect to the case of Posada Carriles. The reality
is that the Government of the United States has gone to
truly shameful extremes to protect the most famous
terrorist in the Western Hemisphere.

It is true that Posada Carriles was detained by
United States immigration authorities on 17 May 2005.
What the representative of the United States did not
say is that the terrorist was detained only after months
had gone by during which the United States authorities
denied his presence in United States territory, despite
the repeated public complaints by President Fidel
Castro on the matter. Only when the press published
interviews with Posada, including front-page
photographs showing him enjoying the Miami sun, did
they have no alternative but to arrest him.

It is also true, as the representative of the United
States said, that Posada Carriles was submitted to a
criminal trial in this country. What she did not say was
that at no time did the authorities try Posada for his
terrorist actions. Rather, they dealt with the case as a
simple illegal immigration matter and thus they
guaranteed the terrorist's protection and release, which
finally took place on 8 May oflast year.

The United States Government knows full well
that Posada Carriles is not a mere illegal immigrant.
They have all of the evidence and information that
prove his guilt for the explosion of the Cubana
Aviacion aeroplane in flight close to the coast of
Barbados, which claimed the lives of 73 innocent
people. They also know that Posada prepared and led a
series of terrorist acts in 1997, using explosive devices
against hotels in Havana, among many other repugnant
actions taken by him in his long career.

There are many questions that the United States
representative did not answer and never will. Why,
while having all of the elements needed to try him as a
terrorist, does the United States Government only
accuse Posada Carriles of lesser immigration offences?
Why has the United States Citizenship and
Immigration Services of the Department of Homeland
Security not used the measures at its disposal to keep
the terrorist in prison? Instead, Posada Carriles is now
walking freely through the streets of Miami. Why has
the Government of the United States completely
ignored the request presented, in conformity with all
the necessary requirements, by the Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela?

For Cuba, the answer is very clear. The
Government of the United States is trying to prevent
Posada Carriles from speaking out in public about the
terrorist acts that he committed against Cuba,
Venezuela and other countries while acting under the
orders of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) for
more than 20 years.

I would like to respond briefly to the comments
by the representative of the United States on the
imprisonment in that country of five Cuban individuals
who were fighting against terrorism. The United States
Government knows full well that none of "the Cuban
five", as they are known throughout the world, threaten
the national security of the United States. On the
contrary, they were carrying out a mission to monitor
terrorist plans organized from Florida against Cuba that
endangered the lives of not only Cuban citizens but of
United States citizens as well.

Despite that, they were arrested and were
subjected to an unfair and politicized trial in Miami,
with its well-known atmosphere of violence and
intimidation with respect to anything related to Cuba.
They faced baseless charges without evidence, which
were never proven.

The trials of the five were publicly questioned by
the United States National Association of Criminal
Defense Lawyers, the American Association of Jurists
and international legal bodies. The Human Rights
Council's Working Group on Arbitrary Detention,
which is composed of independent experts, after
examining the case for two years, declared that the
arrests were arbitrary and urged the United States
Government to take the measures necessary to correct
that arbitrary act.

However, the five remain political prisoners in
high-security prisons in the United States. The State
Department, in addition to these unjust sentences, has
for 10 years denied visas to the wives of two of the
men, Gerardo Hernandez and Rene' Gonzalez,
depriving them of the right to a visit, which even the
worst criminals have. Justice will be served sooner
rather than later. The true terrorists will be condemned
and the five will return to their homeland.

I would like to conclude by making a new appeal
to the Security Council to consider Cuba's accusations
and take the appropriate action. Such shameful
behaviour by a member of the Security Council, as
powerful as it may be, cannot be allowed to so
seriously affect the credibility of this body.

