Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union,
and I will add some national remarks.

In Italy's view, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) and
the ongoing reviews ofpeacekeeping, peacebuilding and
women and peace and security have some underlying
themes in common, including the importance of
conflict prevention, the need to break down silos and
foster an integrated approach towards the three pillars
of the Organization, and the central role of human
rights, respect for which is essential to fostering real
progress across the board.

The rhetorical battle on conflict prevention has
been won. There is broad consensus on its centrality
and on the great risks that can arise from inaction. Yet,
at the same time, prevention has become more difficult.
We must renew our collective commitment to conflict
prevention and operationalize the emerging broad
consensus among the membership. Allow me to share
some of Italy's ideas.

First, with respect to raising awareness, we must
recognize that today's security challenges are different
from those of the past and that the security landscape
before us is rapidly changing. In September, we
adopted the ambitious 2030 Agenda, which introduces
an integrated approach to sustainable development
by linking together the five P's: people, prosperity,
partnership, planet and peace. While respecting the
various roles and mandates of the United Nations
bodies, closer attention should be paid to broader
security issues, which are a matter of concern for a
growing part of the membership, and to furthering
closer cooperation between the General Assembly and
the Security Council.

As an example of best practices, allow me to
refer to the open debate held, during the New Zealand
presidency of the Council, on peace and security
challenges facing small island developing States
(S/PV.7499). We fully supported that initiative and
followed it up with a ministerial meeting in Milan with
our partners from the small island developing States, on
climate adaptation and food security.

Secondly, in fostering an integrated approach
and addressing the root causes, today's challenges are
complex by nature. As we advocate that the United
Nations must not work in silos, we should refrain from
using the same approach. Today we are faced with the
biggest refugee crisis since the Second World War,
causing, inter alia, increased migration pressure on
the Mediterranean region, where too many lives have
already been lost. As a Mediterranean country whose
navy is daily engaged in protecting and saving human
lives, we understand that there is no quick fix to that
phenomenon. It must be tackled from different angles:
through development by addressing the root causes;
politically, by finding solutions to the crises we are
facing; and by respecting human rights and the rights
of refugees.

As highlighted at last week's summit on migration,
held in Malta between the European Union and Africa,
only an integrated approach addressing the root causes
can promote a long-term solution. In that regard, as
stated by Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, during
the recent Summit of the Group of 20, implementing
the recently adopted Sustainable Development Goals
will also play a critical role in the prevention of violent
extremist acts.

Thirdly, we must revitalize the preventive tools
at the disposal of the Council, collectively renew our
focus on the peaceful settlement of disputes under
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations and
deepen our partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations, in particular with the African Union,
under Chapter VIII. In the same spirit, Italy believes
in closer cooperation between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission, for instance
by inviting the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations to participate in Council meetings,
as appropriate. We also welcome the strengthening
of early warning mechanisms, such as the updated
analysis framework developed by the Office of the
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, the
principle of the responsibility to protect, the Human
Rights Up Front initiative and the role of the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights. All of those
represent valuable tools whose potential should be fully
exploited.

My last point is on funding. First, ifwe are to tackle
the root causes of potential conflicts, we must first and
foremost respect our commitment to financing the 2030
Agenda that we have just adopted. In that respect, I
can announce that the budgetary law currently under
consideration by our Parliament aims to increase the
official development assistance (ODA) resources of
Italy's Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation by 40 per cent, in 2016. The ultimate goal
is for Italy's ODA to reach 0.7 per cent of its gross
national income by the 2030 Agenda deadline.

Secondly and finally, with respect to resourcing
United Nations preventive tools and peacebuilding
activities, the reviews we have carried out highlight
that investing in prevention is not only a moral
obligation but also a smart investment, as the cost of
conflict intervention has become increasingly high.
We must now build on that awareness by significantly
strengthening the resources devoted to those activities,
thereby ensuring a more reliable and predictable funding
of the Secretariat's core prevention and mediation
capacities. In the same spirit, it is important that
peacebuilding activities be regularly and predictably
funded to diminish the chances of conflict relapse.

I congratulate the President on the initiative of
addressing these issues in this open debate.

