Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation participated in
the Security Council meeting on 15 December 1995, when
the Council decided to endorse the implementation of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, or the Dayton Peace Agreement. We are
happy to note that tangible progress has been made in the
implementation of the Peace Accord, in particular on its
military aspects. The fighting has ceased, and the warring
parties have been separated, while the ceasefire generally
has been respected.

In this respect, the presence of the multinational
Implementation Force (IFOR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina
has indeed contributed tremendously to the cessation of
hostilities and the promotion of peace. Malaysia is proud to
have been associated with IFOR. We welcome the
concurrence of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the States concerned with the decision of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to continue the
presence of a multinational Stabilization Force (SFOR) in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to replace IFOR at the end of its
mandate later this month. Malaysia is honoured to have
been invited to be part of the new multinational force. We
believe that the continued presence of the international
military force would be immensely helpful in preserving
and consolidating the peace and providing the necessary
climate for a successful implementation of the civilian
aspects of the Dayton Peace Agreement.

In this regard, my delegation wishes to underline the
need for the mandate of SFOR to be reviewed to include
assistance for implementation of the civilian aspects of the
Dayton Agreements, in particular the apprehension and
prosecution of war criminals, the safe return of refugees
and displaced persons to their homes and the assurance of
free movement of people throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
While we commend those responsible for this
progress, we are concerned that many difficult problems
remain in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is appropriate,
therefore, that at this meeting of the Council the
international community is renewing its support for
further efforts to bring about continued progress towards
lasting peace, economic reconstruction, the strengthening
of national institutions, the promotion of human rights and
justice and, more importantly, respect for the
independence, sovereignty, legal continuity and territorial
integrity of a unified Bosnia and Herzegovina within its
internationally recognized borders.

Malaysia considers the establishment and effective
functioning of the appropriate common institutions of the
State important in ensuring a stable Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We therefore welcome the
holding of the elections for the Presidency and higher-
level bodies last September, signifying as it did an
important step in the process of democratization. We look
forward to just and fair municipal elections to be held
throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina next year under the
supervision of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). While we recognize the
importance of strengthening those institutions, we wish to
emphasize the need for the international community to
remain concerned about attempts to minimize the role of
the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina vis-a-vis its Entities.

Malaysia is concerned with the serious difficulties
faced by the responsible authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the implementation of the civilian aspects
of the Peace Agreement pertaining to the safe return of
refugees and displaced persons and freedom of
movement. We believe that the right of return, as
provided for in the Dayton Agreements must be
honoured, and that the refugees must be allowed to return
to their homes free of any form of harassment by the
local authorities or ethnic majority in the area. We
strongly condemn the wanton destruction of houses and
other criminal acts aimed at hindering the free movement
of people in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The entire
international community must give adequate assistance to
efforts to ensure that human rights throughout the country
are fully respected.

Judge Antonio Cassese, President of the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, when presenting the
Tribunal's third annual report to the General Assembly
last month, strongly expressed his dissatisfaction with the
parties concerned for their lack of cooperation and failure
to fulfil their obligations to the Tribunal as required by
the Dayton Peace Agreement. My delegation is disturbed
to note that the perpetrators of some of the worst crimes
against international humanitarian law are still free and
continue to exercise power and undermine the peace. It is

 

most regrettable that those with the strength and ability to
do so have failed to apprehend these war criminals because
of fears of reprisal or other reasons. Malaysia firmly
believes that those responsible for the war crimes in Bosnia
and Herzegovina should be brought to trial and punished
for their heinous deeds. They must be held accountable for
the atrocities which they have committed and the sufferings
they have inflicted upon thousands of people in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The aggressors and murderers should not be
allowed to think that life can go on as usual for them. It is
therefore important that the political will of the international
community be translated into more concerted and robust
efforts to apprehend and prosecute those indicted war
criminals.

The international community must underscore the
importance of the work of the Tribunal in the context of
securing peace and reconciliation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina by ensuring that justice is served. In this
regard, it should continue to provide strong support for the
Tribunal, including financial support, to enable it to carry
out its important responsibilities.

My delegation wishes to emphasize the need for strict
compliance by the parties with their obligations under the
subregional arms control agreement, which is an integral
part of the Dayton Peace Agreement. Malaysia considers
this aspect of the obligations under the arms control regime
to be of the utmost importance in establishing regional
stability. This vital confidence-building measure, if flouted,
could have far-reaching consequences for the stability of
the entire Balkan region. It is therefore important that the
parties concerned comply in good faith with the obligations
contained in the agreements reached in Vienna on 26
January 1996 and in Florence in June this year. Effective
verification of the parties' compliance with the provisions
of these agreements is imperative so that a credible balance
of force can be established in the region.

My delegation believes that for peace to hold in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, economic reconstruction and
rehabilitation must proceed rapidly. We are concerned that
the progress in this aspect of the Dayton Peace Agreement
has been slow. Bosnia and Herzegovina, devastated by four
years of war, requires enormous reconstruction efforts for
the restoration of housing and the rehabilitation of industry
to meet the immediate needs of returning refugees and to
help create jobs for the people. The reconstruction of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a basic precondition for the
stabilization of peace in the region. It is important to ensure
that the areas that have suffered the most devastation of
war are provided the bulk of this assistance. The victims of
aggression ought to be given priority in the provision of
assistance by the international community.

In this regard, Malaysia expresses the hope that the
vigour with which the countries of the West pursued the
transition to a market economy for the former Soviet
States should be equally demonstrated with regard to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are seriously concerned that
failure on the part of the international community to
respond with strong and decisive initiatives might undo
the gains that have been made through the implementation
of the military aspects of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
The international community should seek to consolidate
those gains rather than allow them to be whittled away
for lack of progress in the reconstruction efforts for
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In this regard, we welcome the conclusions of the
London Peace Implementation Conference held on 4 and
5 December 1996, which we earnestly hope will provide
the impetus for more vigorous efforts on the part of the
Bosnian parties themselves to consolidate peace in the
country. As a member of the Ministerial Steering Board
of the Peace Implementation Council, Malaysia has
played its role and will continue to take an active part and
contribute to the process to ensure that peace endures.

