Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): Mr. President,
you can count on France's support for your presidency
this month.

I thank Prosecutor Bensouda and her teams for
their report and today's briefing. As this year marks
the twentieth anniversary of the Rome Statute, France
wishes to reaffirm its complete and full support for the
International Criminal Court, as President Emmanuel
Macron strongly reiterated during the general debate
of the General Assembly (see A/73/PV.6). The Court
must be able to act and exercise its prerogatives without
hindrance, in an independent and impartial manner,
within the framework the Rome Statute. In that regard,
France reaffirms its support for the Prosecutor in the
implementation of resolution 1970 (2011), which refers
the situation in Libya to the International Criminal
Court. That was our conviction then and it remains so
today. Any lasting peace in Libya requires justice to be
rendered to all the victims. The Court plays a crucial
role in that regard.

Today, Libya is in a fragile and volatile situation,
as demonstrated by the clashes between militias in
Tripoli in late August and the attack on the oil crescent
in June. Economic predation is jeopardizing the
political process and the country's emergence from the
crisis. The humanitarian situation is also worrying, in
particular the situation of internally displaced persons,
migrants and refugees.

In political terms, Libyans need prospects. The
Libyan people want elections. The enthusiasm for
voter registration and the initial successes of municipal
elections have been unmistakable in that regard. In
that context, our action must continue along two lines.
The first, which must remain our priority, is the fight
against all those who endanger the fragile political
balances and exploit the situation to divert Libya's
economic resources; and the second is full support for
the efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salame, to
advance the democratic transition in Libya. We commend
the personal efforts of the Secretary-General and the
valuable contribution of his Special Representative.

An agreement on the way forward was reached on
29 May in Paris by the key Libyan players. Compliance
withthe commitmentsmadethereinisessentialtomoving
beyond the status quo, which only prolongs instability.
The Palermo conference organized in Italy should
make it possible to follow up on those commitments
in the presence of Libyan stakeholders. It is essential
that we support all such efforts and demonstrate real
unity to encourage Libyans to maintain the course set
by Special Representative Ghassan Salame. We must
impose sanctions against those who carry out attacks
against Tripoli, as the Special Representative has asked
us to do. Beyond those general observations, we would
like to make three more specific remarks.

First, the ongoing investigations ofthe Office ofthe
Prosecutor require the complete and full cooperation
of all stakeholders. Cooperation with the Court by
the Libyan authorities is essential in that regard. It is
crucial to consolidate the collaboration of all the States
concerned, whether or not they are parties to the Rome
Statute, in order to provide the long-term support that
the Prosecutor needs. As the Prosecutor mentions in her
report, that cooperation can take place through various
means, such as the seizure of evidence, the freezing of
certain assets and, of course, the arrest and surrender of
fugitives. I would also like to express my delegation's
appreciation for the support and cooperation provided
by UNSMIL and the Libyan Prosecutor General to the
Office of the Prosecutor.

Secondly, with regard to the elements of the report
relating to ongoing investigations, France deplores the
failure to date to execute the arrest warrants issued by
the Court. It is important that those arrest warrants be
executed. Let me reiterate the importance of ensuring
that all the most serious crimes committed in Libya
since 2011 and those that continue to be committed
today, including crimes committed by Da'esh, can be
investigated and prosecuted.

Thirdly, and this will be my final point, we welcome
the attention paid by the Prosecutor with regard to the
trafficking of human beings and the smuggling of
migrants, which constitute a direct threat to peace and
stability in Libya. We welcome the rigorous approach
adopted by the Office of the Prosecutor. We hope that
it will make it possible to effectively combat impunity
for crimes committed against migrants. The Security
Council has repeatedly reiterated the importance of
prosecuting and trying the perpetrators of such acts.
The Council must also assume its responsibility by
imposing, under the existing United Nations regime,
individual sanctions against those responsible for the
trafficking of human beings and the smuggling of
migrants. France will continue to actively engage with
its partners in that direction.

To conclude, the situation in Libya once again
highlights a vicious circle of impunity and instability.
That reality requires us to provide answers to the
challenges facing the Libyan people and authorities.
Those challenges must be addressed through efficient
cooperation with the Court and with the support of the
Security Council.

