Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi (Namibia): We, too, would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report, and we
appreciate the additional information presented by
Mr. Miyet.

Since the signing of the Lome Agreement, human
rights violations by rebel groups continue to characterize
the political landscape of Sierra Leone. Recent fighting
between rebel wings continues to cause mass
displacement of the civilian population, in suspension of
the much needed humanitarian assistance to those in need.
While I am on this point, let me join those who have
called for the immediate release of the two doctors who
were abducted.

 

We welcome the arrival back in Freetown of
Mr. Sankoh and Mr. Koroma. We are also pleased to hear
that the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) has transformed
itself into a political party and that it is registering itself
with the Interim National Electoral Commission. While all
these steps are positive, we are deeply concerned by the
military and security situation on the ground and the slow
process of disarmament and demobilization.

On this respect, we would like to make it very clear
that we hold the rebels responsible for the current security
situation in that country. The RUF and other rebel
movements cannot be political parties and rebel movements
at the same time. Secondly, from what we know, soldiers
by the very nature of the military set-up have no choice but
to listen to their leaders. We demand that those who
command and control the combatants in Sierra Leone take
the necessary steps for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programme to proceed unhindered. The
people of Sierra Leone have seen too much suffering.

Reluctance to disarm in the confrontation between the
RUF and the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council (AFRC)
harm the peace process.

The DDR programme will not succeed when
abductions, looting and refusal to release abductees and
child soldiers persist. These negative developments will
only be addressed by sticking to the Lome Agreement in its
entirety.

We are pleased to see that the deployment of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) has
started, and we call for the speedy deployment of the 6,000
UNAMSIL contingent. Even when the 6,000 UNAMSIL
contingent is fully deployed, what we see in the report and
what we hear is taking place on the ground make us
wonder whether it can indeed deal with over 40,000
combatants. In this connection, we recall a provision in the
Secretary-General's report when he proposed the 6,000
troops that their strength should be reviewed in line with
conditions on the ground. We would like to understand that
that provision still exists.

My delegation would like to thank the donor
community for its generous contributions to the DDR
programme as well as to the reconstruction and
rehabilitation efforts in Sierra Leone. It is our hope that,
with the political will of the people of Sierra Leone, peace
will finally be achieved.

We appreciate the efforts by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) to maintain security in
insecure conditions. We echo the Secretary-General's call
to the international community to assist ECOMOG in this
regard.

The Lome Agreement is being put to the test, but in
our view so is the determination of the international
community.

Finally, we thank Mr. Okelo for all that he has done
in aiding the peace process, and we welcome Mr. Adeniji
of Nigeria in his new appointment.

