Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank President Meron and President
Mose for their presentations, as well as to thank
Prosecutors Del Ponte and Jallow. Through them, I
would like to commend the efforts of their Tribunals
for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda both in
combating impunity and in ensuring that justice
prevails. My delegation attaches great importance to
the accomplishment of the mission given to the two
Tribunals by the international community and to the
achievement of the goals of the completion strategies
for that mission.

We note with satisfaction that the efforts by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) are
today enabling it to foresee the possibility of
concluding the completion strategy for its work well
ahead of the established timetable. The recent
commencement of the trial of former minister Andre
Rwamakuba, who is suspected of having played an
important role in the 1994 genocide, reinforces that
possibility. We are nevertheless aware that the pressure
that the Appeals Chamber will face with regard to a
certain and considerable increase in its workload may
compromise the timetable for its completion strategy.
However, we remain confident that the Tribunal will be
able to adapt to the new circumstances and will use the
flexibility of that strategy to achieve its goals.

Human and logistical resources and financial
support should be guaranteed for the ICTR in order to
strengthen its projected plans and prevent them being
thwarted. In that connection, we welcome the
contribution of ad litem judges as well as the new
modern courtroom provided to the Tribunal, which will
certainly facilitate the completion of its work.

The States concerned should give the Tribunal the
necessary political support and cooperation for the
arrest and transfer of accused fugitives on their
territory. The constraints associated with the
competency of the Tribunals and the applicability of
national laws to the cases turned over to the
jurisdiction of some countries should be solved quickly
while, at the same time, respecting international
judicial norms. They should not constitute an
additional source of delay in the Tribunals' carrying
out of their workload.

With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, we welcome the
efforts that have been made in connection with its
regular procedures to improve working methods and
accelerate both trials at first instance and appeals
processes. Likewise, we believe that the establishment
of the War Crimes Chamber in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will contribute to achieving the goals set
out during the creation of that tribunal.

We nevertheless continue to be concerned at the
delay in the implementation of the completion strategy.
In that regard, we believe that full cooperation with the
Tribunal by the parties concerned to provide access to
documents necessary to apprehend and bring to justice
all accused persons is a prerequisite for the
achievement of the objectives set out by the
international community. The international community
should also fully support the Tribunal and, as
resolutely as possible, see to it that those still at large
are arrested and that justice is done.

The other potential stumbling block confronting
the Tribunal pertains to the difficulty of having
sufficient candidates necessary for the election of ad
litem judges at a time when a significant number of
trials may well go beyond the established timetable,
thereby compromising the completion strategy.

