Mrs. Rodriguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Strict adherence to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations is a duty by which all
States committed to international peace and security
are bound. War and armed conflicts have brought
humankind nothing by terrible suffering and setbacks
in their economic and social development, which is why
conflict prevention has always been a common goal
of the international community. And that is why the
Charter of the United Nations, in its Preamble, calls on
us to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war, practice tolerance and live together in peace; the
primary goal is the maintenance of international peace
and security.

Many of the conflicts that have taken place over
the 70-plus years since the founding of the United
Nations could have been prevented if the causes that
triggered them had not been on myriad occasions
linked to interests related to domination. Sustainable
peace implies the elimination of threats that conspire
against its full realization as well as the prevention
of any breaches of the Charter, including interference
in the internal affairs of States, acts of aggression or
wars based on the quest to control natural resources,
including unconventional wars, which in recent years
have become one of the most serious threats to the
exercise of the self-determination of peoples.

Stable and lasting peace that will prevent the
outbreak of conflict presupposes, first and foremost,
the acknowledgement of and unwavering respect
for the sovereign equality of States; the peaceful
settlement of international disputes; respect for political
independence and the political, economic, social and
cultural systems that nations have freely decided to
implement for themselves; and the rejection of the
threat or use of force against another State.

There can be no sustainable, comprehensive, stable
or lasting peace as long as some countries impose
unilateral coercive measures on others; as long as there
exists an unjust and exclusive international economic
order; and as long as inequality and selfishness, the
result of neoliberal globalization, prevail, increasing
discrimination and xenophobia and raising levels of
aggressive posturing in military alliance doctrines.

While it is true that sustainable development
cannot be achieved without peace and stability, it is
equally true that there will be no peace and stability
without development. There can be no peace as long
as millions of people remain condemned to hunger,
poverty, discrimination, exclusion and despair.
We acknowledge that the Security Council has a
key role to play in the maintenance of international
peace and security given the responsibilities conferred
upon it by the Charter, for which reason the members
of this body must also be the first to promote peaceful
solutions to conflict and to show strong, effective and
clear resistance to recourse to war and to violations of
the principles and purposes enshrined in the Charter.

Manipulation and double standards on issues such
as terrorism and human rights, aimed at singling out
developing countries and discredit their legitimate
Governments, do not contribute to the ideal of peace.

We note with concern the increase in such
phenomena as the use or threat of use of force, the
promotion of hidden agendas for regime change in
developing countries, the production of new and
more sophisticated weapons, the persistence of large
nuclear arsenals, the violation by some States of the
principles of international law, intolerance and ethnic
and religious-discrimination. Those phenomena all
undermine the real possibilities for advancing peace
and preventing conflicts.

Improving the ability of the United Nations
to prevent and resolve conflicts is more effective
than dealing with the costly economic and social
consequences and the incalculable human suffering
that war brings. In recognizing the relationship
between socioeconomic development and international
peace and security, we believe that it is important to
ensure that any effort to transform the United Nations
into a more effective instrument for conflict prevention
and the maintenance of peace must take into account
the need for a balanced, consistent and comprehensive
approach - one that is in keeping with the Charter of
the United Nations and international law.

