The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Argentina.

Like my colleagues, I would like to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, and the Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights, Mr. Ivan
Simonovie, for their respective briefings on the situation
in Ukraine.
Argentina expresses its concern about the
continued deterioration of the security, human rights
and humanitarian situation in Ukraine, especially in
eastern Ukraine. We are also troubled by the effects of
the resurgence of violence on the civilian population,
which j eopardizes the efforts made to reach a diplomatic
and political solution to the situation.

We are emphatic that no peaceful way out of the
situation in Ukraine can be found through unilateral
actions of any kind. It is imperative for all stakeholders
to frame their actions strictly within international law
and the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
We recall the obligation of all States, under the United
Nations Charter, to settle their international disputes
through peaceful means, in order not to endanger
international peace and security.

We reiterate that the only possible solution is
through dialogue and negotiation, with due respect for
Ukraine's management of its domestic affairs. Today,
once again, Argentina calls for an end to confrontation
and all forms of interference in internal affairs, which
fall exclusively within the domestic jurisdiction of
States, whether such interference is military, political,
economic or rhetorical in nature.

For that reason, we believe that it is a positive step that
the Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine - comprising
Ukraine, Russia and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe - agreed to the protocol
to implement President Poroshenko's peace plan and
President Putin's initiatives, which were also signed by
armed groups opposing the Government of Ukraine.
However, we recognize that the fragility of the
ceasefire is a true concern. After the recent meeting in
Milan between the Presidents of Ukraine and Russia,
we call for continued discussions in order to find a way
out of the conflict and for all parties to implement the
measures agreed upon in the protocol.

We are naturally deeply perturbed by the reports
of the use of cluster bombs in densely populated areas.
The parties must unreservedly respect human rights
and international humanitarian law and must ensure
accountability wherever violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law occur. We deplore the
reports of killings, kidnappings, abductions, torture,
abuse and other serious violations of human rights,
which are very worrying, but in the face of the evidence
of such violations of human rights, we need truth,
objective information, a speedy, reliable investigation
and justice. With regard to the humanitarian situation,
we would like to highlight the assistance being provided
by the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Medecins sans frontieres. The international community
should continue to support those efforts, and the parties
should ensure that there is access for humanitarian aid.

Finally, as we have done every time the Security
Council has dealt with this issue, Argentina would like
to emphasize the Council's primary responsibility for
ensuring the maintenance of international peace and
security, in accordance with the role assigned to it by
the Charter of the United Nations. We deplore the fact
that, despite the many times we have met to discuss
the situation in Ukraine, the Council has not been able
to play a positive role. As in other cases, constructive
diplomacy has given way to politicization and personal
attacks within the Council.

Once again, Argentina urges that we make a
contribution rather than become an obstruction to
bringing the parties together, so that they can find the
common ground necessary to achieving a political
and diplomatic solution and ending the confrontations
that have had increasingly serious and severe effects
on the civilian population. We cannot allow ourselves
to be witnesses to further setbacks. Those of us with
the greatest influence should contribute the most to
constructive diplomacy. The international community
must unite its efforts to help the parties find a peaceful
solution to the complex situation in Ukraine.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

