Mr. Pascoe: As always, it is a pleasure and an
honour to be here to report to the Security Council. I
regret to report that the stalemate in the Israeli-
Palestinian negotiations has persisted in the last month.
This is of particular concern given the institutional
achievements of the Palestinian Authority and the
evolving regional situation. Bold and decisive steps are
needed to resolve this decades-long conflict, with
vision, leadership and responsibility on the part of all
concerned. It is also important that any outbreaks of
violence that could undermine political efforts be
prevented and that the parties refrain from provocative
steps on the ground.

Quartet envoys continued to work with the
Israelis and the Palestinians to maximize prospects for
resuming direct negotiations on a two-State solution.
Regrettably, after follow-up meetings with the parties
on 5 April, it was determined that more time was
needed for consultations before the next Quartet
meeting could be scheduled. The Quartet remains
committed to convening such a meeting as soon as
possible. The United Nations continues to work for a
balanced and effective Quartet initiative that could help
the parties to engage meaningfully in direct
negotiations and give a clear international signal of the
importance of finding a way forward.

Both parties should be concerned at the fact that
the political track is falling behind the significant
progress being made by the Palestinian Authority in its
State-building agenda. In its report to the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC)
meeting in Brussels on 13 April, the United Nations
made clear its assessment that in the six areas where
we are most engaged with the Palestinian Authority,
governmental functions are now sufficient for a viable
Government of a State. The six areas include
governance, rule of law and human rights; livelihoods
and productive sectors; education and culture; health;
social protection; and infrastructure and water. In
parallel, Israeli measures to facilitate movement have
11-30692
also supported economic activity and access to basic
services.

The World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund also reported strong progress in institution-
building at the AHLC meeting, and the AHLC Chair
concluded that the Palestinian Authority was above the
threshold for a functioning State in the key sectors
studied. However, we must be aware that these
admirable achievements have been to date limited to
certain areas of the occupied Palestinian territory and
do not apply yet to East Jerusalem, much of Area C and
Gaza.

The reporting period saw the highest levels of
violence in Gaza and Israel since Operation Cast Lead
more than two years ago. Violence was ongoing at the
time of the last briefing, on 22 March. That same day,
four members of a Palestinian family, including three
children, were killed by an Israeli strike in Gaza.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu expressed
regret at the unintentional killing of civilians, while
stating that Israel was responding to the firing of
rockets at Israeli civilians from populated civilian areas
in Gaza. The next day, on 23 March, an Israeli civilian
was injured in Be'er Sheva by a Grad rocket fired from
Gaza.

Efforts to de-escalate the violence led to a brief
lull. However, on 2 April, an Israeli airstrike killed
three leaders of the Hamas military wing who were
allegedly involved in plans to kidnap Israeli citizens in
the Sinai during Passover. The Hamas military wing
used a guided anti-tank missile to hit a school bus on
7 April, injuring two people, one of whom, a teenager,
died last week. Between 7 and 10 April, Israel
launched heavy military operations in Gaza. Rockets
continued to be fired into Israel, a number of them
reportedly intercepted by Israel's new Iron Dome
anti-missile defence system. Following further efforts
to de-escalate the violence, a new, uneasy calm was
restored on 10 April. It has been largely respected
since, notwithstanding the firing of two Grad rockets
towards Ashdod on 15 April. The Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and the Egyptian authorities were actively
engaged in efforts to de-escalate the violence.

Overall, Palestinian militant groups, including
Hamas, have fired 111 mortar shells and 155 rockets,
while Israel has conducted six incursions and 57 air
strikes into Gaza since the last briefing to the Security
11-30692

Council. One Israeli child, referred to earlier in the
context of the bus incident, was killed, and two
civilians were injured by Palestinian rocket fire.
Nineteen Palestinian militants and 15 civilians were
killed, while 17 militants and 60 civilians were injured
in Israeli military actions.

We are alarmed at the actions of Hamas to
escalate violence, endangering civilians on both sides
and risking a deeper confrontation with Israel. We are
also deeply concerned at civilian casualties on both
sides. The Secretary-General strongly condemns the
firing of rockets from Gaza and calls for it to end. He
also reiterates his calls for maximum restraint by
Israel. All parties must fully respect international
humanitarian law. In the interests of the civilian
populations on both sides, we call on the parties to
uphold and solidify the prevailing fragile calm.

Citing security concerns, Israel closed the Kerem
Shalom crossing point to Gaza from 5 to 12 April. This
illustrates the detrimental effect of the violence on the
humanitarian situation and the importance of
implementing Security Council resolution 1860 (2009)
in all its aspects. The weekly average of truckloads
entering the Strip during the reporting period was 909,
compared with 566 in June 2010 before the
announcement of the revised Israeli policy, but still far
below pre-closure levels.

During the reporting period, Israel approved six
additional United Nations school and road projects in
Gaza. However, we urge Israel to give early approval
to two United Nations housing projects in Rafah and
Khan Yunis comprising 1,100 units. We also hope that
coordination procedures to facilitate the entry of
approved material will be further streamlined. Greater
liberalization of the import of construction materials
into Gaza, including aggregate, iron bar and cement, is
essential for recovery, as is an increase in exports.

I emphasize the importance of the Government of
Israel making more sustained and far-reaching progress
towards ending the closure of Gaza, within the
framework of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009).
It is essential for the operation of legitimate crossings
to be adequate to meeting the needs of Gaza's civilian
population.

In the context of media reports of potential
flotillas, let me state our belief that the appropriate way
to meet needs in Gaza is through legitimate crossings.
In this regard, I wish to recall the position of the

Quartet, as expressed in its 21 June 2010 statement,
that those wishing to deliver goods to Gaza should do
so through established channels so that their cargoes
can be inspected and transferred via land crossings into
Gaza. The Quartet emphasized that there is no need for
unnecessary confrontations and called on all parties to
act responsibly in meeting the needs of the people of
Gaza. The AHLC also called on all international
supporters to make use of existing land crossings to
channel their support to Gaza and to abstain from
provocations.

We deplore the abduction and murder of Vittorio
Arrigoni, an Italian citizen and activist, in Gaza on
15 April, allegedly by a Salafist group. A number of
suspects have reportedly clashed with and been
arrested by the de facto authorities in Gaza.

I regret to report no progress in efforts to secure
the release of Israeli Staff Sergeant Gilad Shalit, who
has been in Hamas captivity since 25 June 2006. We
continue to call for his release and for immediate
humanitarian access to him. We also continue to follow
closely the situation of several thousand Palestinians in
Israeli prisons, whose human rights must be respected.
We continue to underscore the importance of releases
of prisoners to the Palestinian Authority.

We also remain concerned that the Palestinian
Authority is not able to extend its State-building work
to Gaza due to the ongoing Palestinian political divide.
This only underscores the need for progress towards
Palestinian unity within the framework of the
Palestinian Authority and the commitments of the
Palestine Liberation Organization. In this regard, I note
that consultations on the Palestinian reconciliation
continue, although they have not led to the formation
of a unity Government, as President Abbas and Prime
Minister Fayyad had hoped they would.

In the meantime, preparations for municipal
elections on 9 July continue in the West Bank. Hamas
has yet to authorize electoral work in Gaza. The
Palestinian Central Election Commission opened voter
lists for exhibition and challenges between 9 and
14 April in the West Bank, including for the
approximately 40,000 newly registered voters.

We are very concerned at ongoing Israeli
settlement activity and demolition of Palestinian
structures in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
On 4 April, the Government of Israel retroactively
authorized construction work and plans for further

expansion in the West Bank settlements. We remain
very concerned at plans for more than 2,200 settlement
units in East Jerusalem, although we note that their
further consideration has been postponed until May.
More permanent measures to curtail and halt settlement
expansion are needed. Settlement activity is contrary to
international law and Israel's commitments under the
Road Map, and detrimentally affects Palestinian
readiness to return to direct negotiations. We call on
Israel to respect international humanitarian law.

Palestinian security forces continued to work to
maintain law and order in the West Bank. Investigation
is ongoing into the murder on 4 April of the actor and
director Juliano MerKhamis, who will be remembered
as a symbol of coexistence and peace.

Following the ltamar murder on 11 March, two
suspects from the neighbouring Palestinian village of
Awarta were recently arrested for allegedly
perpetrating the killing, and a number of others were
arrested as alleged accomplices. During the
investigations, the 6,500 inhabitants of Awarta were
placed under several curfews. Over 400 men and 80
women were reportedly interrogated, and many homes
were searched.

Since last month's briefing to this Council, Israeli
security forces conducted 321 search operations in the
West Bank, during which 38 Palestinians were injured
and 228 arrested. Ten Palestinians were injured by
Israeli settlers during the reporting period.
Demonstrations continued against the barrier, which
deviates from the Green Line in contravention of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice,
resulting in 19 Palestinian injuries and a number of
arrests.

We welcome the Israel Defense Forces (IDF)
decision of 6 April to systematically investigate all
Palestinian casualties in the West Bank caused by IDF
fire among individuals not engaged in hostilities. We
look forward to the effective implementation of this
important measure of accountability.

Turning to the subject of Lebanon, almost three
months after his nomination as Prime Minister-
designate by President Sleiman, consultations by Najib
Mikati have not yet led to the formation of a new
Government. Mr. Mikati and the President have
decided to give additional time to the process in order
to ensure that the composition of the next Government
will be as desired by all Lebanese and in accordance
with the Constitution.

Against this background, there have been some
security incidents in Lebanon. On 27 March, a small
bomb exploded in a church in the eastern city of
Zahleh, causing damage but no causalities. No party
claimed responsibility for the attack, which came four
days after seven Estonian nationals were kidnapped
while cycling on a road near Zahleh, in an area close to
the border with Syria. Despite several arrests, the
motives of the kidnappers and the fate of the cyclists
are not known.

In Nahr el-Bared camp, the first delivery of homes
in the reconstructed camp took place on 19 April. This
was a significant milestone, giving hope to the
community displaced since the destruction of their camp
in 2007. I call upon donors to also contribute towards
the full reconstruction Nahr el-Bared.

The overall situation in the area of operations of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon has
remained generally quiet and stable. Israeli air
violations continued on an almost daily basis.

The international community is rightly concerned
over the protracted stalemate in the peace process. We
stress the importance of supporting and empowering
the leadership of President Abbas and Prime Minister
Fayyad and of bringing the parties back to the table.
Despite the Palestinian Authority's accomplishments,
the institutional achievements of the State-building
agenda are approaching their limits within the political
and physical space currently available. Far-reaching
rather than incremental steps should be taken by Israel
to lead to progress on the ground and to roll back
measures of occupation to match the Palestinian
Authority's achievements.

At the same time, the resumption of Israeli-
Palestinian peace negotiations on all final status issues
is urgent. We believe that the international community
must play its part in helping the parties to move
forward, and we will continue to engage Quartet
partners, hoping that the conditions will be met for the
holding ofa principals' meeting as soon as possible.

The United Nations will continue to work for a
comprehensive resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict
on the basis of the Security Council's resolutions, the
Madrid principles, including land for peace, the Road
11-30692
Map and the agreements previously reached between
the parties.

