Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): IthankMs. Fatou Bensouda
for her briefing. We have taken note of the twenty-fourth
report of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court submitted pursuant to paragraph 8 of resolution
1593 (2005) and the judicial activities of the Office of
the Prosecutor since its previous report.

Malaysia remains concerned about the protracted
conflict in Darfur, which has continued to bring about
dire consequences in prolonging human suffering, the
deterioration of the security and humanitarian situations
and large-scale displacement of civilians in Darfur.
Attacks on civilians, including sexual and gender-based
crime, continue to be reported in Darfur. We wish to
remind all parties to the conflict of their obligations
under international human rights and humanitarian
laws to refrain from all acts of violence against civilians
and humanitarian and peacekeeping personnel.

Malaysia has always maintained that dialogue is
the only way to achieve a resolution of the conflict
in Darfur. In that regard, we welcome the signing of
the Roadmap Agreement by the Government of the
Sudan and the Justice and Equality Movement, the
Sudan Liberation Movement/Minni Minnawi, the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North and the
National Umma Party on 16 March and 8 August,
respectively. We furthermore commend the effort of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel
in achieving the Roadmap Agreement. The signing
of the Roadmap Agreement marked an important step
forward in the Darfur peace process. All parties must
seize the opportunity presented by the Agreement,
as its implementation offers a means to resolve their
differences and address the protracted conflict in Darfur.
To that end, Malaysia looks forward to the resumption
of dialogue and urges all parties to intensify their
efforts to reach a comprise on a cessation of hostilities,
ensuring humanitarian access in the Darfur region and
reaching a comprehensive and final political settlement.

At the same time, parties that have yet to join
the Roadmap Agreement should be encouraged to
do so urgently and to engage constructively in the
dialogue. In order to achieve that, it is incumbent upon
the Government of the Sudan to create an enabling
environment where trust and confidence can be built.
In that respect, efforts by the Government of the Sudan
to demonstrate compliance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and their commitment to hold those
responsible for violations of international human rights
and international humanitarian laws accountable would
be the necessary prerequisite.

