Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
While we endorse the consensus and the democratic
process, I have asked through you, Madam President,
to speak to the Security Council once again, within
the framework of the process to renew the mandate
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), in my capacity as representative of a
troop-contributing country and in the desire to express
my delegation's concern with regard to the adoption of
resolution 2180 (2014) based on the following reasons.

First, as I noted in the Chamber on 11 September
(see S/PV.7262), a little over a month ago, my country
attaches the utmost priority to the situation in Haiti
and is therefore always willing to contribute and to
provide the necessary assistance so that this brotherly
country can overcome its difficulties. At the same time,
I believe that decisions that are taken with regard to
MINUSTAH's consolidation should be based above all
on information concerning the situation on the ground,
which would make it possible to act on the basis of the
principles of objectivity, transparency and justice. In
that task, the role of the Secretariat - along with those
of the Security Council and the troop-contributing
countries - is especially important within the
framework of triangular cooperation. At a time when
the decisions of the United Nations and in particular
the Security Council are under constant scrutiny by the
international community within the context of a major
debate on the need for its reform, I believe that the
principles I have just mentioned are crucial.

Secondly and more specifically, there are
crucial factors on the ground that do not suggest the
appropriateness of an acceleration of MINUSTAH's
consolidation process, as called for by resolution 2180
(2014). I am referring specifically to, first, the political
and security situation in Haiti, which has not seen a
substantive improvement; and, secondly, to progress in
professionalizing the Haitian National Police, whose
current plan will not be concluded until 2016; and,
thirdly, to the uncertainty surrounding the electoral
process for 2014 and 2016.

In conclusion, and as I said on 11 September, the
development of Latin America at all levels in recent
years has made it possible for the Heads of State and
Government of the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States to declare the region a zone of peace.
In that respect, I would like to express my country's
hope that shall one day be able to refer to MINUSTAH
as the last peacekeeping operation to have been
established in the zone of peace called Latin America.
As a result, it is important to maintain the correct and
proper management of the situation at this time so that
its final stage will be successful. The decisions taken
with regard to MINUSTAH must therefore ensure the
sustainability of the progress achieved.

To that end, we need a gradual and responsible
drawdown strategy that corresponds to the development
of the situation on the ground and not simply to
budgetary factors. Deliberations on information that
is unrelated to the situation on the ground could have
undesirable consequences for Haiti and the United
Nations. In that context, we also hope that the opinions
of troop-contributing countries will be taken into
account and serve as evidence in the decisions that the
Security Council adopts when it comes to peacekeeping
operations.

