Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Special Envoy De
Mistura for his briefing and for his stated determination
not to give up on his mission, in which he has our
full support.

We deeply regret that this meeting is being held
due to such a negative turn of events in Syria, with
the collapse of the ceasefire agreement, renewed air
strikes and general fighting in the city of Aleppo. The
devastating effects of the latest escalation of fighting
on the civilian population cannot be overstated. It
is deeply regrettable that the United States and the
Russian Federation have been unable to effectively
implement their coordinated agreement on a cessation
of hostilities and collective action against the terrorist
groups operating in Syria.

We share the frustration of most Council members.
We were led to believe that the International Syria
Support Group would be a more effective mechanism
for spearheading the Syrian peace process. However, it
seems that key stakeholders in the group are pursuing
a diplomatic process that is losing credibility on the
ground in Syria, here at the United Nations and in the
eyes of world public opinion.

The concern that some key opposition groups are
cooperating with known terrorist organizations is
legitimate. It is essential to distinguish between them.
However, indiscriminate attacks on civilian areas and
facilities cannot be condoned, regardless of whether or
not terrorist fighters might be present in those areas.
It is also evident that there are elements seeking to
undermine the efforts towards a cessation of hostilities
and the provision of humanitarian assistance. We
believe that it is time for the United States and Russia to
involve other relevant stakeholders, including members
of the Security Council, in the negotiation process for
the modalities of a ceasefire agreement in order to
provide a more effective and long-lasting solution to
the key concerns that have so far stalled the process.

The Syrian Arab Republic cannot continue being
a stage for international rivalries and for a proxy war
between regional and international Powers. The political
and humanitarian repercussions of the Syrian conflict
are likely to hound us for generations to come unless
a timely solution is found. Considering that secretive,
bilateral negotiations have yielded very poor results
in the quest for a final solution to the stalemate, we
strongly request that a more open, inclusive approach
be taken in order to salvage the prospects for peace and
reconciliation and to deliver much-needed humanitarian
relief for the civilian population, particularly in the city
of Aleppo.

Finally, although in despair, we are ready and
willing to join Security Council in responding to
Mr. De Mistura's appeal to the Council to push for a
cessation of violence and a weekly 48-hour ceasefire
pause permitting the provision of humanitarian
assistance, press for medical evacuations, and urge a
strong recommitment on the part of the co-Chairs of
the International Syria Support Group to salvage the
cessation of hostilities agreement.

