Mr. Stanczyk (Poland): It is my pleasure to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. I would also
like to express our gratitude to you for convening this
debate and for providing us with an excellent
background paper, which we find extremely timely and
useful.

Poland has associated itself with the statement
made on behalf of the European Union. Given the
importance of the subject being discussed at this
debate, I would like to offer a few comments of our
own.

The search for ways to improve the effectiveness
of United Nations peacekeeping has covered many
areas. One pertains to cooperation with troop-
contributing countries, particularly within the
framework of relationships with the two other partners:
the Security Council and the Secretariat of the United
Nations. The significance of this issue has been
highlighted by the recently increased involvement of
the United Nations in peacekeeping and, more
importantly, by the wider range of tasks performed
within multifunctional peace operations.

For our part, Poland has made every effort to
have our cooperation reach the highest standards, both
in quantitative and qualitative terms. Throughout our
27 years of involvement in United Nations
peacekeeping, 32,000 Polish soldiers, civilian police
and other civilian specialists have served under the
blue banner. Currently, approximately 1,100 Poles
perform their duties in United Nations-led missions,
and almost 1,300 do so in other missions mandated by
the United Nations Security Council.

Given modest budgetary possibilities, those
figures represent the limits of our capacity.
Nevertheless, we continue to support United Nations
peacekeeping efforts, and we try, at least symbolically,
to respond positively when called upon by the
Secretary-General by providing additional individual
military and police officers or other civilian specialists.
Last year, a Polish special police unit 115 strong was
deployed in the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We are currently
exploring possibilities of contributing other civilian
specialists, including prison guards, border guards and
customs officers.

Through bilateral and multilateral cooperation
with our neighbours and regional partners we continue
to improve both our knowledge and our experience in
peacekeeping. In this context, let me mention that
Polish-Lithuanian and Polish-Ukrainian battalions have
been established for the purpose of participating jointly
in peacekeeping operations and in the initiative on the
Multinational Stand-by Forces High-Readiness Brigade
(SHIRBRIG), which for some time now has been
developed by a group of interested countries. Poland
currently occupies the chairmanship of SHIRBRIG's
steering committee. The concept to form and develop
the Brigade is recognized in the Brahimi report as a
possible model solution for enhancing United Nations
capacity for rapid deployment and effective action. We
are pleased to note the successful deployment of
SHIRBRIG in the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea.

Poland is proud of its achievements in fulfilling
its commitments, which- and I wish to state it
clearly- would not be possible without good
cooperation with the United Nations, particularly the
Secretariat.

We share the opinion that the consultation
mechanism is a cornerstone of cooperation between
troop-contributing countries, the Security Council and
the Secretariat. We welcome efforts to make
consultations more meaningful and substantive. In that
regard, we view the outcome of the deliberations on the
recommendations of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations, including the Security Council's adoption
of resolution 1327 (2000), as positive developments.

As a troop contributor we would be interested in
the views of Security Council members and other
troop-contributing countries, especially with regard to
the formulation of the mandate of a new peacekeeping
operation or when there is discussion on changing the
mandate of an ongoing operation in which Poland is a
participant. Furthermore, we would welcome being
consulted when decisions are made that affect the
safety and security of peacekeepers. At the same time,
we would wish to have our Views known during such
consultations. We are convinced that members of the
Security Council would make best use of the opinions
of troop contributors.

Much has been said about so-called private
meetings between the Security Council and troop
contributors, with one such meeting having taken place
so far. We believe this discussion format may offer
interesting possibilities, and therefore it deserves to be
continued.

Improved consultations with troop contributors
should help to foster common understanding among all
interested partners as to the situation on the ground, a
mission's mandate and the risks facing peacekeepers.
Above all, we believe that closer links between troop-
contributing countries and the Security Council should
strengthen mutual trust and prevent a possible division
between those who decide and those who implement.

