Mr. Tshibanda N'Tungamulongo (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I wish to reiterate my congratulations to Angola for its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of March 2016. I also wish to reiterate
how honoured we are to see the outstanding manner
in which the friendly country of Angola is carrying
out this task. I thank you, Mr. President, for giving
me another opportunity to address the Council at this
meeting focusing on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I wish also to take this
opportunity to pay well-deserved tribute to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, who has worked tirelessly over
the past several years towards the restoration of peace
in my country. Finally, once again I wish to express
the gratitude of the people and the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the efforts
undertaken by the United Nations to preserve the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of our country and
to ensure its peace and stability.

Allow me, before continuing my statement, to
condemn, on behalf of the President of the Republic, the
Government and the Congolese people, the cowardly
terrorist attacks that occurred recently in various
places around the world, and in Brussels on 22 March.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo extends its
condolences to the Belgian Government, the Belgian
people and the families and friends of the victims of
this friendly country, as well as to those of all the other
States affected by this scourge.

We just listened with great interest to the
presentation of the report (8/2016/233) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and the report (S/2016/232) on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, delivered by Mr. Maman Sidikou,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. For clarification
purposes, allow me to comment on some of the issues
addressed in those reports, in particular those related
to the progress in the electoral process, the security
situation in the eastern part of my country, human
rights, the strategic dialogue, including the reduction
of the MONUSCO force, and the implementation of
the commitments made by my country under the Addis
Ababa framework agreement.

With regard to the electoral process, I would
like to reaffirm before the Council that my country
is committed to the organization of free elections
in accordance with international standards of
inclusiveness, transparency and credibility. However,
my country also wishes to ensure that the elections
are not marred by violence - before, during or after.
Given the history of our country, the fragility of our
institutions, the trauma experienced by our people and
the heavy price paid by our economy due to armed
conflicts as well as unruly social movements, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot put a price on
peace and stability. They are our first priority. In that
respect, and with specific regard to the cause and effect
relationship between the elections and violence and
instability, I affirm that there is no - not in absolute
terms but in the specific context of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - empirical evidence that not
holding or organizing elections on a given date has
been, in itself, the cause of large-scale violence.

However, it should be recalled that, following the
political intolerance and non-acceptance of the results
by the defeated parties on the occasion of the 2006 and
2011 elections, my country experienced severe violence
accompanied by a significant loss of human life and
property. To avoid a recurrence of that situation, the
President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Joseph
Kabila Kabange, placed the country on the path of
political dialogue so that, together, politicians from all
sides, civil society, religious and customary authorities
could agree on the ways and means to overcome the
pitfalls found along the road to peaceful elections and
to establish consensus on the current electoral process.
There are four major pitfalls.

The first is the lack of a reliable and inclusive
electoral register that takes into account all eligible
Congolese voters, such as those newly of voting age,
Congolese abroad and displaced persons and refugees
who have returned to their place of residence. The
organization of sound elections also requires the
updating ofvoter lists, which must necessarily take into
account the country's new administrative nomenclature
stemming from the creation of new provinces, as well
as the issuance of voting cards to all Congolese of
voting age.

The second pitfall is the ongoing failure to establish
a consensual and realistic timetable. The timetable
issued at the time by the National Independent
Electoral Commission was rendered non-operational
after multiple discordant voices from the political class
were heard.

The third pitfall concerns the securing of the
electoral process in order to ensure the proper conduct
of elections and the role politicians should play in the
promotion of an environment that is conducive to a
peaceful electoral process.

Finally, the fourth pitfall is the funding of the
electoral process.

The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo welcomes the invitation to participate in
the dialogue among political actors launched by Pope
Francis. My Government also welcomes the 16 February
communique published jointly by the African Union,
the European Union, the International Organization
of la Francophonie and the United Nations, as well as
the 24 February appeal by the Secretary-General, each
of which insisted on the importance of that dialogue
and called on all political actors in the country to fully
cooperate with the duly appointed facilitator, former
Prime Minister ofTogo, Mr. Edem Kodjo, with a view to
the consensual and timely preparation and organization
of free, transparent and credible elections.

My Government has made considerable efforts in
the fight against negative forces and armed groups.
As evidenced by paragraph 5 of the report of the
Secretary-General, the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo (FARDC) have led, and
continue to conduct, operations against the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), the
Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) and the Forces de
resistance patriotiques en Ituri (FRPI). The operations
will end only when all of those rebel movements have
been eradicated.

However, remarkable results have already been
recorded. As such, out of the 1,200 FDLR combatants
estimated at the beginning of operations, today only
108 elements remain to be neutralized. And, even if
we were to add to that figure the few FDLR elements
that had once been returned to Rwanda before being
recycled and re-injected into our country for the purpose
of perpetuating insecurity and plundering the natural
resources of our country, we are not facing a force that
the armed forces of the Democratic Republic of Congo,
supported by the United Nations, cannot overcome.

There is no more eloquent testimony on this subject
than that of an individual who cannot be suspected of
being soft on the matter, namely, the Defence Minister
of the Republic of Rwanda, who, on 11 February 2015,
in response to a question by an elected representative
and member of the Rwandan Parliament's Standing
Committee on Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and
Security, affirmed that the FDLR was no longer a
military threat to Rwanda. That means that even the
Rwandan authorities recognize the progress made
towards neutralizing that negative force, even if, like
them, we think that there is still some work to do.

Equally encouraging results have been seen in
the fight against the ADF. Although it, too, has been
reduced to a bare minimum, it remains a source of the
most grave security concerns because of its established
connection with certain Islamic groups and its terrorist
actions, which, in just a few months, have led to the
death, in atrocious conditions, of more than 500
Congolese men and women in the territory of Beni in
North Kivu. Together with the FDLR and the FRPI, it
is the main target of the operation that the FARDC will
soon undertake with the support of MONUSCO.

I cannot leave this subject without mentioning
that the 340 former combatants from the FDLR who
had voluntarily surrendered last year, and their
dependents, have been confined until today to the
transit sites in Kisangani and Kanyabayonga. While
thanking the United Nations for taking charge of those
former combatants, my Government reiterates that it
is the responsibility of the international community
to repatriate them to Rwanda, their country of origin,
or relocate them to a third country outside the Great
Lakes region.

By setting up the National Human Rights
Commission, on the one hand, and the Human
Rights Liaison Entity, on the other hand, my country
wished responsibly to send a strong signal of its
steadfast determination to protect the rights of all
its citizens, and even those of foreigners living on
our territory, in accordance with national laws and
international commitments.

The political space in the Democratic Republic of
Congo is the most open of the entire region and it will
remain so. Proofofthat can be seen with the existence of
more than 400 political parties and hundreds of private
radio and television channels that freely set their editorial
policy, many of which are owned by political actors
known to be part of the opposition. Media oversight
is constitutionally ensured by the Superior Council
of Audiovisual and Communication, a democracy-
supporting institution in which representatives from
Congolese society in all its diversity sit. Further proof
of the openness of the Congolese political space is the
undeniable fact that, unlike some countries where being
in the opposition means necessarily living outside the
country, virtually all Congolese political leaders live
in Congo, carry out their political activities, leave and
return to the country without any restrictions related to
their political opinions.

However, as in any constitutional State where the
essential principles are the primacy of law and every
citizen's equality before the law, public freedoms
must be exercised in accordance with the law and by
respecting the requirements of public order. And the
State, guarantor of the freedoms and rights of all, has
the duty to see to it that this is so, particularly in the
light of the adage that states that the rights of one end
where those of others begin. An individual's rights and
freedoms do not permit him or her to defy with impunity
the legal arsenal that protects the rights and safety
of all. Therefore, when necessary, courts intervene,
acting in an independent manner, to sanction, as in any
constitutional State, offences committed.

Membership in the opposition, in the majority,
in civil society or in the uniformed military does not
release the perpetrator of an ordinary offence from
responsibility. For a country like ours, whose population
has greatly suffered from the impunity of the privileged
due to their status or social standing, to be lenient in
this area does not help to strengthen democracy, but
rather to derail it. The same goes, necessarily, when
serious violations of human rights or crimes against
humanity are overlooked.

In response to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's legitimate request to begin
the downsizing of MONUSCO, in recognition of the
irrefutable progress made together with the United
Nations over the past 17 years in terms ofre-establishing
peace and State authority, as well as in stabilizing the
country's institutions, the Council had advocated for
setting up a strategic dialogue between the Government
and MONUSCO with a view to working together to
develop an orderly exit strategy that ensures that the
gains made will be preserved. Thanks to MONUSCO's
new leadership and the personal recommendations of the
Secretary-General, the strategic dialogue between the
Government and MONUSCO, which was interrupted in
the last quarter of 2015, resumed about a month ago in
a constructive spirit.

After a series of meetings at the political level
that helped lay the foundations for consensus on
the principles and main lines of the exit strategy, a
joint working group made up of experts from the
Government and MONUSCO met from 9 to 19 March,
with the major task of defining objective and realistic
criteria for assessing the situation in the geographic
areas where MONUSCO personnel are deployed, from
the dual perspective of safety and the requirements of
stabilization, on the one hand, and the drafting, in a
second phase, ofa road map for an orderly and gradual
withdrawal of MONUSCO from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, on the other hand. I am pleased
to report that, at this stage, the following important
results have already been recorded.

First, a withdrawal strategy paper has been drafted
and is in the final stages of completion.

Secondly, based on the principles agreed in the
paper, the experts completed the first phase of their
work by setting forth in a memorandum, signed by
the Government and MONUSCO on 21 March, the
current deployment arrangement of the MONUSCO
contingents region by region, the criteria to be used
to evaluate the situation on the ground, the remaining
pending threats and challenges, ongoing actions or
those expected to be undertaken by the Government
to deal with the threats and challenges and, in each
case, the specific MONUSCO assistance expected in
support of the Government. Specific recommendations
permit this joint exercise. I would like to appeal to
the Council to make sure that this essential exercise,
which it requested and to which the Government is
committed in good faith and which is making progress
in a satisfactory way in a spirit of trust re-established
between the parties, does not remain a dead letter.

With regard to the renewal of the mandate of
MONUSCO, which is scheduled to take place at the
end of this month, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo hopes that the Council will
take into account the progress in the strategic dialogue
and the need to maintain between the two parties to
the dialogue an environment that is conducive to its
continuation, in particular in its next phase, which will
be devoted to developing a road map for the orderly
and definitive withdrawal of MONUSCO from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would underscore
that the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is aware of the actions expected of it in order to
make the withdrawal irreversible and to accelerate its
pace, particularly in terms of security sector reform.
Measures are currently being taken so that the three
battallions of the rapid reaction force that is being
developed within the FARDC, which have already
been trained, equipped and successfully deployed on
the ground, in particular in the course of operations
against the ADF and FDLR, will be further bolstered
within a few months by other units, which will make
possible the assumption of full responsibility for all
needs for securing the eastern part of the country. That
is a very ambitious goal, to contribute to creating the
concrete conditions that will make possible by the end
of this year the withdrawal of half of the MONUSCO
contingent currently deployed on our territory
without undermining security and the stabilization of
the country.

We call on those who continue to oppose the people
and the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to look closely at the political and security
situation, as well as the required responses, particularly
with regard to the role of MONUSCO. The Council
has embraced changing the operational concept of
the Mission by giving preference to strengthening its
capacity for projection rather than simply focusing on
the number of personnel. In the spirit of partnership
that is supposed to be at the heart of our relationship,
we hope, as part of the efforts of the Government to
achieve the established goal of reduction, that we can
count on the support, without any ulterior agenda, of
the members of the Council so that we can, within a
reasonable time frame, celebrate together the successful
completion of the largest peacekeeping operation in
the world.

My country's Government deplores the slowness in
the implementation of one of the important provisions
of the Nairobi Declarations, namely, the repatriation
of eX-combattants of Mouvement du 23-Mars (M-23).
The slow pace is due mainly to bad faith on the part of
the leadership of the M-23. It should be recalled that,
following the military defeat of M-23, those combatants
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other
countries fled to Uganda and Rwanda. According to the
amnesty law, only those from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are eligible for amnesty. Upon application
of the law, 970 citizens of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo who are former combattants of the M-23
who were not guilty of war crimes or crimes against
humanity were granted amnesty by the Government.
Of that number only 208 were repatriated from Uganda
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

According to the latest ultimatum, of 15 December
2015, of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region for the unconditional repatriation to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo of all former
Congolese combatants of the M-23 still cantonned in
Uganda were rejected by the leadership of the M-23.
Only 13 former combatants responded to that appeal
and accepted repatriation. That makes a total of 221
former M-23 combattants repatriated from Uganda
since December 2014. Based on that, it is possible to
assert that the Democratic Republic of the Congo is the
only signatory country to the Nairobi Declarations that
is implementing them. The M-23 former combatants,
taken hostage by their leadership, still have not accepted
to be part of the repatriation exercise.

My Government therefore believes that the
Council should consider sanctions against the M-23
leaders, who are holding the former combattants of the
Movement hostage and preventing their repatriation,
and hence their social reintegration in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in accordance with the decision
taken in New York on 29 September 2015 by the Heads
of States signatories of the framework agreement at
the sixth high-level meeting of the Regionl Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. As far as the countries that have hosted
the former rebels, it is also very important to put
pressure on them to have them meet their commitments
and facilitate repatriation.

I cannot conclude my statement without expressing
the gratitude of my Government to Mr. Maman Sidikou,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to Mr. Said
Djinnit, Special Envoy of thc Secretary-General for The President: I now invitc Council members to
the Great Lakes Region, for the" commitment and informal consultations to continue our discussion on
devotion to the cause of my country and to the Great
Lakes region. To all member of the Security Council,
I reiterate my country's full recognition and gratitude. The meett'ng rose at I] a.m.

the subject.
