Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): | would like to begin by thanking Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau and Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau. I also wish to thank Mr. Ronaldo Costa Filho, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United Nations. I once again welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of the Niger. Since the Security Council meeting (see S/PV.8656) on the situation in Guinea-Bissau last November and the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2019/13, which emphasized the importance of making headway on the political track and conducting the presidential elections according to their scheduled dates, the situation on the whole has been stable. Tunisia therefore hopes to see the situation in Guinea-Bissau moving towards detente and an easing of current tensions, in particular following the presidential elections, which were conducted according to their scheduled dates, amid good circumstances and in a peaceful and transparent manner, as asserted by all observers. Tunisia takes this opportunity to express its appreciation for the efforts of the various parties concerned, in particular the authorities in Guinea- Bissau. We commend the commitment of the military forces to neutrality and to provide adequate conditions conducive to holding the elections. We appreciate the efforts of the National Electoral Commission and the group of five international partners in Guinea- Bissau - the Economic Community of West African States, the United Nations, the African Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the European Union - to ensure the holding of those important elections in Guinea-Bissau on 24 November and 29 December 2019. Despite the lack of clarity that prevailed following the announcement of the electoral results and the political crisis in its wake, which, if it continues, would jeopardize security and stability in the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, Tunisia commends the efforts of all the parties concerned in seeking to surmount the crisis. We also value the approach being taken by the two parties in the presidential elections in opting for legal and judicial means to determine the electoral results. Given that the continued lack of trust among political actors in Guinea-Bissau poses a challenge, Tunisia calls upon all the parties concerned to prioritize the greater national interest and maintain calm and security, while refraining from taking any actions that could lead to escalation or jeopardizing peace and security. In that context, we commend the effective and constructive mediation role played by the Economic Community of West African States - a role it continues to play with the various actors in the Republic of Guinea-Bissau - to resolve the political crisis and ensure the best possible conditions for establishing an environment of peace and stability in this brotherly African country. Tunisia also appreciates the efforts made both to implement the road map and to fulfil the various commitments undertaken in the Conakry Agreement, including on the holding of elections, the constitutional review and security sector reform. Those efforts will enable the authorities in Guinea-Bissau to strengthen national reconciliation, promote democratic governance and prompt further reforms in various areas, including fostering gender equality, enhancing the participation of young people, upholding human rights, spreading a culture of accountability and fostering economic and social development. Despite the great progress achieved on the political, economic and social levels - with support from the international partners represented in Guinea-Bissau and from regional and international organizations - the country will remain under threat if we fail to effectively address the issue of drug trafficking and transnational organized crime, which continues to pose a serious threat to stability, security and development in Guinea- Bissau. In that regard, Tunisia welcomes the efforts of the authorities, with support from the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), to strengthen monitoring along land, sea and air borders so as to ward off those threats. We call for increased support and follow-up in the implementation of the national action plan on drug trafficking, and we promote bilateral cooperation with the United Nations and other partners to fight against this scourge. My delegation stresses that a lack of political stability in Guinea-Bissau endangers the country and is likely to lead to further deterioration in the security situation and increased backsliding on the political track despite the progress seen in the holding of presidential and legislative elections. Lapses in this progress are likely to have serious repercussions throughout the entire region, especially with terrorists and criminal groups poised to take advantage of the situation, bolster their presence and extend their activities; lapses will also enable transnational organized crime in all its forms. As for the reconfiguration of the United Nations presence in Guinea-Bissau, in line with resolution 2458 (2019), Tunisia reiterates that it is following this issue in parallel with the improvements in the country's situation. In conclusion, I would like to note that under Tunisia's chairmanship of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012), concerning Guinea-Bissau, we commend the role played by the Committee's former Chair, His Excellency Ambassador Anatolio Ndong Mba, Permanent Representative of Equatorial Guinea. We intend to build upon the progress achieved by the Committee thus far and stand ready to further the work of the Committee. We will also continue to consult and coordinate with UNIOGBIS, the members of the Committee and other actors concerned as we monitor developments in the situation and follow the progress achieved on the path towards political stability and reform.
