Mr. Fulci (Italy): I wish to join you, Mr. President,
and the speakers who preceded me in extending a warm
welcome to the Foreign Minister of Mozambique, His
Excellency Mr. Leonardo Simao. His presence at this
table today symbolizes the return of his country to peace,
unity, stability and progress. Henceforth Mozambique will
be able to channel all its energies into healing the wounds
of a protracted civil war and building a better future for
all its people in a renewed spirit of harmony, respect and
understanding. May I ask him to convey our
congratulations to the leader of his country, President
Chissano, who, together with the leader of RENAMO,
Mr. Dhlakarna, decided to set out on a path of dialogue
and pacification by signing the historic General Peace
Agreement, in Rome, on 4 October 1992, under the
auspices of the Italian Government and the community of
Saint Egidius. This process culminated a few months ago
in the free and peaceful election of the President and the
Parliament of Mozambique.

I fully associate myself in advance with the
statement of the Permanent Representative of France, who
will speak on behalf of the European Union. I do not
have much to add, but I would be remiss if I did not take
this opportunity to recall, not without some pride, Italy's
special commitment to ending the civil war that divided
Mozambique for almost 20 years.

 

The United Nations peace-keeping Operation in
Mozambique marks a milestone in the history of our
Organization's peace-keeping activities. This Operation is
already often being cited as one of the true success stories
of the United Nations in the application of the pertinent
provisions of the Charter, which the founding fathers
conceived of as a way to end the tensions and conflicts that
have marked the history of this century. The Italian people,
our Parliament and our Government are deeply gratified by
the outcome of the process begun in Rome two years ago,
and we are proud to have had a role in making it possible.
Of course, it was a long, extremely difficult and complex
negotiation, and sincere homage must be paid to both
parties - the Government and RENAMO - and to all
those who contributed to the final success through their
tenacity, good faith and, above all, sincere willingness to
compromise. Our colleague here at the United Nations,
Ambassador Pedro Comissario Afonso, also lent a very
skilful hand from New York, and we should acknowledge
that.

But good offices and mediation alone would not have
sufficed; military and financial commitments were equally
necessary. In this regard, allow me to cite only three figures
concerning the Italian contribution to Mozambique. To
monitor observance of the peace agreements, together with
other United Nations troops, my country deployed in
Mozambique a total of 4,700 men, 650 vehicles and 11
aircraft, a contribution amounting to roughly $300 million,
only a fraction of which was reimbursed by the United
Nations.

Equally significant were the voluntary contributions -
another $110 million - through bilateral and multilateral
channels; and this does not include additional bilateral
economic assistance.

Of course, the elections were the key element in the
peace process, and we must again congratulate the
Mozambican Government and RENAMO on keeping to
their agreement and making possible what many had
considered impossible: fair, impartial and free elections,
with an 88-per-cent participation rate by Mozambican
voters.

In the long term, some of the key aspects of
ONUMOZ will represent a point of reference for other
peace-keeping operations. A careful study of the presence
and activity of the United Nations in Mozambique could
contribute, we believe, to the deeper reflection currently
under way on United Nations peace-keeping activities, in
connection with the Secretary-General's recent important
Supplement to the Agenda for Peace.

We also should remember that individuals play a
crucial role in operations of this type. The
professionalism, experience, negotiating talent and
personal qualities of those involved - of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for instance -
often can mean the difference between success and
failure. From this perspective, we must pay tribute once
again to the political stature and leadership of the
Mozambican leaders, and also to the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, Aldo Ajello, and to all the on-site
representatives of the donor countries, who operated at all
times in close and effective coordination.

We should never tire of reminding ourselves that
peace and development go hand in hand. They are the
two sides of the same coin: there can be no peace without
development, and no development without peace. I am
glad to assure the Foreign Minister that Italy intends to
continue in Mozambique to play a role on the front line
of this phase of consolidating democracy and stability,
which are so closely linked to economic development.
The seeds of democracy in Mozambique will take root,
but they are still fragile and in need of care. The
stabilization of political institutions, in the meantime, will
constitute a vital premise for the economic and social
development to which the country so rightly aspires.

In this perspective, we believe that two fundamental
conditions must be fulfilled. First, the international
community must continue to maintain a high level of
commitment to helping Mozambique, even when that
country is no longer on the map of crisis areas. Secondly,
a true policy of national reconciliation must continue to
prevail in that country, one that would allow everybody
to participate on an equal footing in its democratic life
and institutions.
Let me conclude by wishing every success to
Foreign Minister Simao and to the new, freely and
democratically elected Government of Mozambique. It is
our most sincere hope that the consolidation of freedom,
democracy and development in Mozambique will set a
shining example for other countries that, unfortunately,
are still affected by civil war and internal strife.

