Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We feel honoured, Sir, by your presiding
over this Council meeting. We welcome the meeting's
format, in which Council non-members have been able
to hear the valuable information presented by
Ambassador Koonjul, Chairman of the Security
Council ad hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution in Africa; by Mr. Ivan Simonovic',
President of the Economic and Social Council, by
Mr. Amadou Kebe, Permanent Observer of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU); and by
Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, to whom we bid a fond farewell.

We wonder, however, why this type of meeting is
not also being extended to other groups and subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council, such as the working
groups examining the question of sanctions and
peacekeeping operations. As we have said on earlier
occasions, there is much wisdom among Africa's
leaders and representatives. No one has a better
understanding of African problems or is in a better
position to find the most appropriate solutions than
they.
For that reason, Cuba is participating in this
debate with particular eagerness to hear the opinions
and the proposals of the African delegations. In
addition, we believe that the Council Working Group,
whenever possible, should be chaired by an African
representative.

The Group should have frequent and direct
contact with the protagonists in conflicts and with
African regional and subregional mechanisms for the
prevention and resolution of conflicts. In spite of what
has been said in debates and affirmed in resolutions,
emphasis continues to be placed on reaction to
conflicts rather than on prevention.

As has been said here, the best solution is
prevention. Prevention means addressing the most
profound causes of conflict, such as poverty and
underdevelopment. However, many of the measures
that are necessary to eliminate the causes of conflict in
Africa and to consolidate peace and sustainable
development are clearly beyond the mandate of the
Security Council and correspond to other organs, such
as the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. Therefore, one of the functions of the
Working Group should be the careful consideration of
activities undertaken by the Security Council in Africa
that may need to be reconsidered because the Council
is not the appropriate organ to undertake them.

Our insistence on clearly delimiting the
responsibilities of the Security Council is a response
not to a purely conceptual concern, but rather to the
fact that, when this organ assumes functions that are
beyond its competence and for which it is therefore not
duly prepared, the countries that are subject to such
measures suffer the consequences, while functions for
which the Security Council is responsible and
accountable are inevitably affected.

There is sometimes a proliferation of United
Nations initiatives and proposals of various types for
Africa, but there is still no comprehensive and
integrated approach to solving problems related to
peace, security and development in the continent, nor is
there any mechanism for periodic evaluations of the
implementation of what has been agreed. One reason
why such an approach remains elusive is the
inadequate level of coordination and communication
among the General Assembly, the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council. We hope that the
work of the Security Council Working Group will
contribute to changing that situation.

The work of the Working Group should
complement and not substitute for the efforts of other
organs to address African problems. It is very
important that there be no duplication. We propose that
periodic meetings be held involving the Chairmen of
the Security Council Working Group on Africa, the
Open-Ended Ad Hoc Working Group of the General
Assembly on the Causes of Conflict and the Promotion
of Durable Peace and Sustainable Development in
Africa, and the ad hoc Advisory Group of the
Economic and Social Council on African Countries
Emerging from Conflict. The results of these meetings
should be duly reported to Member States.

The issue before us today could well be the
principal item for an initial meeting between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council.
There is no reason not to hold periodic joint meetings
between those two bodies. African questions are the
subject of over half the activities of the Security
Council. It would therefore be very useful for the
Working Group to draw up an accurate account of the
successes and failures in Africa and to prepare a
summary of experiences and lessons learned. It should
also examine the way in which the Security Council
deals with different African problems and recommend
measures to avoid selective action by this organ,
which, unfortunately, is reflected in swift action with
regard to certain conflicts and in virtual passivity with
regard to others.

You have asked us to be brief, Sir, and for that
reason I will conclude at this point. We hope that this
meeting will not be an isolated event and that we will
be able to follow up the work of the Working Group on
Africa in future debates.

