Mr. Rowe (Sierra Leone): Sir, my delegation too
shares the view expressed by others that your presence
here underscores the significance that Benin attaches to
the role that the Security Council can play in the
maintenance of peace and security in our West African
subregion.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2005/86) - and we thank him for introducing it
personally today - once again covers the entire
spectrum of the steps now under way or being
proposed to help combat subregional and cross-border
problems in West Africa. My delegation would like to
offer some brief comments on the observations and
conclusions contained in that latest report.

The Secretary-General states in the report that
many of the border problems require joint efforts by
the countries and peoples concerned, including civil
society and its organizations and local communities. In
that connection, the Security Council will be interested
to know that earlier this week, parliamentarians, chiefs
and elders from Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, all
ethnic Kissi people, met at Koindu, a border town in
the Kailahun district of Sierra Leone, in a historic step
towards the consolidation of subregional peace and
stability. Until the rebel war and other armed
incursions into the area, Koindu was a thriving
international market serving the three countries of the
Mano River Union.

In the presence of their heads of State or
Government, the Kissi parliamentarians, chiefs and
elders resolved, among other things, that there is an
urgent need to support their respective Governments to
implement the regional and subregional protocols
relating to peace, security and the free movement of
people, goods and services in the subregion. Perhaps
the most significant part of their communique was a
request for the Governments of Guinea, Liberia and
Sierra Leone, to facilitate the establishment of
international markets at Koindu, Gueckedou and Foya,
and to improve the road network to facilitate easy
access to those markets.

The Security Council may recall the serious
humanitarian and refugee situation that arose in the
areas of Gueckedou and Parrot's Beak almost four
years ago, following a series of cross-border armed
attacks. This week's meeting in Koindu should be seen
as an important contribution to the integrated
strategies, described by the Secretary-General in his
report, for stabilizing border areas.

My delegation also takes this opportunity to
mention another recent development in addressing
what may be perceived as a potential cross-border
problem. My colleague the representative of Guinea
briefly referred to it earlier. This is the so-called Yenga
problem between Sierra Leone and Guinea -
something which, unfortunately, has been grossly
exaggerated. The Security Council should take note of
the Sierra Leonean proposal for an independent group
of consultants, preferably under the aegis of the United
Nations and working with experts from both countries,
to replace the beacons that are missing along the border
that had already been demarcated.

In his latest report, the Secretary-General has
listed some of the areas where, in his view, much more
remains to be done for a more effective contribution to
conflict prevention and peacebuilding in West Africa.
He mentions, for example, the need to convert the
ECOWAS moratorium on the importation, exportation
and manufacture of small arms and light weapons in
West Africa into a legally binding instrument. Sierra
Leone shares the view of the Secretary-General that
such conversion of the moratorium would send a strong
signal to development partners and the wider
international community that West African
Governments are themselves prepared to address
decisively the devastating effects of the proliferation of
small arms - a major contributing factor to political,
economic and social instability in the region. We
acknowledge, in that connection, the support of the
European Union and others for upgrading the
moratorium.

Now that efforts are under way to convert the
moratorium into a legally binding instrument, we
believe that the Security Council should also send the
same signal to the wider international community
concerning the devastating effects of the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons. It can do so by
pronouncing itself unequivocally on the need for an
international legally binding instrument on the tracing
and marking of illicit small arms and light weapons. In
our view, that would constitute a significant
contribution to our efforts to combat subregional and
cross-border problems in West Africa. A non-binding
instrument or political declaration is not enough. As
the representative of the United Kingdom eloquently
noted this morning, we must move from the mode of
rhetoric to the mode of substance, in the form of a
legally binding commitment to deal with that scourge.

One cannot speak about subregional and cross-
border problems in West Africa without referring to the
situation of youth, or what the Secretary-General
rightly describes in his report as the shocking levels of
youth unemployment in West Africa. That is the heart
of the matter, and therein lies perhaps the most viable,
effective and long-lasting means of dealing with
conflict prevention, peacebuilding and development in
the subregion. The state of youth unemployment
manifests itself in such regional and cross-border
problems as mercenarism, rebel recruitment, the
circulation and use of illicit small arms and light
weapons and illicit mining.

We wholeheartedly agree with the Secretary-
General that first, the growing numbers of young men
and women who lack the prospect of ever being able to
work for a decent living are a major threat to the future
of the subregion and, secondly, that the shocking levels
of youth unemployment and the desperation that
accompanies it not only could undermine any progress
that countries such as Sierra Leone may have made, but
also carry a real risk of destroying the political and
social structures of currently stable countries.

Experience over the past 10 years has taught us in
West Africa that we can no longer remain complacent
about the existence of a few pockets of stability here
and there, while other spots of the region are collapsing
as a result of prolonged armed conflict. Youth
unemployment in West Africa must be addressed as a
matter of priority at the national, regional and
subregional levels. Indeed, measures to reduce youth
unemployment should be regarded as key to conflict
prevention, peacebuilding and development. Those
measures transcend the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants. As we say in Sierra
Leone, hundreds of thousands of young people never
handled weapons. They were not combatants. They
need to be integrated - not necessarily reintegrated -
into the mainstream of society.

Of course, we agree with the Secretary-General
that the primary responsibility for promoting peace and
stability in the region rests with West African leaders
and communities themselves. However, we should
emphasize that we in West Africa already have in place
appropriate institutions and mechanisms for the
promotion of regional and subregional economic
cooperation and integration, such as ECOWAS and the
Mano River Union. In spite of obvious constraints,
they have already demonstrated a propensity - indeed,
the capability - for conflict prevention, development
and even peacekeeping. We in Sierra Leone know what
ECOWAS did for us during those dark, dark days
before - and I emphasize before - the deployment of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
and the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone.

What those regional and subregional
organizations need most is the continued and sustained
support of the international community. For its part, the
Security Council must continue to monitor responses to
and implementation of the recommendations it has
formulated for strengthening collaboration among the
various United Nations institutions, agencies,
programmes and partners. The emphasis should remain
on an integrated approach to conflict prevention and
development in West Africa.

