Mr. Noziri (Tajikistan): I have the honour to
make this statement on behalf of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference (OIC) group.

At the outset, we would like to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and the Special
Representative for Somalia of the Commission of the
African Union, Mr. Boubacar Diarra, for their
important briefings. We welcome the presence of the
Prime Minister of the Transitional Federal Government
of Somalia, Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed. We
would like also to express our deep appreciation to the
Chinese presidency of the Security Council for the
convening of this timely meeting and for giving the
OIC group the opportunity to address it.

Since the beginning of the conflict in Somalia
nearly two decades ago, the OIC has always given top
priority to the situation in that country, which is a
founding State Member of the Organization. The crisis
in Somalia has permanently featured on the agenda of
all OIC summits and conferences of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs, including their annual coordination
meetings in New York.

The OIC has remained in close contact and
worked in unison with the United Nations to find the
necessary ways and means of restoring peace and
security in Somalia. In the same vein, we wish
specifically to pay high tribute to Mr. Augustine
Mahiga, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Somalia, for his commendable role and
outstanding performance directed at ensuring a
tangible outcome to the efforts of all concerned to
restore peace, security and stability in Somalia.

Despite the renewed strong engagement by the
OIC and, indeed, the larger international community,
which produced the Djibouti Peace Agreement,
currently under implementation, lasting peace has,
sadly, continued to elude Somalia. A number of
international conferences in which the OIC actively
participated have been convened to demonstrate
solidarity and support for the Transitional Federal
Government, led by President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh
Ahmed, but Somalia is still at a crossroads, and the
security situation remains fragile. Considering the huge
investment made so far in the Somalia project, it is
therefore incumbent on all of us, as stakeholders, to
continue to work together with the Government in
order to protect and preserve our collective investment,
in the interest of regional and international peace and
security.

As a practical commitment to Somalia, the OIC
also hosted the sixteenth session of the International
Contact Group on Somalia in Jeddah. Unfortunately,
the violence and terrorist attacks by extremist militant
groups seeking to overthrow the internationally
recognized Transitional Federal Government have not
abated, thereby compounding the already dire
humanitarian situation in Somalia.

It is our hope that with the appointment of the
new Prime Minister and his government, the
Transitional Federal Government will remain focused
on pursuing national reconciliation and will avoid any
distraction in order to complete, through an inclusive
process, the outstanding key tasks under the transition.

The international community must encourage the
Government to promote dialogue and reconciliation
with the groups that renounce violence and join the
peace process. However, we must also demonstrate a
strong resolve to confront as well as defeat the spoilers
and enemies of peace and progress. I urge participants
in this meeting to send a strong and clear message to
them that terrorist activities and violence will not pay
and will never be rewarded.

As we all know, security and development are
mutually reinforcing. The Somalis need to be given
hope through rehabilitation, reconstruction and
economic development in order to make their lives
more meaningful and worth living. To achieve this
goal, the current Somali Government requires massive
international support to build a viable economic base
and institutions. I should like here to reiterate our
unflinching solidarity with the good people of Somalia
and to reassure them that the OIC will never abandon
supporting their country. In this regard, I have the
pleasure to announce that the OIC has opened a
humanitarian affairs office in Somalia and signed an
agreement with the World Food Programme and many
international partners for the implementation of a
comprehensive food security programme covering the
south and centre of Somalia and the areas most
affected. In its first stage, the programme will benefit
around 400,000 citizens.

Finally, as we strive to retain the confidence of
the Somalis, the international community must be seen
to deliver on its promises, as stabilizing Somalia is an
invaluable investment in global peace with respect to
which we cannot afford to waver or compromise. In
this important peacebuilding project, enormous
responsibilities also lie on the shoulders of the Somalis
themselves, and we must all strive individually and
collectively to meet our part of the bargain
satisfactorily. Let this meeting produce the desired
fruitful outcome that will lay the ground for permanent
peace in Somalia.

