Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
for his briefing and his efforts. I also thank the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for his
thorough briefing to the Council and for having
reiterated the priorities defined by the Afghan
Government for continued cooperation with the
international community to provide the conditions most
conducive to the transition period, which should be
owned and led by the Afghans themselves.

Lebanon supports the cooperation of other
Council members on efforts to support Afghan
priorities to achieve the well-being of the brotherly
Afghan people. We recall and endorse the words of the
Permanent Representative on the need to put an end to
war and violence in Afghanistan.

Allow me to share a few remarks with the
Council. Following the outcome of Afghanistan's
recent free elections, lessons must be drawn and
reforms must continue while avoiding future obstacles.
In addition, the independence of the electoral
monitoring institutions must be strengthened. Lebanon
welcomes the new Afghan Parliament and invites the
legislative, executive and judicial authorities to
cooperate and complement each other's work by giving
the highest priority to the country's interests over any
other interests or considerations.

My country also welcomes the commendable
steps undertaken to implement reconciliation and
reintegration policies, in particular awareness-raising
and capacity-building efforts undertaken throughout
the various sectors of Afghan society. We support the
request made by the Secretary-General to Security
Council members in his report (S/2011/120*) to pay
special attention to the impact on the reconciliation and
reintegration process of the sanctions regime
established by the Council in its resolution 1267
(1999). Indeed, all sectors of Afghan society must be
convinced of the benefits of reconciliation, which is
the only way to achieve the desired objectives.

At the same time, efforts must be made to ensure
the implementation of the commitments made through
the Kabul process on security, governance and

11-2662]
development by transferring full responsibility for
security in a gradual but thorough manner to the
Afghan authorities.

Lebanon condemns the killing and maiming of
civilians - some 9,000 to date - and demands that all
factions respect international humanitarian law and
protect civilians and their possessions. We hope that
the repression of and discrimination against women
will cease. Women must be protected from violence
and guaranteed the rights to education and to
participation in public life. We refer to the convention
signed between the Afghan Government and the United
Nations forbidding the recruitment of minors into the
army and the police, and we call for an end to sexual
violence by security forces against children. We also
welcome progress made in the rehabilitation of military
forces, the return of refugees, and demining.

My country believes that practices such as
arbitrary detention highlight the flaws in the security
situation and the judiciary. We also condemn the high
rate of deaths among pregnant women and children
under five. We reaffirm the importance of regional
cooperation and good-neighbourliness, which have a
positive effect on the economic and security situations.
They also strengthen the fight against terrorism,
organized crime and narcotics trafficking, ensure
border security, and strengthen internal reconciliation.
Restoring peace in Afghanistan will have a positive
effect on the neighbouring countries as well.

Lastly, Lebanon reiterates its appreciation for the
efforts of the United Nations bodies and regional and
international organizations, including the Organization
of the Islamic Conference. We thank them for their
efforts in every field and to restore peace, stability and
prosperity in Afghanistan, a friendly country with a
rich history, culture and resources.

