Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is holding an open debate for the
second time in less than 96 hours in an attempt to find
a way out of the tragic circumstances to which the
people of Palestine are being subjected as a result of
the continued Israeli acts of aggression inside the
territories of the Palestinian Authority and inside the
compound of its legitimately elected leadership.

Once again, we would like to reiterate that Israeli
defiance - its refusal to implement Security Council
resolutions, most recent among them resolution 1402
(2002) - will lead to further deterioration. The peace
and security of the Israeli people, which Israel claims
to be seeking, will not come about unless security for
the Palestinian people is realized. Peace will not be
achieved unless the Palestinian people obtain their
rights in full.

What is required today of the Security Council is
for it to reaffirm its earlier resolutions. The Council
must call for an immediate Israeli withdrawal from the
Palestinian territories, an immediate lifting of the siege
imposed on Palestinian cities and an end to all forms of
aggression against the Palestinian people and its
legitimate leadership. The Israeli Government must
realize that all aspects of its aggression against
Palestine are doomed to failure, because the Palestinian
people will stand up forcefully to such aggression and
will continue its resistance to end Israeli occupation of
its territories. The occupation is the origin of the
problem. It must be ended immediately if the region is
to enjoy stability and calm.

Many Israeli government officials speak of peace.
They speak of a desire to live in peace with the
Palestinians. They say that they are extending their
hand in peace. These are claims that no one in his right
mind can believe any longer, in the light of what we
see clearly on our television screens. Israel is asking
for a unique kind of peace: a peace built on attempts to
subdue Palestinians so that they will accept the
occupation of their territories, which are subjected to
forcible settler colonization by terrorist elements for
whom armed force is a way of life. Israel is asking for
peace, but under conditions tantamount to transforming
the Palestinian people into splinter groups living in
isolated bantustans in the service of the Israeli
economy and Israeli society, or into refugees exiled
from their land or prisoners allowed to stay there under
aggression and tyranny.

Those who speak of civilization and barbarism
must learn from history that barbarism is, at best, the
occupation of other people's territory, settler
colonization and the killing or physical liquidation of
those who resist or oppose. That is the true face of
barbarism, which we thought we had left behind us 57
years ago. They speak of democracy and of the free
world. They say they are part and parcel of democracy
and of the free world. To them, I say that the free world
does not occupy the territory of others by force and
does not subject other peoples to occupation. True
democracies do not occupy the territory of others and
do not commit aggression against what is not rightfully
theirs. Let them stop the lies, because they can no
longer convince anyone.

The situation calls for a very conscientious and
in-depth look at what is really required. Egypt calls for
international action, through the Security Council, that
would achieve a final and comprehensive settlement of
the Arab-Israeli conflict. What is required for the
attainment of that objective is an agreement on the
necessary elements of any settlement. They are well
known to all of us and can be summarized as follows:
first, Israeli withdrawal from the Palestinian territories
occupied since 5 June 1967; secondly, the
establishment of an independent, sovereign Palestinian
State with East Jerusalem as its capital; thirdly,
arrangements guaranteeing security for all parties on an
equal footing in terms of rights and commitments; and
fourthly, the establishment, after all withdrawals have
been carried out, of comprehensive peaceful relations,
good-neighbourly relations and constructive
cooperation among the region's States and peoples on
the basis I set out earlier - the Madrid formula of land
for peace, endorsed by the international community and
accepted by the parties. Or at least we thought they had
been accepted by the parties.

The importance of those principles, as well as the
need for them to be part of any settlement plan, must
be reaffirmed. That would lead to a measure of
confidence-building in this political process, which
must be restarted after Israel's attempt to demolish it.
This plan will lead us to negotiations on the details of
such a just and comprehensive final settlement, whose
elements we reviewed a moment ago.

Once again, I reiterate that Israel's continued
occupation, acts of aggression, attempts at repression
and failure to recognize the Palestinian people's right
to self-determination and to the establishment of an
independent State on its land will only lead to further
suffering by both Palestinians and Israelis. The forces
of aggression, darkness and terror cannot be victorious.
All involved must shoulder their responsibilities -
primarily the States members of the Security Council,
and in particular the permanent members. They all bear
a special responsibility, and they cannot forget, or
claim to have forgotten, it.

