Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to thank Special
Representative David Shearer for his briefing. I would
also like to thank Ambassador Wronecka for her briefing
and guidance on the work of the Sanctions Committee
over the past two years. The South Sudan sanctions
regime remains a useful tool, and the Security Council
should not hesitate to use it when the situation requires
such action.

We will soon be halfway through the 100-day
extension of the transition period, and we must note
the little progress that has been made on the key
issues of implementing the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of Conflict in the Republic of South.
We take note, however, of the recent statements by
President Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar and urge them to
implement them. The challenges of implementing the
peace process are many, complex, well-known and have
been recalled by the various speakers today. While we
tend to focus on those difficulties from the point of
view of political leaders, I would like to highlight some
challenges today from the point of view of the people
of South Sudan.

First, civilians need all fighting to stop in order
for them to rebuild their lives, homes and livelihoods.
Perhaps the most important achievement of the current
peace process is the ceasefire, which is broadly pursued.
It is entirely up to the political leaders to ensure that
their troops respect the ceasefire. However, we are
concerned that fighting continues in parts of Equatoria
and that inter-communal violence - which accounts for
85 per cent of civilian casualties - sexual violence and
crime persist throughout the country. Those conditions
confirm the need for civilian protection efforts by the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). It
seems to us that conditions are not yet conducive to the
voluntary, safe, dignified and well-informed return of
displaced persons, nearly half of whom are children.

Secondly, the people of South Sudan need justice.
Let me give a concrete, and unfortunately demonstrative,
example ofthat. The July 2018 joint report by UNMISS
and the Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights on attacks against civilians in Unity
state identified three individuals who were likely to
exercise command over those who were committing
the violations. One of those three individuals was the
Commissioner of Gany county. Information gathered
by the United Nations suggests that that individual
ordered officers of the Sudan People's Liberation Army
and youth groups to kill, rape and abduct civilians,
recruit children, burn and loot houses and commit other
atrocities, many of which could constitute war crimes.
Initially, following the report, that Commissioner was
dismissed. However, shortly thereafter, he was not only
promoted militarily but, in November of this year, he
was reinstated as Commissioner in the same place.
We therefore urge the Government to put an end to the
culture of impunity, thoroughly investigate all cases
of abuse and bring to justice those responsible for the
crimes. In that regard, we remind everyone of the Peace
and Security Council ofthe African Union's call for the
Republic of South Sudan to rapidly operationalize all
transitional justice mechanisms, including the hybrid
court for South Sudan.

Thirdly, the people of South Sudan must be able
to exercise their civil and political rights. Some have
been prevented from freely participating in political
discussions as part of the peace process. The civic and
political space is under threat. In that regard, we are
particularly concerned about the seemingly uncontrolled
powers of the national security services. We have
received reports of illegal detention of members of civil
society and the media, including cases of torture and
sexual abuse by members of that service. We call for
the urgent and thorough investigation of those reports.
In addition, political prisoners and prisoners of war
must be released without delay. There is also a need to
ensure the full, effective and meaningful participation
of women, young people and civil society in the
peace process.

Fourthly, the population is suffering from a severe
humanitarian crisis. As the Secretary-General's
report (S/20l9/936)indicates, the extreme gravity of
the humanitarian situation underscores the need to
restore peace. The World Food Programme has said
that it is engaged in a race against time to feed millions
of people. Hunger is on the rise due to droughts and
floods, but also political instability in the context of a
long-term humanitarian crisis. Significant obstacles to
humanitarian access persist, whether due to hostility or
attacks on humanitarian personnel and goods. Experts
believe that the prospects for food insecurity have never
been worse.

Those challenges represent only part of the daily
suffering and pain that the people of South Sudan have
been subjected to for years. Those belonging to the
political elite hold the keys to the solution. The time
has come for them to get to work.

