Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Mr. Ruiz Massieu for his informative briefing
and welcome Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia,
Foreign Minister of Colombia, and Mr. Emilio
Archila, Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and
Consolidation, whose continued presence at these
meetings reflects the importance that the Government
of Colombia attaches to the Council's support of the
peace process.

As this is possibly our last intervention on the
issue, which is so close and important for Peru, I would
like to recall our first intervention in the Chamber
(see S/PV.8154), when we recognized that, although
the implementation of the peace agreement would be a
complex process with numerous challenges, we trust in
its future with conviction and hope.

Today, we reiterate our confidence in the Colombian
Government and people in their commitment to peace
and to continuing to implement the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace in a comprehensive manner, including
by strengthening State presence and through
comprehensive rural reform, the crop-substitution
programme, legal and security guarantees and the social
and economic reintegration of former combatants. The
Government's continued efforts to implement the "peace
with legality" strategy and development programmes
with a territorial focus through a multidimensional and
multisectoral approach to reintegration are consistent
with that commitment, as is the transition process in
the territorial areas for training and reintegration, the
development of productive projects, collective and
individual alike, access to land and effective integration
into local communities.

It is also important to strengthen support and
protection mechanisms for more than two-thirds of
former combatants who reside outside of the territorial
areas for training and reintegration, while taking
into consideration the specific needs of women and
young people, as well as rural, indigenous and ethnic
communities. The killings of former combatants and
social leaders, exacerbated by the ongoing regional
election campaign, mean that better schemes must be
put in place to protect candidates and apprehend those
responsible and bring them to justice.

Upholding commitments, such as the National
Pact for Political Culture and Non-Violence during the
Electoral Campaign, signed in August in the presence
of President Ivan Duque, is also vital. The Pact ensures
respect for political opponents and seeks to ban violence
during electoral campaigns. In that context, because we
are also affected by the actions of criminal groups, we
reiterate our categorical rejection of the announcement
by Ivan Marquez and a small group of dissidents to
return to arms. We trust that this petty decision will not
undermine the commitment of the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Comun and that of other former
combatants to peace. Those involved will have to
answer for their actions before justice and history.

The contribution made by the institutions of the
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation,
and Non-Repetition to the peacemaking process must be
recognized, as they play a fundamental role in ensuring
accountability, legal security and reconciliation and in
honouring the memory of the victims.

Lastly, we highlight the work of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, both in Colombia and
in New York alike, for the dedication, professionalism
and excellence with which it discharges the mandate
that was unanimously renewed by resolution 2487
(2019) on 12 September.

The peace process in Colombia must continue to
set a good example for the world. To that end, Colombia
will always have the support of Peru and, we are sure, of
the Security Council and the international community.

