Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank the
Secretary General of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO), Ms. Fang Liu, and Ambassador
Aboulatta for their insightful briefings.

In light of evolving terrorist threats throughout the
world, the enhancement of aviation security worldwide
is critical to keeping aircrafts and travellers safe and
secure. Today's missile attack on the Kabul International
Airport only highlights the need for the advancement of
new standards of aviation security. It is not just timely,
but necessary. Yet, not all needed improvements to
aviation security can be made overnight, especially
given that their implementation requires a phased
approach and the active engagement of all States.

Among the urgent tasks are the enhancement
of overall security with the Advanced Passenger
Screening System; the heightened screening of personal
baggage, in particular electronic devices, to prevent
improvised explosive devices from being taken in the
air; the introduction of increased security protocols
around aircraft; and the establishment of additional
pre-clearance locations.

Resolution 23 09 (2016), which Ukraine co-sponsored,
sent a strong message to ICAO to further develop its
cooperation with the Security Council, in particular
with the CTC and the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED). That entails a systematic exchange
of information on terrorist threats, incidents, trends
and mitigation efforts, as well as providing capacity-
building assistance where it is needed most.

In that regard, we take positive note of the CTC
special meeting held in July and the most recent 2017
ICAO Global Aviation Security Symposium, held this
month. Both events facilitated strategic international
collaboration in addressing the threat posed by terrorists
targeting civil aviation by reinforcing, strengthening
and promoting the international framework of
aviation security standards. Their findings should be
well reflected in national and international terrorism
prevention strategies. We therefore encourage ICAO
and CTED to continue such cooperation, with the
active involvement of the new United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism.

Driven by the requirements of resolutions 2309
(2016) and 2341 (2017), Ukraine updated its State
programme on civil aviation security in March, in
conformity with the recent amendments of the ICAO
Standards and Recommended Practices. It establishes
a mechanism for risk assessment at both the national
and the airport levels, introduces extensive measures
related to the protection of civil aviation from acts of
unlawful interference, and in that regard enacts the
provision of specialized training for security personnel
to promptly and effectively identify and eliminate
threats to civil aviation.

Since a single cyberattack could deal even
more damage to the civil aviation system than any
other terrorist attack, a special focus under the State
programme is given to the protection of critical airport
infrastructure from cyberthreats, as envisaged by
ICAO Assembly resolution 39-19. A dedicated division
has been created within the State aviation service of
Ukraine to coordinate cybersecurity strategies, policies
and plans with airline companies and share respective
information to help identify critical vulnerabilities that
need to be addressed.

To check travellers' information against the terrorist
sanctions lists, Ukraine has become a participant in the
Advance Passenger Information System and supports
its universal implementation. In that vein, we have
also introduced ICAO-compliant biometric travel
documents and equipped our airports with automated
systems for their check-in.

The gravity of acts threatening the safety of
international civil aviation, especially terrorist
attacks, makes them a matter of concern for the entire
international community. States should therefore
spare no effort to cooperate diligently with the aim of
thoroughly investigating those crimes and holding their
perpetrators to justice.

One of the examples I must mention is the downing
of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7 in Ukraine's
occupied Donbas. Five countries - Australia, Belgium,
Malaysia, the Netherlands and Ukraine - are already
working together in the Joint Investigation Team (J IT)
on the criminal investigation of that heinous crime. The
investigation is still under way. Resolved to prosecute
those responsible for this atrocious crime under the
most authoritative body, Ukraine and its partners
attempted to establish an international tribunal through
the Security Council. Yet all our attempts were blocked
by the Russian Federation.

This summer, the JIT countries decided that the
prosecution and trial of the suspects would take place
in the Netherlands. Ukraine and the Netherlands signed
a bilateral treaty on international legal cooperation in
relation to the downing of Flight MH-17. The treaty
constitutes the legal basis for transferring the criminal
proceedings from Ukraine to the Netherlands.

Last week, on the margins of the seventy-second
session of the General Assembly, the Ministers of the
JIT countries signed a memorandum of understanding
regarding political support for prosecuting the
perpetrators of the downing of Flight MH-17. By
signing the agreement, we pledged to continue working
in partnership to implement the demand of resolution
2166 (2014) that those responsible for this incident be
held to account.

Together with other JIT countries and with broad
support from the international community, we will
continue working tirelessly to ensure justice for the
victims and accountability for all responsible for this
crime - those who supplied the missile system that
shot down Flight MH-I7, those who gave that criminal
order, those who pushed the button and those who
supported and funded terrorists then and continue to
do so until now. We count on the backing of all States
in this just cause.

