Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Permit me to welcome
President Tadic, representative of a new, democratic
Serbia, and to thank him for his intervention.

We thank the Secretary-General for his latest
report (S/2006/45) and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Jessen-Petersen, for his
comprehensive briefing. We welcome his presence here
today, together with the delegation of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), which includes Prime Minister Kosumi.
Greece associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the Austrian presidency of the
European Union.

Before I start, I would like to pay tribute to the
late President Ibrahim Rugova and especially to his
legacy of peaceful pursuit of the rights of his people
and his belief in a Kosovo society based on tolerance
and dialogue. In respecting his memory, the Kosovo
leadership will, it is to be hoped, enshrine the very
same principles in their future policies. In that context,
we expect that the election of Fatmir Sejdiu as his
successor last Friday will contribute to the
strengthening of the commitment of the Kosovo
leadership to the creation of a democratic and multi-
ethnic Kosovo.

Today is the first opportunity for the Council to
take stock of the developments that have taken place
since the launch of the status negotiations process, last
November. Let us recall that, at our meeting last
October (see S/PV.5289), the international community
set out its expectations for the period following the
presentation of Ambassador Eide's excellent report and
the launch of the status process. Those expectations
were, justifiably, high.

At the time, the Council stressed the need for
increased and strengthened efforts on behalf of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government for
progress in standards implementation. It was
underlined explicitly - and this was repeated in the
Secretary-General's latest report i that the pace of
progress in standards implementation will be an
important factor in determining the pace and progress
of the status negotiations.

Today we regret that, in his recent report, the
Secretary-General concluded that progress has been too
slow and that there is serious concern over delays and
setbacks in most areas of standards implementation.
Understandably, the overall impression one comes
away with is one of disappointment.

We certainly do not intend to ignore or minimize
the progress achieved in certain standards areas, such
as the increase in minority employment, property rights
and the Kosovo Police Service. Especially noteworthy
is the progress in the reconstruction of the Orthodox
churches damaged during the March 2004 violence. We
would like to believe that this is a sign of recognition
on the part of the provisional authorities of the
importance of this issue, both on its own merits and as
a confidence-building measure.
The final assessment of the past few months can
be only that more needs to be done. More specifically,
the provisional authorities need to do much more on
decentralization - the one area that holds the key to
the whole negotiation process. There has been very
little progress since the launch of the initial pilot
projects, back in August. The first meeting of the two
sides at the ministerial level, held in Vienna in
September, was a welcome step, but nothing
substantial came out of it. We hope that the next
meeting, scheduled for the twentieth of this month, will
produce concrete results and that the two sides will
participate constructively.

The security situation remains fragile. Serious
security incidents not only continue to occur, but are
actually increasing, as the Secretary-General notes,
again with concern. More needs to be done. The impact
from this, whether perceived or real, on the freedom of
movement of minorities and on the return of refugees
and internally displaced persons is as inevitable as it is
regrettable.

More progress is also needed in many other areas
of the standards process, including those of minority
rights, technical dialogue, access to justice, the fight
against corruption and organized crime and access to
basic public services, to name but a few critical ones.

On the other hand, it is also highly regrettable
that, during the reporting period, there has actually
been a decline in participation in the political process
by Kosovo Serb leaders. Belgrade should encourage
Kosovo Serb leaders to participate constructively in the
Provisional Institutions. The establishment of
substantial dialogue between all of Kosovo's
communities, as well as between Belgrade and Pristina,
remains of crucial importance.

In view of the upcoming meeting in Vienna on
20 February - which in effect constitutes the
beginning of the status negotiating process - I wish to
reiterate the two basic principles that have guided us
thus far in our discussions here in the Council. First,
the implementation of standards is an obligation of
Kosovo's leaders towards their people and towards
their future within the larger European family. Second,
our goal - of which we must not lose sight - is that
any status solution must aim at a new democratic and
multi-ethnic Kosovo. To that end, no efforts should be
spared.

In conclusion, allow me say a few words on the
status process already underway.
Greece welcomed the launch of the process and
the preparations by the two sides for the upcoming
negotiations. Coming from the region, and
consequently being one of the countries directly
affected by the developments in the area, we feel the
need to stress once more that it would be in everyone's
interest to reach a successful outcome through a
negotiated and mutually agreed settlement. That will,
in turn, contribute to the stability and prosperity of the
region. Such a successful outcome can be reached only
by taking into account the situation on the ground,
respect for minority rights and compatibility with the
values of the European Union, of which the whole
region will be part.

