Mr. Fachir (Indonesia): I would first like to
commend you, Mr. President, for convening this
important debate and congratulate all delegations
on their excellent work in producing the important
resolution 2462 (2019), which the Security Council
has just adopted. I also wish to warmly thank
Mr. Voronkov, Mr. Billingslea and Ms. Buku for their
insightful briefings.

The recent terrorist attack in Christchurch,
New Zealand, was a reminder for us that no country
is immune from terrorism. Indonesia once again
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
regardless of its origins or motivations. In the same
vein, we also continue to strongly reject any attempt to
link terrorist acts to any specific religion, nationality,
people or civilization. Moreover, Indonesia is fully
committed to fighting terrorism, including terrorist
financing, not only because Indonesia has been a
victim of terrorist attacks as well but also due to our
deep concern that terrorism has been evolving in its
modus operandi, which continuously poses imminent
threats to our society.
With that in mind, Indonesia would like to share
three main standpoints.

First, we need to close the implementation gap in
international instruments related to preventing and
combating the financing of terrorism. The resolution
we adopted today, which Indonesia co-sponsored, has
provided both great momentum and a significant push
for us all to further enhance our common and concerted
efforts in addressing the financing of terrorism. As
such, we must reaffirm our commitment to existing
international instruments, such as the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism, relevant resolutions and the recommendations
of the Financial Action Task Force. Nevertheless, we
are still witnessing a wide gap in implementation. It is
therefore both imperative and crucial for us to ensure
that all instruments are implemented effectively.

Secondly, we need to strengthen our adaptive
capabilities in responding to increasingly dynamic
and complex challenges. There is a clear indication
that terrorist financing is shifting towards high-
tech cyberactivities, including sophisticated online
transactions, which has made it even more difficult for
authorities to detect and curb them. Given the nature
of such challenges, we need to be not only decisive,
consistent and firm in our policies, but also flexible
in our strategies and innovative and practical in
our approach.

Nonetheless, States' particularities in addressing
the challenges of terrorist financing must also be
taken into account and recognized. For the sake of
effectivity, any measure, including capacity-building,
must therefore correspond to the needs and interests of
any particular State. We cannot afford to have an evil
opponent, with its rapidly changing forms of operation,
outpace our international cooperation.

That brings me to my final point. The fight
against terrorist financing must take place within the
framework of strengthened international cooperation
and coordination. We have no other option. Exchanging
information and best practices; lending technical
assistance and adequate resources for capacity-
building; enhancing the capacity of financial
intelligence units and law enforcement agencies; and
bolstering coordination among relevant United Nations
agencies, including close consultation and synergy with
international financial institutions, are indeed vital.

In that regard, Indonesia, together with Australia,
Malaysia and Thailand, has since 2015 alternately
hosted the Counter-Terrorism Financing Summit,
which advocates for a regional risk assessment to
analyse the threat, vulnerability and impact of the
financing of terrorism in the Asia-Pacific region. At the
domestic level, we adopt an annual national strategy to
strengthen close coordination among relevant agencies,
including the private sector, and ensure that our legal
and institutional infrastructures are adequate to deal
with the emerging methods of terrorist financing.

In closing, we must adapt to changing technology
and new methods of financing. We must be innovative
in our approach, not only in tracing terrorist money
but also in preventing the creation of terror money. We
must not stop at finding their resources, but use all our
financial resources to curtail terrorist activities.

