The President: At the outset, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Leslie Kojo Christian,
Permanent Representative of Ghana to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of October 2007. I am sure that I
speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Christian for the
great diplomatic skill with which he conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The role of regional and subregional organizations
in the maintenance of international peace
and security

Letter dated 29 October 2007 from the
Permanent Representative of Indonesia to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2007/640)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Guatemala, Guinea, Honduras, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Malaysia, Norway, Philippines, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Spain, Uruguay and Viet Nam, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I should like to draw attention to document
S/2007/640, which contains a letter dated 29 October
2007 from the Permanent Representative of Indonesia
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.

I welcome the participation of the Secretary-
General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, at this
meeting, and invite him to take the floor.


