Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I join others in
thanking Special Coordinator Mladenov and his team
for their dedication to the Middle East peace process
and for today's valuable briefing. We meet in difficult
times, in which Mr. Mladenov's involvement and
actions are crucial, and we commend him for his work.

I align myself with the statement to be made later
by the observer of the European Union.

I will focus on the following three issues: first, the
ongoing crisis in Gaza; secondly, impediments to the
two-State solution and the peace process; and thirdly,
the Golan Heights and regional dynamics.

First, on the ongoing crisis in Gaza, during the past
months the Council has met several times to discuss
the crisis situation in Gaza. We need de-escalation,
maximum restraint and urgent measures to alleviate
the humanitarian situation. That has been the call by so
many in the Council - to prevent a new escalation of
violence to step back from the brink. But unfortunately,
today again I start my intervention by calling attention
to the dire situation in Gaza. We have to conclude,
especially after last weekend, that Gaza is still on the
brink of war.

We welcome the current truce. Now all parties
should do everything in their power to prevent further
escalation. They should implement measures to
improve the living conditions in Gaza. The daily lives
of the people of Gaza have to improve. That means
that economic development, humanitarian aid and
rebuilding infrastructure need to go hand in hand.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly opposes
the sending of incendiary kites and balloons from
Gaza into Israel, leading to forest fires and damage to
Israeli crops. We also strongly oppose the building of
tunnels. We call on the de facto authorities in Gaza and
the Palestinian Authority to do everything possible to
ensure that this practice stops.

We welcome the reopening of the Rafah crossing
by Egypt, and we encourage Egypt to keep it open. We
welcome today's reopening of Kerem Shalom for goods.
Much-needed fuel for the people of Gaza is entering
today. This is a first important step in the restoration
of the permanent opening of the Kerem Shalom
crossing. The opening of crossings is paramount and
helps to decrease the already immense pressure on the
humanitarian situation in Gaza. We call upon Israel to
ease restrictions on the movement of goods and people,
while safeguarding its own security needs.

The restoration of payment of public-service
employee salaries is another measure that is needed to
improve the economic conditions in Gaza. The situation
there underlines the urgent need for intra-Palestinian
reconciliation. Gaza and the West Bank need to be
reunited under one single and legitimate Palestinian
Authority. We welcome the renewed efforts of Egypt in
this regard and call on allparties to engage constructively.

United Nations efforts to improve the humanitarian
situation in Gaza are of the utmost importance. We
once again express our full support for the efforts of
Mr. Mladenov in that regard and for his plans for Gaza.
We would like to ask Mr. Mladenov if there are any
remaining hurdles to starting the swift implementation
of his plans, and how the international community,
and certainly the Council, canassist in making his
plans a reality. We also support the new efforts by the
United Nations Development Programme, creating
emergency jobs for youth and women in Gaza. We
remain concerned about the financial situation of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and call on all to
support the Agency. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
has been an important UNRWA donor for many years.
If its funding gap is not closed soon, UNRWA will not
be able to continue the provision of the delivery of basic
services in Gaza and elsewhere. More countries have
to contribute.

The situation in Gaza is a stark reminder of the
urgent need for a political horizon and for a genuine
peace process leading to a two-State solution within
existing parameters, based on 1967 lines.

That brings me to my second point, namely,
impediments to the two-State solution and to the
peace process. The last couple of weeks have shown
a rapid deterioration of the situation on the ground
with several legislative developments. The pending
Israeli decision on the demolition of Khan Al-Ahmar is
a pertinent example. That village is located in the so-
called E1 Area and is seen by many as the last corridor
that connects Palestinian lands on the West Bank. It
can thus be described as essential for the viability of a
future Palestinian State.

Together with many of our fellow European Union
(EU) member States, and as has been expressed by
the EU High Representative, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands objects to the planned Israeli demolitions
in Area C. We call upon Israel to respect its obligations
under international law, and we consider the settlements
to be illegal under international law.

In line with the foregoing, we are concerned
about the developments around the so-called Jewish
nation-State bill. That bill seems to imply that Jews
alone have the right to national self-determination
in Israel, while downgrading Arabic from its status
as an official language and encouraging the building
of Jewish settlements. It is difficult to see how that
contributes to a two-State solution.

Furthermore, we have concerns about the bill
recently passed in the Knesset on revenue clearance. It
enables the Israeli Government to withhold tax revenues
it collects on behalf of the Palestinian Authority as
compensation for their contribution to Palestinian
prisoners and their families. We consider that bill to be
contrary to the Paris Protocol and the Oslo Accords. We
also call upon the Palestinian Authority to change the
system ofpayments to prisoners and their families. The
issue has the potential to incite violence and is thus an
impediment to the peace process.

All developments underline the need for the
resumption of meaningful negotiations, leading to a
two-State solution based on known parameters and
addressing all final status issues. We are therefore
very interested in the American plans in this regard.
We emphasize the important role of the Quartet in the
peace process, and we underline the need for countries
of the region to be involved.

My third point concerns regional dynamics and the
situation in the Golan Heights. We are concerned about
the increased tensions in that area, including the Israeli
border with Syria. We call on the parties to refrain from
actions that can further destabilize the area, and we
welcome all de-escalating measures. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands welcomes the evacuation of the White
Helmets last weekend, which serves as a good example
of international cooperation in the region.

Unrest in the region requires our continued
attention as well as joint efforts to de-escalate. At the
same time, our continued and combined efforts are ever
more needed to make progress on the political track
towards a two-State solution.

