Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We are pleased to begin by
commending the briefing provided by Prosecutor Fatou
Bensouda on a subject that so urgently needs a solution.

The Dominican Republic takes this opportunity
to commend the efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor
and reaffirm our full cooperation with and support
for the work of the International Criminal Court. The
Dominican Republic, open to international cooperation
and inspired by the vital need to maintain international
peace and security, ratified the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court in March 2005, and since
then has demonstrated its commitment to cooperating
with that body of international justice.

The International Criminal Court acts in accordance
with the principle of complementarity vis-a-vis
national criminal jurisdiction. States must therefore
exercise their criminal jurisdiction in coordination
with international justice by establishing a national
regulatory framework contributing to the prosecution
and punishment of any act that disrupts international
peace and security.

As we heard today from Ms. Fatou Bensouda, the
situation in Libya is very worrying. The situation of
its people is cause of deep uncertainty and grief to
us. For that reason, the Dominican Republic joins and
supports the call of the Prosecutor for the cessation of
the commission of crimes to all parties involved in the
conflict. In the brief course of this year, an estimated
432 people have lost their lives and some 50,000
people have been displaced. However, no one has been
prosecuted for those crimes. The ongoing attacks on
the civilian population and civilian structures, such as
hospitals, schools, relief vehicles and health centres,
must be arrested and the perpetrators be brought
to justice.

For that reason, we believe that it is essential that
State authorities recognize the complementary role
of the International Criminal Court in the struggle
for the prosecution, investigation and punishment
of crimes against humanity and war crimes. Without
the collaboration of State agencies, the work of the
International Criminal Court will be limited, at the risk
of rendering it ineffective.

In that regard, we call on the Libyan authorities
to cooperate efficiently with the arrest of the
Mr. Al-Qadhafi, Mr. Al-Werfalli and Mr. Al-Tuhamy,
who, in spite of the arrest warrants against them,
have not been arrested or brought to justice. As an
international community, we must join the efforts of
the Office of the Prosecutor by providing, as far as
possible, the resources and tools necessary to improve
the discharge of its duties.

Based on all that we have heard and have yet to hear
today, we call on those countries that have not accepted
the International Criminal Court's jurisdiction and
vehemently urge the national authorities to cooperate
with the surrendering of individuals, investigations
and arrest of criminals. We urge the Office of the
Prosecutor to pursue its investigations and monitoring
of events in Libya. Its work is a fundamental part in the
struggle to assist the desperate Libyan population and
its migrant population, victim of terrible mistreatment,
illegal arrests and sexual abuse.

Let me conclude with the words of the philosopher
Sophocles, who said that a State where disrespect and
the freedom to do anything are left unpunished ends
up sinking into the abyss. Impunity is an evil that
undermines economic and social development, piercing
the depths of the people, making them victims twice
over for lack of effective and impartial justice.
