The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Ballard for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

As Chair of the 1540 Committee, I am grateful
for the opportunity to lead this open debate on the
global effort to prevent the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction to non-State actors. All States have
a responsibility to effectively implement resolution
1540 (2004), which was adopted unanimously on
28 April 2004. The resolution should be at the heart
of our discussion today. As all members are aware,
the main purpose of the resolution is to prevent
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, along with
their delivery systems and related materials for their
development and manufacture, from falling into the
hands of non-State actors, including terrorists. I should
stress that the resolution is unique in that regard, as
it is the only legally binding instrument dealing with
the proliferation of all three types of weapons of mass
destruction.

In the nearly 13 years since its adoption, resolution
1540 (2004) has become one of the key components of
the international regime to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery.
Participants are aware that the range of legislation and
enforcement provisions required is broad. However,
as a background to this debate, allow me to recall
that the resolution includes prohibitions on non-State
actors from developing, acquiring, manufacturing,
possessing, transporting, transferring or using weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery. Those
seven prohibitions must also cover anyone acting as an
accomplice to assist in any way, including by financing
such activities. Similarly, domestic controls are needed
on related materials, including measures in the areas
of accounting, security, physical protection, border and
law enforcement, and export controls.

Substantial efforts have already been made by many
States to promote the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). In that regard, while the responsibility for
implementation lies with individual States, such efforts
can benefit from collaboration, whether bilaterally or
collectively, on a regional basis. That is key to successful
implementation. As stated in the concept note for
this meeting, resolution 1540 (2004) is a platform for
cooperation to prevent non-State actors from gaining
access to weapons of mass destruction. Without
cooperation it would be impossible to address the issue
at a global level. It would also be counterproductive
to undermine the cooperative spirit that is already
evident in the way the resolution is being implemented
by moving in the direction of a strict mechanism for
Member States.

The Security Council has called upon States

"to take note in its work, where relevant, of
the continually evolving nature of the risks of
proliferation, including the use by non-State actors
of rapid advances in science, technology and
international commerce for proliferation purposes,
in the context of the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) (resolution 2325 (2016), para. 8).

The Council has also called on the 1540 Committee

"to take into account developments on the evolving
nature of risk of proliferation and rapid advances in
science and technology in their implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004)" (ibid., para. 7).

The Council thereby impressed upon States that they
have the ultimate responsibility for those obligations in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004).

In the 13 years since the adoption ofresolution 1540
(2004), the developments I referred to have had a major
impact on how cross-border movements and trade are
conducted. While those are positive developments that
bring about humanitarian and economic benefits, they
also present challenges to the effective implementation
of the obligations set out in resolution 1540 (2004).
Keeping those and other developments under review in
relation to preventing the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction to non-State actors requires constant
vigilance and effective international collaboration. I
will be very interested in the experiences and views of
Member States in that regard.

With regard to resolution 2325 (2016), which is an
important prt of implementing resolution 1540 (2004), I
would like to draw attention to paragraph 12 of resolution
2325 (2016). It calls for the full implementation of the
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004) as a result of
the 1540 Committee's 2016 comprehensive review of
the implementation of the resolution. The paragraph
also clearly notes the need for more attention on
enforcement measures; measures relating to chemical,
biological and nuclear weapons; measures on the
financing of proliferation; measures on accounting for
and securing related materials; and national export and
trans-shipment controls. It will be interesting to hear
how Member States are approaching those aspects of
the resolution. I would also be grateful for the views
of the international organizations represented here.
The Council very much appreciates the participation
of those representatives as key partners in our joint
endeavours.

In the interests of time, I have highlighted just a
few points of importance for our debate. However, not
everything has to do with the obligations of States. I
therefore look forward with interest to hearing more
information from all participants in this meeting.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.

