Mr. Zerihoun: I thank you, Sir, and members
of the Security Council for this opportunity to brief
everyone on electoral developments in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Sidikou has just briefed everyone
on the political and security developments, as well the
measures taken by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) to provide support and enhance
the protection of civilians. I will therefore limit my
remarks to what the United Nations has done to support
the electoral process.

In resolution 2277 (2016), the Security Council
decided that the priority tasks of the United Nations in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo should include the
provision of technical assistance and logistical support
for the revision of the electoral register. Accordingly,
the Electoral Assistance Division of the Department
of Political Affairs undertook an advisory mission to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 24 April
to 10 May, first, to assess the political environment
and preparations for updating the voter register and
polls; secondly, to assess the capacity of national
institutions, including the National Independent
Electoral Commission (CENI) and that of the United
Nations as it relates to the implementation of resolution
2277 (2016); and, thirdly, to consider the implications
of the implementation for the United Nations in terms
of human and financial resources.

The Mission made the assessment that United
Nations and international support would be critical to
allow the Independent National Electoral Commission
to organize the voter registration exercise within
the shortest time frame technically possible and
that a political agreement among key stakeholders
would be necessary to move elections preparations
forward peacefully. In accordance with resolution 2277
(2016) and the findings of the advisory mission, the
United Nations has been providing support to African
Union (AU) facilitation and national stakeholders,
including on technical issues pertaining to the
electoral process.

As Council members are aware, the 18 October
political agreement reached by the presidential
majority and part of the opposition provides for a
complete overhaul of the voter register by 31 July 2017
and the holding of presidential and legislative elections
simultaneously. It also provides for the possibility of
holding local elections on the same day, financial and
technical conditions permitting, or within six months
following the general elections. Under the agreement,
elections would be announced on 30 October 2017,
following which CENI is expected to organize the
general elections within 6 months - meaning, by April
2018. The agreement also calls on the Government to
provide CENI with the logistical and financial resources
necessary for the completion of the electoral process.
The timeline suggested by the agreement presents
some advantages, including shorter deadlines than
the one initially envisaged by CENI, which cuts down
the number of days required to organize the elections.
However, it is worth noting that this would be the first
time for CENI to embark on such a herculean electoral
undertaking with such serious logistics implications.
Needless to say, the continued support of the
international community, including through financial
assistance, will be crucial to ensure the success of
the electoral process. Furthermore, broadening the
base of the political consensus and the acceptance of
the electoral timeline by national stakeholders will be
critical, given that the only peaceful way out of the
current stalemate will be through a negotiated solution.

On 31 July, the voter registration exercise was
launched in Gbadolite, which is in Nord-Ubangui
province. The registration process is planned to take
place in two phases. The first phase is a pilot project,
and the second will be staggered over four operational
areas to cover approximately 17,500 registration centres
throughout the remaining 25 provinces of the country.
The pilot project in Nord-Ubangui was completed on
31 October. As of 1 December, almost 90 per cent of
the 850,000 prospective voters had been registered.
About 45 per cent of them are women. CENI has
started preparations for the second phase and the voter
registration will be simultaneously launched in the
middle of December, in two operational areas covering
12 provinces. In the meantime, registration agents
are being trained and the deployment of registration
material is under way.

In accordance with resolution 2277 (2016), the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
have been providing logistical and technical expertise
to concerned national stakeholders for the registration
process. MONUSCO logistics support alone includes
the transportation of more than 3,500 tons of registration
materials to 16 main hubs and to at least 104 of the 225
antenna sites. CENI is taking care of the remainder of
the antenna sites and the registration centres. Since
28 October, MONUSCO has provided four cargo planes
and 16 helicopters to CENI, and since then 520 tons
of registration materials have been transferred by the
Mission from Kinshasa to other provinces. In addition,
MONUSCO has provided support for the deployment of
50 voter registration agents.

Council members will recall that in 2015,
UNDP established an electoral project further to the
recommendations ofthe 2013 electoral needs assessment
mission. However, the capacities of the project to
provide assistance are stretched to the breaking point.
Out of a project budget of $123 million, only about
$10 million have been mobilized. Financial constraints
continue to prevent UNDP from properly staffing the
project and implementing planned activities.

MONUSCO and the Secretariat are also taking
administrative steps aimed at providing the United
Nations with the material and human resources
necessary to undertake the technical and logistical
support to CENI. As recommended by the advisory
mission, the MONUSCO electoral division is being
established with a view to putting in place an integrated
electoral assistance team that brings together UNDP
and the MONUSCO electoral division. The Department
of Political Affairs is providing support to the process
through the electoral roster. In addition to the
electoral expert deployed to support AU facilitation,
the Department of Political Affairs has deployed
its principal electoral officer, based at the United
Nations Office to the African Union in Addis Ababa,
to spearhead the Mission's electoral support efforts,
pending the recruitment of a director for the electoral
division of MONUSCO.

On 31 October, a joint centre comprising experts
from CENI and the United Nations was established to
better coordinate voter registration operations. United
Nations support to the voter registration process is
being provided amid a very challenging political,
financial and security environment. Moreover, the
electoral calendar and the funding of the process by the
Government are still not fully clear. Out of an electoral
budget of over $1 billion, the Government is committed
to disbursing $300 million in 2016. However, while the
Government paid $20 million monthly from January
to June and similar monthly allotments in Congolese
francs from July to September, it reportedly has not
disbursed any funds since October.

Despite the challenges faced by the political
process, the international community will need to
exert additional effort to help improve the political
environment surrounding preparations for the elections,
most notably with a view to securing a level playing
field, as well as to providing necessary technical and
financial assistance. It is essential that MONUSCO
and UNDP be provided the means to deliver on their
commitments and mandates.

