Mr. Bynoe (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
At the outset, permit me the opportunity to convey
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for
the briefing on the situation in the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has
been monitoring very closely the recent developments
in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela at the bilateral
and multilateral levels and, like many countries, we too
are deeply concerned and apprehensive about the events
unfolding in our neighbouring Caribbean country.

Let it be abundantly clear that Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines adheres to and upholds the fundamental
principles of non-interference and non-intervention
in the affairs of States; respect for sovereignty;
adherence to the rule of law; and respect for human
rights and democracy, as enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. Cognizant of the complexity of
the long-standing political crisis in Venezuela, which
has been exacerbated by recent events, we stress the
need for meaningful dialogue among all stakeholders
in the country to de-escalate the contentious and
conflictive situation.

We are undoubtedly living in an unpredictable
era and must categorically reject all attempts to
aggravate dangerous situations or engender change of
democratically elected leaders through impositions,
interventions and interferences that veer away from
the basis of lasting peace and security. In the history
of Latin America and the Caribbean, the imposition of
the mighty against the meek is far too well known. The
history of Latin America and the Caribbean is indelibly
scarred by military interventions and imposition of
dictator Governments. That egregious history and the
need to triumph over its lingering remnants drives the
countries in the hemisphere to regard any semblance
of its re-emergence as viscerally abhorrent. In our
Caribbean subregion, we have witnessed the urgent
fury of military intervention, while our consciousness
remains aware of the uninvited and illegal interference in
electoral processes as a result of cold war proxy battles.

Let us not lose sight of the forest for the trees and
be mindful that the region of Latin America and the
Caribbean remains a zone of peace as proclaimed by
the heads of State and Government of the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States in 2014. Let
Venezuela not relive the systematic act of terror and
attempted coup d'etat that created bloodshed on the
streets of Caracas on 11 April 2002.

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines laments the
convening of this meeting today, especially against the
backdrop of an unambiguous irony. Constitutionally,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has a duly
elected President in the person of His Excellency
Nicolas Maduro, who was officially inaugurated for
a second term on 10 January. Regrettably, however,
an unconscionable crusade against the legally and
legitimately elected president, orchestrated by the
Organization of American States (OAS), the oldest
hemispheric organization, aims to erect, unilaterally
and extraterritorially, a parallel unelected presidential
Government and to destabilize order and the rule of law
in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

Presently, the OAS has abdicated its role of arbiter
and indeed any serious leadership responsibility in
the hemisphere to defuse the impasse in Venezuela,
especially since it is revisiting its deplorable history
of being a conduit for imperialist aggression and
hegemonic ambition in Latin America and the
Caribbean. Thankfully, many member States within that
organization have not exhausted the option of dialogue,
nor have they abandoned the bedrock principles of the
OAS and United Nations Charters. Effectively and
more pointedly, Mexico and Uruguay have expressed
their willingness to mediate the political crisis, while
regional groupings such as the Caribbean Community
and the European Union have offered their good offices
to serve as honest brokers to facilitate dialogue among
all parties and resolve the crisis. Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines supports these responsible initiatives.

We affirm unequivocally that Venezuela is not a
threat and represents no danger to international peace
and security, even though the Government has been
subjected to a systematic campaign of aggression.
Undeniably, the country is confronted by a plethora
of complex challenges which must be tackled head-on
by democratic means and within the confines of the
supreme law of the land, its Constitution.

As always, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
stands ready to constructively assist our beloved
brothers and sisters in the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and bring about a rapprochement between
the contending forces. We must not abandon dialogue
as it is essential in multilateral diplomacy. History
teaches us that the rejection of dialogue is often the
precursor to unilateralism and war, an option that we
cannot countenance in our zone of peace.

Let us be guided by the central tenets of this
Organization and its Charter.

