Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I join others in
welcoming the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Kuwait to the Security Council. His country has
made an outstanding contribution as a donor and as a
member of the Security Council. It has been an honour
to work with his country's delegation, which has always
focused on the heart of the issue, whether we are
considering international peace and security or, as we
are doing today, the relief of human suffering. I thank
Kuwait very much for everything that it has done for
the Security Council.
We share the concerns that have been expressed
around the table, and I think they follow a common
theme. For various reasons, since 2012, the international
community has not served the Syrian people as
well as we might have, despite some specific heroic
efforts involving the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the United Nations
and such volunteers as the White Helmets. I would
like to once again salute, through the Assistant
Secretary-General, the work that OCHA and the other
humanitarian agencies do to help the Syrian people.

And now, as others have noted, after seven long and
terrible years, the political process may finally have an
opportunity to turn the corner. We, of course, support
that effort and will do what we can to help Special
Envoy Pedersen deliver results to that end. However,
we are very sad to relate that other areas on the ground
have not made such progress. But that is not due to
the international community; it is due to the Syrian
authorities and the countries that give them the most
support. In particular, I think we need to look at Idlib
and Rukban, the added upcoming pressure of winter, as
others have said, the targeting of civilian objects around
Idlib and the need for international humanitarian law to
be upheld. Terrorism is no justification for violating the
Geneva Conventions. We say it every time we meet in
the Chamber, but it remains as true today as it did when
the Geneva Conventions were first drawn up.

But the worst situation of all, I believe, is the one
that the Assistant Secretary-General outlined in her
briefing. The humanitarian situation is getting worse,
and 4 million people are at very grave risk, which is
why, exceptionally, cross-border assistance remains
needed - and it has been needed since 2014. That is
set out clearly in the Emergency Relief Coordinator's
letter to the Security Council, and in correspondence
from others over the past few days. Having heard the
Assistant Secretary-General's briefing, we have no
doubt that the fewer than four border crossings in less
than 12 months have led to saving fewer ofthe 4 million
lives at stake, which means more suffering for the
Syrian people.

Turning to the impending draft resolution, as others
have said, the representative of Germany set out in his
statement why his delegation drafted it the way it did,
and we respect that. The penholders are trying to find
a way through on this very important issue so that as
many of those 4 million lives as possible can be saved
and their suffering relieved. But it is not clear to us what
has changed since last year, when the Council adopted
resolution 2449 (2018) on cross-border access to Syria.
What has changed to justify such a dramatic reduction
in cross-border assistance, down to two border crossings
in only six months, as other members of the Council
have proposed? In the past, the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2165 (2014) on cross-border access,
as well as resolutions 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016). In
2017, the Council adopted resolution 2393 (2017) with
12 votes in favour, with three abstentions, and in 2018,
the Council adopted resolution 2449 (2018) with 13
votes in favour, with two abstentions, I therefore repeat
that it is not at all clear why the situation should be
deemed by some to be so drastically different today.

I would also join others in making a real appeal for
us to examine the penholder text and do the very best we
can to protect the Syrian people. This is a humanitarian
briefing. There are some very important humanitarians
around the table today. The most important thing we
can do, as Ms. Mueller said, is to adopt a draft resolution
that brings genuine relief over a significant period of
time, based on an end-state and not on an end-date,
and which authorizes all the crossings that the United
Nations believes it needs.

OCHA is the component of the international system
that we, States Members of the United Nations, have
all charged with coordinating humanitarian efforts.
We may not always agree with OCHA or the United
Nations on every individual point or issue, but they are
discharging their responsibilities to the membership
and to the Syrian people to ensure that the assistance
reaches the communities that need it the most. If the
United Nations does not help these communities,
there is no evidence at all to believe that the Syrian
Government either wants to, can or will provide that
assistance. I therefore hope that we can find a way
forward on the draft resolution so that the Assistant
Secretary-General and her teams can do the job we
have mandated them to do.

