Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): In the end, there has
been a genuine debate among the members of the
Security Council, which we commend. In other cases, it
has proven impossible to discuss issues as complicated
as those we are witnessing in the humanitarian
field. Now, not only are we calling into question
the United Nations system and the reports being
presented, but we also recognize with some concern
that the issue of humanitarian aid is being distorted
and politicized. But this happens only when it is in
the interests of certain permanent members - very
influential members - of the Security Council. The
humanitarian topic is a complex one that is salient in
all the conflicts that we are, unfortunately, seeing take
place in the Middle East and Africa: in Libya, Iraq,
Yemen, Syria and Palestine. However, I believe we have
never discussed here, and perhaps will never discuss,
the humanitarian topic in Yemen in a debate like this
one, or the topic of the humanitarian situation in Iraq,
which continues to combat terrorists and continues
its advance on Mosul. But we are not going to discuss
that here. I am sure that we have not discussed nor will
we discuss what the humanitarian consequences were
of the foreign intervention in Libya, or of the Israeli
aggression against the Gaza Strip.

In other words, in the Council the humanitarian
topic is used in a political way. It is manipulated; it is
distorted. And in this specific case it is used to attack
the Russian Federation for its active participation
in the fight against terrorism in Syria. What is
being disregarded here is the complexity of this
conflict - its origins are being deliberately ignored.
Most ofthe permanent members ofthe Security Council,
the important permanent members, have been involved
in this conflict since it began. They have fuelled this
war. They have encouraged it. They have financed it.
They trained groups that later become terrorists. And
now in all of Syria we are witnessing a tragic situation,
where there are deaths of innocent civilians, basically
at the hands of terrorism and owing to the dynamics
of war.

We think that we should not lose sight of this,
because the solution to the humanitarian issue is to end
this war. The way to do that is by relaunching talks
and political negotiaitons among all the stakeholders,
but particularly between the Russian Federation and the
United States, in order to reach a negotiated political
solution to end this conflict. We cannot continue to
stoke this war. We cannot allow the groups that call
themselves the moderate opposition to continue to fail
to disassociate themselves from terrorist groups. We
cannot allow other foreign Powers to continue to arm
those groups, and thereby continue to indirectly arm
the terrorist groups.

We in the Security Council need clearly to call things
what they. We have here a terrible case of manipulation
of the humanitarian issue in order to attack Russia. Our
position is that we understand that the Government of
Syria has a legitimate right to reconquer all its territory
and a legitimate right to combat terrorism. Of course,
we do not support either the deliberate bombing of
civilians nor attacks against civilian infrastructure.
We have consistently rejected that in all conflicts. But
we understand that the situation in Syria is complex.
All of Aleppo - east and west - is involved in the
conflict. Almost 1.5 million people live in western
Aleppo, while 250,000 live in eastern Aleppo, where
terrorist groups have holed themselves up. Reports of
their numbers vary, but this is not about numbers. This
is about civilians being used as human shields. The
Security Council cannot declare eastern Aleppo as a
sanctuary so that terrorist groups can hunker down.
Flying in eastern Aleppo are the flags of Da'esh and
those of other terrorist groups. Other combatants said
to be from the moderate opposition are intermingled
and fighting side by side with terrorists against the
Syrian Government.

We are therefore discussing here a partial picture
of the humanitarian issue. It is a terrible situation, and
we could hear thousands of stories about the fates of
innocent civilians in this war. This war has to end. The
Government of Syria must fully exercise sovereignty
over all its territory, and all must fight terrorism
together, which is the main enemy of the Syrian people.
What would they have us do here in the Council? That
there be no military operations in eastern Aleppo? That
terrorists be allowed to continue to be holed up in the
city? I do not know, but I believe we cannot make any
country here responsible for this type of leaflet. This is
a war, and a complex situation. But it seems to us that
there has been a major effort to establish humanitarian
pauses to allow the civilian population to leave Aleppo
through the corridors that have been opened up. It has
been said here that civilians have returned to the city.
But we cannot fail to mention that the terrorist groups
have executed civilians who have tried to leave the city.
Civilians are being used as human shields - the same
thing is being denounced in Mosul. What are we going
to do in Mosul? Should we suspend the offensive to
recapture the city from the hands of the terrorists?
I would therefore urge the members of the
Council - we have heard once again tragic reports. We
are also seeing the deliberate use of the humanitarian
situation for political ends. We, who have no ability
to influence this conflict militarily, call on those
that are doing so to abandon propaganda rhetoric
and political manipulation and return to the path of
dialogue so that, by assuming our responsibilities as
an organ of the United Nations, we can present to the
world a proposal for a political solution whereby the
Syrians themselves can resolve this situation without
any further foreign interference. Foreign interference
must end. Propagandist rhetoric must end. We should
work honeslty to combat terrorism head-on and to find
a solution that ends the humanitarian tragedy in Syria.

