Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Madam President, for having organized this
meeting at the request of France.

We would like, in particular, to thank Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General, for her statement.
We likewise deplore the attack near a shopping centre
in Benghazi on the eve of Bid. We also support the
press statement condemning that criminal attack on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
We extend our sincere condolences to the families
of the victims, including UNSMIL staff members.
We hope that those who were injured will make a
speedy recovery.

Those terrorist attacks underscore the importance
of the Council's support for the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya,
Mr. Ghassan Salame, to facilitate a comprehensive
political process commensurate with the United Nations
plan to improve the humanitarian situation by ensuring
access to humanitarian aid for those who need it.

Libyans have been facing a very difficult
humanitarian situation, which has deteriorated in
particular as a result of the recent military operations
around Tripoli. We call on all parties to ensure the
delivery of humanitarian aid without delay and without
discrimination. We also welcome the fact that the parties
to the conflict have accepted the ceasefire proposed by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
which has been supported by the Security Council.
The Council must be strongly united in support of
the ceasefire and call on all parties to the conflict to
uphold the ceasefire so that it goes hand in hand with
confidence-building measures.

We also reiterate our position that there is no
military solution to the crisis. As we said, we call on the
Libyan parties to respect and build on the Bid Al-Adha
truce while practicing restraint and showing respect for
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. We also call on the Libyan parties to reach
a political settlement in line with the understandings
agreed upon in Paris, Palermo and Abu Dhabi to ensure
transparent, comprehensive and peaceful presidential
and parliamentary elections.

The Libyan parties must uphold their national
interests above and beyond all other interests. They
must also work concretely and constructively with
the United Nations efforts to establish stability in
that brotherly Arab country and to reach a settlement
in line with the legitimate aspirations of the Libyan
people to live in security and safety while ensuring the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Libya.

In conclusion, I would like to sincerely congratulate
the Arab and Muslim nations on the occasion of Bid
Al-Adha. We ask Allah Almighty that the Arab and
Muslim countries may repeatedly celebrate this
occasion with stability, security and prosperity.

