Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Polish presidency of the Security Council through
you, Mr. Minister, for convening today's important
public meeting of the Security Council on the situation
in Ukraine. Let me also welcome the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands and Ukraine.

I would like to thank the Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo; the
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, Ms. Ursula
Mueller; and the Chief Monitor of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, Ambassador Ertugrul
Apakan, for their very insightful briefings.

Given that French and German authorities are
committed to resolving the crisis, I am honoured to
deliver this statement on behalf of France and Germany.
This joint statement, which is quite extraordinary,
demonstrates the strong commitment of both countries
within the framework of the Normandy format.

As we mark the one hundredth anniversary of the
end of the First World War this year, eastern Ukraine
has been ravaged for more than four years by a conflict
of an intensity rarely seen in Europe. More than 70 years
after the Second World War, in a conflict in which both
Ukraine and Russia paid an extraordinarily high price,
more than 10,000 civilians and military personnel have
lost their lives, millions of people have been displaced
and millions more have been affected by clashes in the
Donbas region.

For four years Germany and France have spared
no effort to ease the suffering of those concerned and
to put an end to the conflict. Following the Minsk
protocol, the Minsk agreements were drafted in 2015
under the Normandy format and specify steps to end the
crisis. Three years after the adoption of resolution 2202
(2015), which endorses the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements, now more
than ever before, we call upon all parties to honour their
commitments. We also recall our full support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders.

Against that backdrop, we would like to underscore
three points.

The first point pertains to the security situation,
which is a precondition for improving the plight of the
civilian population. By no means a frozen conflict,
although the parties have promised to silence their
weapons on several occasions, including as recently as
30 March, eastern Ukraine is the site of daily clashes.
Hundreds of ceasefire violations are observed every
day by the OSCE. We pay tribute to that organization
for its excellent work and for the risks its team faces.
We implore the parties, in particular Russia, to do
their utmost to facilitate the freedom of movement of
observers and to ensure their safety and that of their
equipment, including drones.

France and Germany condemn all ceasefire
violations in the strongest terms. We once again
call for the withdrawal of heavy weaponry, which
is again being employed for attacks against civilian
infrastructure. It is unacceptable that schools continue
to be the targets of shelling. Both parties must also
make headway on the disengagement of forces along
the contact line in areas already identified as present
or future disengagement areas. Those first steps will
create a climate of trust and prevent the occurrence of
another tragic event similar to the one that occurred on
17 July 2014 when the 298 passengers and flight crew
of Malaysia Flight Airlines MH-l7 tragically lost their
lives after the plane was shot down by a missile. We
commend the professionalism of the Joint Investigation
Team, whose work is fully independent. In order to
shed light on the tragedy and bring those responsible
to justice, it is crucial that investigators have the full
cooperation of all Member States.

Our second point refers to the urgent humanitarian
situation. In April alone, we recorded 23 fatalities,
including five civilians, and 115 injuries. May's death
toll already exceeds April's. During the harsh winter
months, hundreds of thousands of people went without
water, electricity and heat for more than a day. They
also faced worsening food insecurity and deteriorating
health, in particular women and children. In order to
ease the suffering of the civilian population, Germany
and France request that humanitarian workers be
granted access to the Donbas region and that their
safety be guaranteed. We implore all parties to protect
key civilian infrastructure, such as the Donetsk
filtration station, and to open additional checkpoints
along the contact line. We encourage another exchange
of prisoners, which would convey trust, which all of
us want.

Lastly, a long-term solution to the crisis also
depends on the political and economic measures that
will be taken. Considerable progress has been made
by Ukrainian authorities over the past three years in
the implementation of the political commitments made
under the Minsk agreements. Legislative arrangements
must still be finalized to enable the holding of local
elections in certain areas of Donetsk and Luhansk and
the development of a plan to ensure they are held in
the best possible conditions. It is expected that specific
measures will be taken to improve the lives ofpeople in
the Donbas region - for example, by guaranteeing the
right to a pension or by dispatching a team of experts on
environmental issues.

France and Germany will continue to stand in
solidarity with the Ukrainian people, who have been
battered in recent years by the conflict in Donbas and
the illegal annexation of Crimea. Our efforts within the
framework of the Normandy format are an expression
of our desire to succeed in alleviating the suffering
of the Ukrainian people and to lay the foundation for
lasting peace throughout the European continent.

