Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We welcome your presence in the Chair,
Madam President, and we thank the delegation of the
United Kingdom for convening this important meeting.
Allow me also to welcome Mr. Momodu Koroma,
Foreign Minister of Sierra Leone, and my friend and
colleague Francois Fall, Foreign Minister of Guinea.
The Foreign Ministers of Sierra Leone and Guinea; the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Guehenno; the Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Ms. McAskie; and the representatives
who spoke before me in fact covered all the important
lessons to be learned from the experience in Sierra
Leone.

Nevertheless, I would like to put forward the
following points. The 14 May 2002 elections in Sierra
Leone were a major landmark on the road to peace in
that country. The people of Sierra Leone and the
elected Government under the presidency of
Mr. Kabbah, deserve our congratulations on the success
of those elections. The United Nations, particularly the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL),
deserve appreciation and thanks for the essential
contribution. We believe that the important role played
by the United Nations is in itself a lesson to be learned
and built upon in other African regions suffering
similar conflicts.

UNAMSIL's completion of the disarmament and
demobilization of some 50,000 combatants and the
achievement of peace and security in Sierra Leone
constitute a success story. They prove that the
international community's determination to bring about
peace and security can be realized with the requisite
political will, with clear resolutions adopted by the
Security Council and with a clear mandate and
adequate resources for a United Nations force. We have
to preserve such a situation and build upon it. But
completion requires reintegrating ex-combatants and
confronting the problem of financial shortfalls.

We believe that failure in this regard can
represent a serious threat to the stability that has been
realized so far. This in itself is another lesson to be
learned. The success of the elections, the completion of
the disarmament of ex-combatants and the progress
achieved regarding the return and reintegration of
many refugees and internally displaced persons mark
the end of the current stage of the peace process and
the beginning of a new stage. In that stage, the elected
Government must strengthen the bases of stability and
peace by moving towards national recovery. The
country continues to require assistance from the
international community. This leads us to comment
briefly on the regional dimensions of the crises in the
Mano river region, where refugees are among the most
important factors. We look forward to our discussion of
that issue this afternoon. The waves of refugees who
are intermittently fleeing the fighting in Liberia are the
best example of this, as stated by the Foreign Minister
of Guinea in reply to your question, Madam President.

Finding regional solutions to the problems of the
region and reversing the destructive fighting in Liberia,
in particular, are the key to maintaining and building
on the success achieved in Sierra Leone, and the key to
many chronic and thorny crises, such as those related
to refugees.

Finally, we believe that this successful experience
can be repeated with political will on our part with
respect to other regions in Africa, such as Somalia.
In conclusion, I would like to pose the following
question. When the crisis in Sierra Leone was at its
worst, the United Nations dispatched one of its largest
missions, and its success was one of the most important
lessons to be learned, as has been mentioned by
everyone here, and as I mentioned at the beginning of
my statement. What does the Security Council expect
with regard to the crisis in Liberia? Are we going to
wait until that crisis escalates further before addressing
it, as we did in Sierra Leone? That question has
implications for the lessons learned.

I believe that the success of UNAMSIL is a good
lesson for us, a lesson that we ought to draw on in
Liberia. Otherwise, we believe that the intensity of the
crisis could spread again to Sierra Leone, which would
not lead to peace and security in the Mano River Union
region.

