Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me at the outset to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, for this morning's briefing.
The causes of the conflict in the Middle East are
difficult to define owing to its long-standing nature and
complexity, but we will try to enumerate a few. The
first cause is the unkept commitments of the Powers
that occupied the Middle East under a mandate by the
League of Nations after the First World War. The second
cause is the implementation of regime-change policies.
The third cause is the invasions in the region without the
authorization of the Security Council and in violation
of international law. Terrorism is, of course, another
cause, as is the competition for natural resources.

Jordan's King Abdullah II, at the latest Arab
Summit, held in his country a few days ago, also
identified one of the causes of the tragic situation that
the region is experiencing. He said that:

(spoke in English)

"there will be no peace and stability in the Middle
East without achieving a just and comprehensive
solution to the question of Palestine, the core issue
ofthe Middle East, based on the two-State solution".

(Spoke in Spanish)

We also wish to echo the words of Pope Francis
during a meeting with the accredited diplomatic corps
in the Holy See: "No conflict can become a habit
impossible to break." Israelis and Palestinians need
peace. The entire Middle East urgently needs peace.

Similarly, on 29 November 2016, the Secretary-
General said the following:

"The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is notjust one
of many conflicts in the region. It is in many ways
a long-standing, gaping wound that has fed tension
and conflict throughout the Middle East."

The Plurinational State of Bolivia comes to today's
important open debate with the urgency of getting
reliable, first-hand information that would update us
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), and
once again, we are seeing acts that are undermining the
long-desired two-State solution.

A few days ago, on Thursday, 30 March to be
exact, the international community was informed of the
decision ofthe Security Cabinet ofIsrael to build the first
settlement in 20 years in the Emek Shilo zone, located
in the occupied West Bank. Such repeated conduct on
the part of Israel defies the Security Council, whose
views have been set forth in numerous resolutions
since 1967, including resolution 2334 (2016), adopted
on 23 December 2016, and is in flagrant violation of
the demand that Israel immediately and completely
cease settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem.

It can seem a bit redundant that every time we
take up matters related to the situation in Palestine in
this body, I go back to the almost 50 years of Israeli
non-compliance with the unanimous demand of all
peoples that it stop its expansionist and settlement
activities. In these 50 years, the world has looked on,
perplexed and helpless, as day after day a Government
decides to act in collusion with purveyors of war against
a population that only wants to exercise its human right
to life and self-determination.

The States Members of the United Nations must
focus on this situation and on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016). We reiterate our request that the
next quarterly report have a written format and contain
in detail an assessment of the status of implementation
of the resolution. Similarly, as we have done in the past,
we reiterate the need for the report to be enriched with
detailed maps of the Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory. We believe that it is an unavoidable
responsibility of the members of the Security Council
to act without delay to ensure that Israel cease its illegal
settlement activities in occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, and refrain from acting
against the Palestinian people, including the inhumane
blockade of the Gaza Strip. The Government of Israel
must show its political will and commitment to the two-
State solution.

We agree with some of our colleagues at today's
important meeting who have said that the two-State
solution cannot and should not become the illusion
of two States. It is absolutely clear that there is an
occupying Power and an occupied territory, which is
the big difference compared to other conflicts in the
region. And that is why we have international law as
well as General Assembly resolutions adopted on this
matter, decisions of UNESCO, the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice and resolutions of this
very Council. Bolivia naturally supports all the peace
processes set up to resolve this issue in a political and
negotiated way and through dialogue, and we support
the framework of the Madrid principles and the Arab
Peace Initiative, which contribute to the fulfilment of
this objective.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia reaffirms its
support for the self-determination of the Palestinian
people and their right to have a free, sovereign and
independent State, with pre-1967 international borders
and with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly. It is crucial that the Council
work not only to recognize but to guarantee the right of
peoples to peace, the right of the Palestinian people to
peace and the right of the Israeli people to peace.

