Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
My delegation should like to a pay a special tribute,
Madame, to your country, Mexico, for your interest in
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Your
country's outstanding chairmanship of the Security
Council's Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict and your presence at today's debate clearly
attest to that interest.

My delegation also thanks Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy for her exceptional introduction of the
Secretary-General's ninth annual report on children and
armed conflict (S/2010/ 181), and reaffirms our support
for her efforts to promote the cause of children affected
by the scourge of war. We also note the deeply moving
testimony of Ms. Manju, a former child soldier, on the
war in Nepal. It not only reminded us of the gravity
and urgency of the phenomenon, but also encouraged
us to listen to and involve children in the settlement of
problems that concern them.

My delegation wishes to speak on the following
three points: the impact on children of new forms of
warfare, progress made, and challenges and prospects
ahead.

New forms of armed conflict, marked by the
growing involvement of non-State actors and
non-traditional forms of combat, complicate the
objective assessment of the impact of war on children.
In addition to this there is the illicit proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, the increase in armed
groups, the emergence of resource wars and the
internationalization of terrorism, which constantly fuel
a culture of violence, especially against children.

In his periodic report on children and armed
conflict in 2005 (S/2005/72), the Secretary-General
identified six violations of the rights of children in
conflict zones, namely, killing or maiming, the
recruitment of child soldiers, attacks against schools or
hospitals, rape or other forms of sexual violence, the
abduction of children and the denial of humanitarian
access for children. Gabon vigorously condemns these
heinous and shameful practices, which offend morality
and undermine human dignity.

One of the most significant achievements of the
last ten years has been the recognition by the
international community that political and diplomatic
commitment is crucial in responding to the suffering of
children affected by armed conflict. The Security
Council played a decisive role in acknowledging, in
resolution 1261 (1999), that the protection of children
in armed conflict affects international peace and
security. The many resolutions adopted since then by
the Council and by the General Assembly on this
matter bear witness to this. Thus, the problems linked
to children are taken into account today in negotiations
of peace agreements and in the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

In adopting, in accordance with resolution 1612
(2005), a monitoring and reporting mechanism for
countries at war and a working group on children in
armed conflict, the Council wanted to have reliable and
timely information on the recruitment and use of
children by parties to armed conflicts, as well as on
other violations of children's rights. Despite this
progress, the international community has many
challenges to overcome in this area. The reality on the
ground remains very worrisome.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/ 181)
reveals that many national armies and armed groups
continue to recruit and use children. Therefore we
welcome the publication in the annexes of the report of
the Secretary-General of the lists of those who violate
the rights of children, which certainly constitutes
progress towards possible legal proceedings against
them.
My country is pleased by the fact that at a
regional conference held in N'Djamena from 8 to
9 June 2010, the States of Central Africa adopted the
N'Djamena Declaration reaffirming their commitment
to put an end to the enrolment of children in armed
conflict, with a view to strengthening peace and
security and promoting development of the subregion,
where there are more than 30,000 child soldiers.

The protection of children in armed conflict is a
shared responsibility. Gabon considers relevant the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to ensure
that the question of the recruitment and use of children
in armed conflict could be examined at all levels of the
Security Council's activities, including in the counter-
terrorism committees.

That recommendation includes another proposal
which urges the participation of experts on questions
linked to the protection of children in all United
Nations peace missions, including peacekeeping
operations and political missions. It would also be wise
for the Council to establish a sanctions committee on
the violations of the rights of children affected by
armed conflicts. Generally speaking, our action in
fighting impunity with respect to violations of the
rights of children will not be truly effective unless we
increase our awareness campaigns with the goal of
leading the largest number of leaders and individuals to
accept and understand the validity of this struggle.

The presidential statement that we shall adopt at
the end of this debate should lay the bases for a
common ethic, the commitment of all of us -
Governments, the United Nations system and
non-governmental organizations - to act together in
the interest of the children of the entire world and of
future generations.

