Mr. Juppe (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
first to thank you, Sir, for your warm words of
welcome, which I deeply appreciated.

The world is experiencing one of the great
revolutions that change the course of history. From
North Africa to the Persian Gulf, the Arab people
clamour to breathe the air of liberty and democracy.
From the Jasmine Revolution in Tunisia and the events
of 25 January in Egypt, great hope arose and
democratic transition was launched in a spirit of
maturity and responsibility.

In Morocco, King Mohammed VI announced in a
courageous and visionary speech the establishment of a
constitutional monarchy. This new Arab spring is good
news, I am certain, for all of us. Our duty and interest
require us to support these developments with
confidence and availability - not to teach lessons or
2
set examples, but to help each people to build its own
future.

In Libya, alas, for a number of weeks the will of
the people has been crushed by the murderous
repression led by Colonel Al-Qadhafi's regime against
his own people. That is why the General Assembly,
pursuant to the 25 February request of the Human Rights
Council, suspended Libya from that Council. That is
why the Security Council determined on 26 February
that

"the widespread and systematic attacks currently
taking place in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
against the civilian population may amount to
crimes against humanity" (resolution 1970 (2011)).

In its resolution 1970 (2011), which was adopted
unanimously, the Security Council recalled the Libyan
authorities' responsibility to protect the Libyan people
and at the same time demanded an immediate end to the
violence. It expressed the hope that those responsible
for these crimes will be brought before the International
Criminal Court and referred the matter to the
Prosecutor. It imposed sanctions on Colonel Al-Qadhafi,
members of his family and his accomplices. Finally, it
imposed an embargo on arms destined for Libya.

These measures have not been sufficient.
Throughout the country, violence against the civilian
population has only increased. Given this intolerable
provocation, the international community has reacted
in near unanimity. The European Union did so at the
extraordinary meeting of the European Council on
11 March. The Group of Eight countries did so in Paris
on Tuesday. Regional organizations have also
expressed themselves forcefully. First and foremost,
the League of Arab States called on the Security
Council in its 12 March resolution to establish a no-fly
zone. I also wish to commend the commitment of the
African Union, which has called for an end to the
violence against civilians.

Despite these calls for peace, the situation in
Libya today is more alarming than ever. As I speak,
Colonel Al-Qadhafi's troops pursue their violent
conquest of liberated cities and territories. We must not
give free rein to warmongers; we must not abandon
civilian populations, the victims of brutal repression, to
their fate; we must not allow the rule of law and
international morality to be trampled underfoot. For
this reason, France sought to contribute its utmost to
11-26718
the international momentum by working alongside the
United Kingdom, the United States and others to
prepare the draft resolution before the Council.

The draft resolution provides the Council with the
means to protect the civilian populations in Libya, first
by establishing a no-fly zone and by authorizing the
members of the Arab League and those Member States
that so wish to take the measures necessary to
implement its provisions. Furthermore, it authorizes
these same States to take all measures necessary, over
and above the no-fly zone, to protect civilians and
territories, including Benghazi, which are under the
threat of attack by Colonel Al-Qadhafi's forces. Lastly,
it strengthens the sanctions that have been adopted
against the regime, including implementing the arms
embargo, freezing the assets of authorities in Tripoli
and prohibiting flights by Libyan airlines.

France solemnly calls on all members of the
Security Council to support this initiative and to adopt
the draft resolution. If it is adopted, we are prepared to
act with Member States - in particular Arab States -
that wish to do so.

We do not have much time left. It is a matter of
days, perhaps even hours. Every hour and day that goes
by means a further clampdown and repression for the
freedom-loving civilian population, in particular the
people of Benghazi, Every hour and day that goes by
increases the burden of responsibility on our shoulders.
If we are careful not to act too late, the Security
Council will have the distinction of having ensured that
in Libya law prevails over force, democracy over
dictatorship and freedom over oppression.

