Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
At the outset, Gabon welcomes the presence among us
of His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia. We assure
him of our willingness to further strengthen the
felicitous links of friendship and cooperation between
our two countries, and of our readiness to work
towards a peaceful settlement of the dispute under
consideration.

My delegation also thanks M. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
the clarity and quality of his briefing on the Secretary-
General's report (S/2010/169) on the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We congratulate him
and express our appreciation for his commitment to
peace and stability in Kosovo.

The current report, which follows that (S/2010/5)
which formed the basis of our debate of 22 January
(see S/PV. 6264), offers an assessment of the activities
undertaken since then by UNMIK and the evolution of
the situation on the ground. It addresses, inter alia, the
political and security situation, the return of displaced
persons and refugees, the consolidation of the rule of
law, human rights and the protection of cultural and
religious heritage.

My delegation reaffirms its support for the central
role played by UNMIK in encouraging and facilitating
dialogue and reconciliation among the various
communities of Kosovo, and with Pristina and
Belgrade. We also appreciate the tremendous work
done on the ground by the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the Kosovo Force in
coordinating their operational and strategic activities.

Gabon has always advocated dialogue and
cooperation in the peaceful settlement of crises and
conflicts. We continue to believe that these two tools
are absolutely necessary to achieving peace and
stability in Kosovo and throughout the region. In this
regard, we urge the two parties to resume discussions
on matters of disagreement in order to settle their
dispute, taking into account the security of the entire
region.

As we outlined in the debate of 22 January, we
support maintaining UNMIK's presence in Kosovo
until the final settlement of the dispute. We take this
opportunity to reaffirm our attachment to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Serbia. Moreover, it should be recalled that resolution
1244 (1999) remains the legal basis for any peace
initiative with respect to this matter. The plan laid out
by the Secretary-General is therefore an important
contribution to the search for a peaceful and negotiated
solution to the Kosovo issue.

Gabon, like many other countries, continues to
believe that the final recognition of Kosovo's status by
the international community must be based on the rules
for processes leading to self-determination. In this
regard, my country awaits the decision of the
International Court of Justice pursuant to the request of
the General Assembly in its resolution 63/3.

