Mr. Sahovic' (Serbia and Montenegro): I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
Council presidency for the month of July and to thank
you for convening this meeting. I also wish to express
the appreciation of my delegation for the work of the
Russian Federation presidency last month.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
report and thank his Special Representative,
Mr. Michael Steiner, for the briefing he provided
today - his final one in this capacity. I would like to
wish him every success in his new, important post.

Three weeks ago, we had the opportunity to
analyse the situation in Kosovo and Metohija after four
years of the international presence. Unfortunately, our
analysis differs from that we have just heard from
Mr. Steiner, but perhaps that is understandable. To
describe the poor state of affairs in the province, we
find it sufficient at this point to cite the recent report of
the Council of Europe decentralization mission, stating
that the political climate in Kosovo currently appears
worse than ever since 1999. The report of the
Secretary-General before us also indicates the
underlying unsatisfactory conditions on the ground.

It is, however, not quite clear to us what the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) intends to do to address the
outstanding difficulties. The Mission has evidently
entered a delicate phase and is, in addition, awaiting a
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
My country hopes the appointment will soon be
forthcoming, since there is much work yet to be done
before the situation improves.

On this occasion, I would like to indicate some of
the steps that we feel would need to be taken in the
nearest possible future.

The Secretary-General's report states that the
transfer of responsibilities to the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government is being carried out at
a pace that takes into account their capacities to assume
additional responsibilities. However, the analysis of the
functioning of these Institutions in most cases does not
offer evidence of successful performance of their basic
functions.

It is therefore necessary to define transparent
criteria for assessing the capabilities of the Provisional
Institutions to perform tasks entrusted to them at this
stage, as well as criteria and a timetable for assuming
new responsibilities. As some Council members have
previously proposed, a clear link needs to be
established between performance and progress in the
transfer of responsibilities. This would assist the
process of establishing good governance in the
Province.

The persistent attempts of the Assembly of
Kosovo and Metohija to overstep its competencies is a
serious political issue that needs to be appropriately
addressed. Accountability is necessary in cases of
repeated violations of the existing legal framework in
the province and particularly of resolution 1244 (1999).
UNMIK has to take clear and concrete measures to
prevent recurrence of these attempts. Declarations of
condemnation by UNMIK are obviously not sufficient
to put an end to this practice.

Basic human and minority rights - including the
right of minorities to use their language, access to
education, health care and employment - need to be
upheld in a far more vigorous manner than has been the
case to date. We fully expect UNMIK, within its
overall responsibility for the province, to meticulously
ensure the exercise of these rights.

The majority must be held responsible for
compliance with resolution 1244 (1999) and for
establishing the values of a democratic, multi-ethnic
society. Otherwise, it will be difficult to expect the
most vulnerable, the minorities, not to reach out for
help elsewhere or to try to create their own institutions.

The investigation of the triple murder in Obilic on
4 June has not yielded any results, as is the case with
many other atrocities the Council might care to recall.

A more visible presence of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and of UNMIK would deter potential attacks
on members of minority groups as well as on their
heritage sites. Just a few days ago, the Orthodox
Church of St. Nicholas was stoned in Pristina for the
second time in one month and for the sixth time this
year. In addition, the Orthodox cemetery in Kosovska
Vitina was desecrated, also not for the first time.

Serious and robust action by the police in
apprehending perpetrators of all types of crime -
including ethnically motivated crime - is a
precondition for establishing the rule of law in Kosovo
and Metohija. The necessity of bringing criminals to
justice has been cited as a precondition for
reconciliation in all crisis spots around the globe.
Kosovo and Metohija is certainly no exception.

The Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) is another
problem that requires decisive action. The Secretary-
General's report (S/2003/675) cites a connection
between KPC and the Albanian National Army (ANA)
terrorist organization. However, the KPC commander
has faced no consequences for harbouring an as yet
unknown number of terrorists in that nominally civilian
organization. We expect a full, prompt and transparent
investigation into KPC's membership and activities.

Without a breakthrough in creating a secure
environment for all inhabitants, few other problems in
Kosovo and Metohija can be solved. We therefore ask
the Council to carefully review the plans to downsize
the UNMIK Police. It is also clear that the number of
international judges and prosecutors is inadequate. If
the establishment of the rule of law is to be an
attainable goal, their numbers will need to be
increased, not reduced.

Further failure to comprehensively address
security issues will also present a major impediment to
the success of various initiatives aimed at giving
impetus to the return process, such as the Rapid
Response Returns Facility. A viable return strategy
requires full cooperation on the part the Provisional
Institutions, which - as the report indicates - has not
been forthcoming. UNMIK needs to put that
responsibility - including conditionality - more
forcefully before the Provisional Institutions.

We take note of the call by Kosovo and Metohija
leaders for the return of internally displaced persons. It
could have been taken in good faith had it offered
guarantees for a fundamental right to life for members
of minority groups. A declaration of willingness to
work with elected representatives of minorities rings
hollow alongside an explicit statement that no one's
security can be assured. That appeal says, among other
things, "We cannot guarantee anyone a job, and we
cannot guarantee anyone's safety".

In addition to those priorities, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General will have
before him or her the standards whose implementation
the Council has called for so many times. The obvious
necessity of making operational the benchmarks for
meeting those standards has also been stated in this
Chamber. It is our expectation that clear indicators will
be established as a basis for measuring progress
achieved by the Provisional Institutions - and
UNMIK as well - in meeting all eight standards.

Decentralization is also an undertaking of
strategic importance that we hope the new Special
Representative will energetically pursue. We are
studying the detailed report of the Council of Europe
mission charged with dealing with that issue. My
Government hopes for an opportunity to discuss the
topic in depth with both the Council of Europe and
UNMIK in the near future.

As to the question of privatization, I should like
to inform the Council that we recently received a
response from the Legal Counsel of the United Nations
to our request for an explanation of the legal basis of
regulation 2003/13, known as the "land use"
regulation. In particular, given the recent assessment of
the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of UNMIK's European Union Pillar
that the regulation is critical to the political future of
the province, we hope that the Council will devote
more attention to this issue, as proposed during the
most recent debate on this item (see S/PV.4770). It is
our firm belief that a process of such importance as
privatization should not, at its very outset, be burdened
by doubts as to its legality. Therefore, we are ready for
a constructive discussion with UNMIK on the matter.

With the appointment of a new Special
Representative, we will also be looking forward to a
speedy improvement in our cooperation with UNMIK.
We believe that the Common Document of November
2001 and the existing High-Ranking Working Group
continue to be the best framework; this does not
indicate any intent to seek co-governance with
UNMIK, but shows our unreserved willingness to help
improve the situation.

Finally, allow me to reiterate our position on
dialogue with Pristina. Over a period of time, my
country has consistently expressed its readiness for the
commencement of such a dialogue. Now, it seems that
the sustained efforts of the international community to
prevail on Pristina to accept talks on practical issues
have yielded results. We believe that a dialogue should
focus on issues such as security, returns, energy and
transport. We hope that the United Nations, the
European Union and members of the Contact Group
who are willing to do so should be involved in the
process with a view to establishing mechanisms to
ensure both the constructiveness of the dialogue and
the effective implementation of any agreed measures.

