Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): On behalf of
the delegation of Azerbaijan, I would like to thank
the Malaysian presidency for having convened this
important and timely debate and for its leadership in
advancing the issue of child protection in the Council's
work. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his annual report on children and armed conflict
(S/2015/409).

Armed conflict and foreign occupation are both
the root cause and the result of grave violations against
children. The proliferation of non-State armed groups,
their easy access to armaments and their increased use
of abduction, recruitment and sexual abuse as a tactic of
war have contributed to the rise, intensity and brutality
of crises, which have emerged as a common challenge
related to the protection of children.

Azerbaijan is deeply concerned about the
dramatic increase in the number of child casualties
and the disproportionate impact of armed conflicts on
children's security, safety, health and welfare. We have
always been consistent in demanding strict observance
by the parties to an armed conflict of their obligations
under international humanitarian and human rights law,
in all circumstances. The vulnerability of children in
wartime brings an element of urgency, dedication and
strong commitment to worldwide protection efforts,
which must be free of selectivity.

During the Armenian aggression against my
country, thousands of Azerbaijani children were
deprived of their basic rights; thousands of them were
killed and maimed on the basis of ethnic hatred or
taken hostage and forcibly displaced from their homes.
Armenia's continuing denial of those children's right
to return to their homes has social consequences and
implications for the possibility of achieving lasting
peace. Many of the children and their families have
also gone missing, and despite the continued efforts of
the Government and the International Committee of the
Red Cross, their fates are still unknown. More than 20
years after the signing of the ceasefire agreement, the
civilian population and facilities of Azerbaijan have
remained subject to targeted and indiscriminate attacks
by the Armenian armed forces.

We appreciate the activities of United Nations
mechanisms aimed at ensuring more effective protection
of the rights of children and improving the situation
of children affected by armed conflict, pursuant to
resolutions 1379 (2001), 1882 (2009), 1998 (2011) and
2143 (2014), and we welcome the progress made in
that regard, including the "Children, Not Soldiers"
campaign. Particular consideration should be given to
internally displaced children in terms of ensuring their
right to return and the implications of illegal policies
in situations of foreign occupation for the protection of
children's rights.

We appreciate and commend the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui. The
fulfilment of the Special Representative's mandate with
respect to all situations of armed conflict, including
those ofa protracted nature, is crucial in that regard.

Efforts to achieve peace cannot be conducted in
a manner that contradicts the established norms of
international law. It is therefore imperative that such
efforts and peace agreements should never encourage
the acceptance of situations resulting from the unlawful
use of force or other serious violations of international
law, such as war crimes, crimes against humanity,
genocide and ethnic cleansing. Important steps have
been taken in a number of situations of armed conflict
to achieve accountability for grave violations against
children. However, serious challenges remain. We join
the call for more resolute efforts to end impunity and
find a long-term and sustained solution for eliminating
and preventing illegal practices affecting the rights of
children.

I would like to conclude by welcoming the adoption
today of resolution 2225 (2015), which demonstrates
the Council's continued determination to address the
problem in a comprehensive manner, with a focus on
the phenomenon of abduction.

