Mr. Loulichki (Morocco): It gives me great
pleasure to brief the Security Council on the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) since the previous briefing, held in May (see S/PV.6964). The Committee continues to be guided
in its work by the relevant resolutions, especially
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010),
and continues to play a critical role in promoting and
facilitating their implementation.

The Committee has benefitted from the valuable
assistance of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTD), under the leadership of
Mr. Mike Smith and Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, its recently
appointed Executive Director.

Monitoring and promoting Member States'
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2004) is one ofthe core components ofthe Committee's
mandate. Among the vehicles and tools to achieve those
objectives are two new assessment tools introduced
in May, the overview of implementation assessment
and the detailed implementation survey, developed
by CTED to replace the preliminary implementation
assessment and to assist the Committee to continue
its constructive dialogue with Member States. The
Committee has adopted nine files, and it is expected
that another five will be completed before the end of
2013.

Another tool is the country visit, which is a critical
part of the direct interaction and engagement between
the Committee and Member States. Conducted on
the Committee's behalf by the Executive Directorate,
such visits provide an opportunity to discuss, inter
alia, terrorism-related trends and challenges; States'
counter-terrorism efforts, strengths, weaknesses,
and technical assistance needs; and good practices in
implementing the two resolutions. During the review
cycle, the Committee conducted visits to six States,
bringing the total number of States visited since 2005
to 88. The Committee expects to conduct two further
visits before the end the year.

The facilitation of technical-assistance delivery is
another core function assigned by the Council to the
Committee. A number of steps have been undertaken to
strengthen the facilitation efforts of the Committee and
its CTED, which include,first, giving priority to States
visited by the Committee and focusing on follow-
up requests; secondly, working with traditional and
new donor States and organizations and on a regional
and thematic approach to facilitate the provision of
assistance; thirdly, increasing its focus on prevention
and implementation; fourthly, participating actively
in the Integrated Assistance for Countering Terrorism
Initiative of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF); fifthly, integrating an approach
based on human rights and rule of law into its activities;
and finally, establishing working relations with the
Global Counterterrorism Forum.

In that regard, CTED, acting in cooperation with
partner organizations and entities, also facilitated a
number of regional and thematic workshops and events
within the framework of global, multi-year projects on
a variety of topics, including the freezing of terrorists'
assets, misuse of the non-profit sector for terrorist
purposes, the regulation of alternative remittances
against misuse for terrorist financing purposes, joint
investigations, community policing, the prosecution
of terrorism cases,strengthening the capacity of
central authorities, countering the illegal cross-border
movement of cash, the protection of witnesses and
victims of terrorism, and countering violent extremism
and implementing resolution 1624 (2005).

On 20 September 2013, the Committee held
a special meeting on enhancing cooperation and
technical assistance to States in the Sahel region to
strengthen their capacity in the global fight against
terrorism. The meeting highlighted the importance
of the prevention and capacity-building approach and
international cooperation. The Committee, with the
assistance of CTED, also arranged a number of special
events and open meetings with Member States and
international and regional organizations on issues of
common and current concern, including countering
terrorism through the use of new communications
and information technologies and countering violent
extremism through education.

The special meetings and events of the Committee,
which are open to Member States and international
and regional organizations, help raise the international
community's awareness of counter-terrorism issues.
They provide a useful forum for States and organizations
to discuss new threats and capacity-building initiatives
to address terrorism challenges.

The Chair of the Committee also arranged a
number of public briefings for the wider membership
by CTED on regional and thematic topics regarding
various aspects for the implementation of resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). Those arrangements and
discussions helped the Committee to not only raise
awareness of its strategic and transparent approaches,
but also to make known its work and maintain links and
dialogue with the wider membership.

CTED has also been active in conducting a number
of workshops on specific topics. Important workshops
organized during the reporting period include two
regional workshops, in Jeddah in May and in Algiers in
June, on the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005),
as part of a series on enhancing the implementation of
that resolution; the 4th workshop on the links between
terrorism and organized crime, co-arranged by CTED,
the Regional Cooperation Council, the Centre for
Security Cooperation and the Southeast European Law
Enforcement Center; the 7th regional workshop for
judges, prosecutors and police officers on effectively
countering terrorism in South Asia, held in Pakistan in
October; and four subregional workshops on freezing
mechanisms, held in Tanzania, Thailand, the Bahamas
and Turkmenistan.

Resolution 1963 (2010) encourages CTED to work
with Member States on developing comprehensive
and integrated national counter-terrorism strategies.
During the Committee's visits to Member States, CTED
discusses with the visited States the potential benefits
of putting in place a comprehensive and integrated
national counter-terrorism strategy that employs a
multidisciplinary approach that includes civil society.
Based on that constructive dialogue, and with the
consent of the State in question, the Committee has on
several occasions recommended in its visit report that
the State adopt a national comprehensive and integrated
strategy. CTED has conveyed its readiness to provide
expert advice in that regard or to facilitate the delivery
of the necessary and required technical assistance.
CTED, working in close cooperation with the
CTITF Office and its constituent entities, also engaged
with regional organizations on the development of
comprehensive regional counter-terrorism strategies.
CTED and the CTITF Office co-led a Working Group
of the Whole on National and Regional Counter-
Terrorism Strategies. The Working Group also
facilitated and co-chaired an international conference
on national and regional counterterrorism strategies, at
which participants identified a set of principles to be
considered by Member States and regional organizations
when developing their respective strategies.

Effective counter-terrorism measures and respect
for human rights are complementary and mutually
reinforcing. That is an understatement. They are an
essential part of any successful counter-terrorism effort.
In accordance with the Committee's policy guidance on
human rights, CTED continued to take into account the
relevant human rights concerns, including in preparing
the overview of implementation assessments and the
detailed implementation survey, in its dialogue with
States on behalf of the Committee and within the
framework of country visits, regional workshops and
other events.

The United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights came to brief the Committee on 24 October
2013. The discussions were useful. The Committee and
the Office of the High Commissioner will continue to
work together to ensure that Member States' counter-
terrorism legislation and practices complied with their
obligations under international human rights law.

In closing, I would like to say that terrorism
continues to pose a serious threat to international
peace and security. There are various emerging threats
and challenges in our common endeavours to combat
terrorism.

The Committee is now considering the renewal
of the mandate of CTED, which will expire at the end
of December this year. The Committee will consider
strategic and practical recommendations to the Security
Council for the future work of the Committee and its
CTED to better meet these threats and challenges.

