The President (interpretation from Arabic): I thank
the representative of Botswana for his kind words
addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Egypt.

 

Egypt voted in favour of the draft resolution just
adopted. This is an expression of Egypt's firm position on
Iraq's need fully to respect all Security Council resolutions.

Egypt affirms the need to implement all the provisions
of those resolutions with regard to the Commission's right
to inspect the sites it deems necessary, and its access to
those sites, so that it can complete its tasks and fulfil its
responsibilities - particularly the provisions of Security
Council resolutions 687 (1991), 707 (1991) and 715 (1991).
In this context my delegation reaffirms its appreciation for
the efforts of the Special Commission and those its
Chairman, Mr. Rolf Ekeus.

The most recent report of the Special Commission
states that Iraq has made progress towards implementing
the resolutions pertaining to the elimination, destruction and
monitoring of weapons of mass destruction; this is referred
to in the fifth preambular paragraph of the resolution
adopted today. There is no doubt that Iraq's complete
cooperation with the Commission is the only means of
guaranteeing the Commission's completion of its task. It is
one of the requirements for lifting the sanctions

 

imposed on Iraq and for ending the suffering of the
people of Iraq resulting from those sanctions.

While Egypt welcomes the agreement between Iraq
and the United Nations Secretariat on the implementation
of resolution 986 (1995), which allows for the sale of
Iraqi oil in order to provide funds for some of the
humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people, it believes that
further progress must be made towards the
implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions, thereby opening the way to lifting all the
sanctions imposed upon Iraq.

Finally, my delegation affirms that the aim of calling
on Iraq to respect all Security Council resolutions is not
to undermine Iraqi sovereignty or to jeopardize Iraqi
national security.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration

of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 5.55 pm.
