Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me,
Madam President, to thank Special Envoy Mr. Pedersen
for his valuable briefing on the political process in
Syria. We also thank Ms. Al Hallak for her briefing.

We meet today following a major achievement in
the Syrian political process, namely, the holding of the
first round of the Constitutional Committee meetings.
It would be remiss of me not to once again commend
the efforts of Mr. Pedersen this year, which contributed
to reaching this agreement.

We have been following the work of the Committee,
which met as the large body comprising 150 people and
the small group comprising 45 people in Geneva during
the first halfofthis month. We must commend the Syrian
parties for taking that vital step and for participating in
the work of the Constitutional Committee. The launch

of the Committee's work is a glimmer of hope not only
for Syrians, but also for the international community,
after the years of suffering as a result of the conflict
in this brotherly Arab country. Given the fact that we
are just days away from resuming the Constitutional
Committee meetings in Geneva, we hope that
dialogue will prevail and that the parties will engage
in constructive discussions leading to understandings
with regard to the Syrian Constitution.

We know that those discussions are not going to be
easy and that there are competing Views. However, we
call on the Syrian parties to focus at all times on the
interests of the brotherly Syrian people and to allow
them to fulfil their legitimate aspirations through a
political settlement agreed upon by all components of
Syrian people - a settlement that would uphold the
unity, independence and territorial integrity of Syria,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

We stress that this political process must be
coupled with confidence-building measures. Most
importantly, genuine and tangible progress needs to be
made on the issues of detainees and missing persons, as
Mr. Pedersen mentioned in his briefing. International
organizations must be allowed to visit detention centres
and prisons. On the issue of refugees, we once again
express our position that the return of refugees must be
voluntary, safe and dignified. We stress that attaining
comprehensive and sustainable peace will not be
possible without ensuring justice, ending impunity and
ensuring accountability for all the crimes that have been
committed in Syria since the beginning of the conflict
in 2011. Once again, we support the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, as well as the board of inquiry established by the
Secretary-General, which has recently started its work.

We would like to refer to the press release
issued yesterday by UNICEF and its horrific figures
on the number of children who were killed last
year - more than 1,100 children were killed. It also
contains information on civilian facilities that were
targeted. In that context, we express once again our
concern about the latest developments in the north-west
of Syria, specifically in Idlib, which has recently seen
a military escalation that has led to civilian casualties.
The latest attack was on an internally displaced persons
camp in Idlib, which also led to civilian casualties.
We stress once again that we condemn the targeting
of innocent civilians, by any party. We also condemn
all attacks carried out on civilian-populated areas by
terrorist groups that are designated by Security Council
as terrorist organizations. At the same time, we recall
that counter-terrorism operations do not absolve
any party of its obligations under international law,
which include abiding by the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution, and protecting civilians
and civilian facilities.

We recall that the United Nations has warned that
any large-scale military operation in Idlib could lead
to the worst humanitarian crisis of the twenty-first
century. We fear that such a military operation may
adversely affect the political process and the meeting
of the Constitutional Committee, and we reiterate our
call for a ceasefire throughout Syria, as provided for
in the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolution 2401 (2018). We condemn Israel's repeated
attacks on Syria's sovereignty and its territories, which
violate the Charter of the United Nations, international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 350 (1974), concerning the
disengagement between Israeli and Syrian forces.

In conclusion, we stress once again that there
is no military solution to the conflict in Syria. The
solution must be sought through a political settlement,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), which set
out a road map for a transitional political process that
includes a number of stages, including the drafting of a
constitution and the holding of free and fair elections in
accordance with that constitution, under the supervision
of the United Nations. That process must engage all
Syrians, including those who are abroad.

