Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): For the last few
years, the situation in Burundi has remained a priority on
the agenda of this Council. Despite the continued
attention and efforts of the international community,
however, there have been no signs of alleviation in the
plight of the Burundian people. Rather to our despair, the
events of one month ago testify to the fact that Burundi
is not a land that allows the slightest room for wishful
thinking.

The latest report of the Secretary-General, of 15
August 1996, gives a detailed account of the political
plunge of the Burundian parties, which saw its nadir in
the 25 July coup, as well as a vivid description of the
precarious security and humanitarian situation,
characterized by mass killings that have terrorized large
segments of the population. As indicated by the Special
Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights, the
generalized lack of safety, the climate of fear, hatred and
exclusion and the prevalent culture of impunity are
poisoning human relations and paralysing all initiatives to
lift the country out of chaos. In particular, we note with
grave concern the Secretary-General' s observation that the
unfortunate event of 25 July will reinforce the fears of
one ethnic group and strengthen extremists on both sides,
thus increasing violence and adding to the suffering of the
Burundian people.

My delegation believes that the current situation in
Burundi underscores the fact that the international
community should, with the utmost urgency, make every
effort to prevent any further deterioration of the situation
and put Burundi back on the track of dialogue for peace
and a political settlement. We fully share the Secretary-
General's observation that the conflict in Burundi is not
susceptible to a military solution and that political
mechanisms to share power have to be found with the
help of outsiders. In this regard, my delegation cannot fail
to express its disappointment at the inability of the
Burundian parties to seize the opportunity that was

 

created by the Mwanza and Arusha I processes, driven in
particular by the relentless efforts of former President
Nyerere.
In this context, I should like to stress the critical
importance of the decisions of the Arusha II summit.
Among other things, we highly value the resolve of the
countries in the region to react in a unified, resolute and
prompt manner. We fully support the measures taken at the
summit to bring to bear upon the Burundian parties an
optimal level of pressure so that serious negotiations for a
political settlement can be reopened in Burundi. This
initiative is a manifestation of the division of labour
between the United Nations and the regional communities,
and complements the fulfilment of the purpose of the
United Nations. It also marks a historic milestone in the
furtherance of the region's commitment to democracy by
pronouncing itself, in the most unequivocal terms, against
the overthrow of a legitimate Government. I am certain that
this initiative is bound to have a long-lasting, salutary effect
on the democratic future of the African continent. Now that
the regional community has come up with its own action,
the Security Council has to resume its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
stability in the Great Lakes region.

N ow I should like to suggest two overriding guidelines
for contemplating the Council's future course of action.
First of all, we should bear in mind the importance of
taking seriously into account the gravity and volatility of
the situation in Burundi. Our action should be oriented
towards minimizing the risk of triggering a chain reaction
that could inadvertently turn the situation into a major
crisis. Secondly, we cannot afford to wait too long, as this
would send the wrong signal to the Burundian parties. We
find it imperative to make these parties refrain from
violence and commit themselves to a negotiated resolution
of the conflict. All our efforts should be directed towards
encouraging them to resume, without delay, a process of
political dialogue that will bring together all political forces
in Burundi without exception and without any
preconditions.

In this regard, we strongly support the efforts that
former President Nyerere, the regional leaders and other
international mediators are making to help facilitate this
process. To achieve this objective, we ought to consider
every option at our disposal. Truly it is not an easy thing to
strike a proper balance between the need for action and the
risk of action. But it is not an impossible task, either.

 

On the other hand, there is an equally pressing need
for contingency planning on a much bigger scale and of
a wider scope, as is well elaborated in the Secretary-
General's report. It is unfortunate to find that this
contingency planning has yet to be fully developed due to
the insufficient level of Members' commitments. My
delegation is of the view that we should facilitate, with a
sense of urgency, contingency planning as an essential
part of our action plan. My delegation wishes to convey
its appreciation to the Secretariat for the laudable efforts
it has made thus far, despite many constraints, towards
this cause.

Before concluding, my delegation wishes to express
its belief that today's debate on Burundi is very timely
and appropriate. The time is ripe for us to take an
initiative for the effective management of the crisis
situation in Burundi. Today's debate will give us precious
input from many interested countries, which will be used
for fine-tuning our deliberations. It is my delegation's
hope that this debate will lead us to a package of actions
that will best serve the interests of the Burundian people
and the international community.

