Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Thank you very, very
much, Mr. President of this Council. Maybe it is true that
we Africans are taking over; they just do not know how we
are doing it. We will keep it a secret. Let me just say that
when old wise women and old wise men sit down by an
African tree and drink beer on a Saturday afternoon many
years from now, and they look back at this century and
think of the people who contributed to our struggle, I
think your name will appear, though we would have loved
you to be our minister.

When the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom started this idea, which is an incredible and
novel idea, of communication, he said that he hoped we
would come here without prepared statements and be able
to engage in this interactive session. It is very difficult for
me to write something for five minutes, so my remarks
may be disjointed. I hope you will forgive me.

I was very struck that in one of the questions that is
posed, the term "real time" was used. Now, to associate
real time with the United Nations is very exciting, at the
least, since it may be seldom real. What I would like to
say to this meeting is very simple. I am not going to go
through answering all the three questions. I am going to
try to use "real time" as a guide.

There is one issue that to us, as Africans, is a
fundamental test for this Council, and that is the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I am very
thankful that the Security Council has discussed Africa
many, many times. Perhaps, now that we are at the end
of the year, we need to look at all the discussions that
you have had on Africa and review them to see if
something concrete has come out of them. If it has, what
is it? If not, how can we make it better? But we have to
keep on coming to the situation of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. If, God forbid, the Congo were to
fall apart, it would not be an African failure; it would be
an international failure.

The story of the Congo is very simple. The
international community said to us as Africans, get your
house in order, get involved, do something. Guess what?
We did. We did. On 10 July the countries of southern
Africa brought together all the combatants in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - those inside,
outside and everywhere - and came up with a peace
treaty.

What has the Security Council done since 10 July?
What has this body done? I think that is the question that
needs to be answered. Yes, we have talked about it, but
to the people in the Congo, it seems as if nothing has
happened. Maybe the lot that we have done has to be
concretized in a way that it can be real to the people of
the Congo. All we did was come up with a peace treaty,
and right now it is very fragile around the edges. But it

 

is fragile like any peace. Even Kosovo, if you had left that
situation for six months as in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, it would have been fragile too.

I think that is why I say that this is a situation where
this body has to really think hard about what it is that we
can do. The Africans formed the Joint Military Commission
(J MC). Those who could provide transportation, like South
Africa, did. We gave helicopters and what have you.
Zambia has given more than anybody in promoting this
peace. Where is the international community? Or more
"real", where is the Security Council?

I am glad that we are discussing this issue. I am not
going to address any of the other issues that are on the
table because the litmus test is the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I am not saying "do in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo what you did in Kosovo". I am not saying
"do in the Democratic Republic of the Congo what you did
in East Timor or in Sierra Leone". We are very thankful for
what was done in those countries. The situation is not the
same. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is different.
One of every five countries in Africa is directly drawn into
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. If you look at those
who spend sleepless nights trying to be involved, the ratio
is even less.

Let me conclude, because I said I was just going to
come and make one point only. I am very pleased that we
have talked all morning about working together with the
Organization of African Unity. One practical thing that
maybe the Security Council can do is to appeal to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, and perhaps to the
United States as the host country, to look at the situation of
immunities and privileges for the office of the OAU in
New York. My country has given a lot of help in
strengthening the offices of the OAU, whether they be on
the continent or here, but I think we can use help if there
could be another real look, in a practical way, at what we
can do here.

So, as far as my country is concerned, the test is very
simple: it is the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we
are watching. We have been watching since 10 July.

