Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
wish to sincerely congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the talent and skill with which the South African
presidency has so admirably led the Security Council
this month and on the choice of topic that you have put
before us today. It is a subject of paramount
importance, because African issues are among the
Council's top priorities.

Most of the issues that come repeatedly before
the Security Council relate to the African continent and
countries in conflict, including Cote d'Ivoire, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Somalia and Sudan-Darfur, or those emerging
from conflict, such as Burundi, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia
and Sierra Leone. The persistence of those conflicts
has resulted in the establishment of close institutional
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union.
11
Thus, the referral and settlement of African
conflicts now go through a logical process. It begins
with consideration by decision-making bodies at the
level of regional organizations and ends with the taking
of a final decision by the Security Council. As proof of
that, I need only refer to a current event: the political
agreement between the Ivorian parties, which was first
approved by the Mediation and Security Council of the
Economic Community of West African States and then
by the African Union Peace and Security Council
before being submitted to the United Nations Security
Council. So everything is occurring as if the conflict
had already been sorted out at the subregional and
regional levels. That enables the Security Council, as
the final body, to reach a swift and consensual
settlement.

Such cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union, imposed primarily by needs and
circumstances, is the expression of mutual will. Thus,
at a meeting in Nairobi in 2004, the Security Council
had already insisted on the need for joint efforts
between the two organizations to resolve conflicts on
the continent and to promote lasting peace,
development and stability in Africa. In addition, the
Ouagadougou Agreement on Cote d'Ivoire recognizes
the Organization's major role in its implementation and
in supporting the parties throughout that process and
recalls that the role of the Impartial Forces of the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire and of
Licorne remain essential for completing the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
and for the country's reunification.

In general, cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union takes various forms:
technical support, which provides competent and
experienced experts and technicians; and logistical
support, which provides personnel and equipment,
particularly in observation and peacekeeping missions.
However, financial support is clearly insufficient; at
present, it is virtually non-existent.

The African Union has become an essential
partner in managing peace and security on the African
continent. It intends to continue to address that
challenge. In order to do that, it needs the Security
Council's support. Indeed, the United Nations can
increase its support for the African Union in its
peacekeeping and conflict prevention efforts by
strengthening its capacity to guarantee stability in the
post-conflict period, by enhancing its political,

financial and technical support for the Union, as
already recommended in the October 2004 report of the
Secretary-General, and by supporting the
implementation of the Protocol relating to the
Establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, which seeks to establish an early-
warning and security system, particularly by helping
the Union to create an African standby force, which
would make it possible to react more swiftly.

Moreover, and as noted in the Secretary-
General's report dated 13 April 1998 on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa, the United Nations
could help the African Union develop its capacities for
planning, launching and managing operations from its
headquarters and could assist the African Union and
subregional organizations in strengthening their
capacity to control illicit weapons trafficking.

In order to achieve that, the Security Council
should first acknowledge that the decisions of regional
organizations regarding peacekeeping matters are
complementary to its mandate and actions. Regional
organizations are closer to the theatres of conflict, have
developed their mandates and have strengthened their
institutions, thus becoming partners that the Council
can no longer continue to ignore on the ground. The
Security Council must now permanently make them
part of its approach.

