Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, my delegation wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this meeting on an
important subject, one close to us all. We welcome
your presence here with us, and we also welcome the
presence of the Secretary-General.

Permit me to make a few remarks. I wish first to
thank the Secretariat, and the Secretary-General for his
report (8/2009/304), which certainly provides the most
in-depth thinking to date on the matter of post-conflict
peacebuilding. That is a major area of work for the
United Nations, with great potential, comparable to
that of the tool that we have used so far, namely,
peacekeeping.

However, we are only at the very beginning of
this process. The report marks an essential step in
thinking about improving the United Nations capacity
to respond to the challenges of peacebuilding. Today,
we need to pursue our thoughts and our concrete
actions.
I would like to focus on two challenges. The first
is that we are not yet strategic enough. A greater
analytical effort is needed. Before we can begin to
check the cycle of violence and conflict, we must be
able to analyze the causes and factors. That approach is
also true for conflict prevention.
Then we need to identify priorities. After
emerging from a conflict, that is not simply a rule for
action; it is the only way to move forward. On that
point we welcome the recommendations in the report
to make the assessments carried out by the Secretariat
teams more political and to follow a logical sequence
in order to be available more quickly. I wish to stress
that it is only by working on a limited number of
priorities that we will be effective; I think that is a
comment everyone shares.

Finally, we need to be consistently opportunistic,
in the good sense of the word; we must be rapid, agile
and flexible. It is at the deployment of an operation, or
even before, that we must begin to sketch out a
peacebuilding strategy. The recommendations set out in
the report to allow the deployment of civilian
personnel and competent specialized teams along with
the special representatives on the ground make good
sense, and we hope they can be carried out.

The second challenge, as we see it, is that we are
not yet fully mobilized. There is progress to be made in
this area.

The United Nations has a central role to play in
peacebuilding, because it alone has all of the
instruments - political, military, humanitarian and
development - on which we can base an effective
strategy. But the United Nations is still quite
fragmented in its interventions. Here also, the
Secretary-General's recommendations are aimed at
improving consistency in our response to these
challenges, and we welcome this. We have some clear
examples already, in Sierra Leone or the Central
African Republic.

Setting up financial mechanisms adapted to the
challenges of peacebuilding is even more necessary
now, because the actions required surpass the capacity
of a small number of actors. The Peacebuilding Fund
by itself cannot fully play its role if mobilization by the
international community is not assured. There is a role
that the Peacebuilding Commission has already begun
to play for the four countries on its agenda. It has
broadened its donor base and is reaching out to non-
traditional donors, even the private sector.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that a
rapid intervention by the international community
during the immediate post-conflict phase draws on the
same care for effectiveness that has led France, with
the United Kingdom, to propose discussion in the
Security Council on follow-up to and improvement of
peacekeeping. The same principles apply: the need for
better follow-up, and use of indicators and milestones.

We hope that peacebuilding will now be clearly
understood as a dimension of peacekeeping, and not
simply as the next stage. The requirement for
effectiveness is the condition for a lasting commitment
by the international community to help countries
emerging from crisis.

To conclude, I will say that France fully supports
the draft presidential statement submitted to us.

