Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me begin by thanking
Portugal for organizing this important debate; I
welcome the presence of the President of Portugal at
the opening of today's meeting. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Pillay, as
well as Assistant-Secretary-General Catherine Bragg of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and Mr. Philip Spoerri, the Director for International
Law and Cooperation of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, for their statements and for their long
and strong commitment to the protection of civilians.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the European Union later in this debate.

This year's developments in Libya, Cote d'Ivoire,
the Sudan, Somalia and Syria, to name a few, have
once again demonstrated the deadly effects of
repression and armed conflict on civilians. The
challenge confronting the international community, and
in particular the Security Council, remains: how can
we better prevent or stop violence against civilians?
This is a question that is of course closely linked to the
concept of the responsibility to protect. The Council
has only recently reaffirmed that it is the responsibility
of the authorities concerned to protect their own
populations. Germany firmly supports the principle of
the responsibility to protect, including the
responsibility of the international community, through
the Council, to take appropriate action should the
authorities concerned fail in their duty to protect
civilians. Let me add that now is not the time for us to
begin to step back from, or compromise on, the
commitments that all of us have undertaken in
endorsing the principle of the responsibility to protect.

Notable progress has been made since our last
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
held in May (S/PV.6531). On a normative level, the
Security Council adopted resolution 1998 (2011) in
July, which ensures that information on attacks on
schools and hospitals are included in the Secretary-
General's annual report on children and armed conflict.
On the implementation side, we welcome the new
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on
conflict-related sexual violence requested under
resolution 1960 (2010), which are now operational.

We also very much welcome the recent progress
made by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
on the completion of new training modules on
protection issues for peacekeeping personnel, and we
look forward to their rollout in the near future. In that
context, it is also of special importance to engage local
communities, including and especially women, in
discussions on protection requirements by taking
gender sensitivities into account when planning and
carrying out peacekeeping mandates.

These are positive developments. However,
enormous challenges remain. One of the major
challenges is the question of accountability. How can
we ensure accountability for violations of international
law committed both by individual perpetrators and for
parties to conflict? Ending impunity for violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law has to
be part of any approach to sustainable peace, justice,
truth and national reconciliation. As outlined in the
landmark resolution 1894 (2009), countries must first
and foremost take measures at the national level to
ensure accountability for such serious crimes, taking

into consideration the full range of justice and
reconciliation mechanisms, such as national criminal
courts and truth and reconciliation commissions.
Where that cannot be done at the national level, the
international community must step in.

The Security Council continues to play an
important role in that regard, as illustrated by its
referral of the situation in Libya to the International
Criminal Court last February, which testifies to the
determination of the international community not to let
the commission of atrocities go unpunished. Germany
fully supports the important complementary work of
the International Criminal Court.

In its resolution 1894 (2009), the Council
considered the possibility of using the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission, established
under article 90 of the First Protocol Additional to the
Geneva Conventions, in order to gather information on
alleged violations of applicable law relating to the
protection of civilians. We would like to encourage the
Council and other parties concerned to make use of the
Commission, as appropriate.

To conclude, allow me to touch very briefly upon
just a few situations of particular concern to us. In the
Sudan, the humanitarian situation in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states remains alarming. The
civilian population continues to suffer. Tens of
thousands have been displaced. Since humanitarian
access continues to be denied, the Council does not
even have detailed information on the number of
casualties, the displaced and those in need. We feel that
the Council should urgently press for an end to the
hostilities and request humanitarian access.

In the civil war that continues to devastate
Somalia and that has recently seen an escalation in the
fighting and an increasing number of parties to the
conflict, the Council must not lose sight of the
situation of civilians. The civilian population bears the
brunt of the war, as it does in many modern armed
conflicts. We continue to call on all actors to minimize
civilian casualties.

Looking at Syria, during the open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict held in May
(S/PV.6531), the Assistant Secretary-General for
Human Rights voiced his appeal that we prevent the
violent suppression of mass protests from developing
into civil war. That was six months ago. Meanwhile,
the situation in Syria has deteriorated. The Syrian
regime is relying on repression. Unarmed civilians are
continuously being killed.

The United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, reminded us
today of her deep concern about the situation, stating
that the death toll in Syria now exceeds 3,500. As the
German Foreign Minister reiterated yesterday, we
cannot allow President Assad to play for time.
Germany welcomes the more robust approach of the
League of Arab States, and we urge the Security
Council to send a strong message. The international
community must stand firm and united in calling for an
end to the bloodshed in Syria.

