As I begin my remarks today, I should like to offer my thanks to Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter and UNICEF Director Fore for their efforts to spotlight and address child protection around the world. Those efforts are noble and consequential. One of the most powerful lines that Ms. Fore spoke during her opening statement just now is that children are not pawns, and it must stop. We fully agree, and it is so true. Fifteen years after the Council established its Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and the United Nations-led monitoring and reporting mechanism, the United States remains fully committed to supporting this critical work because the impact of conflict on children remains all too real around the world. Far too often, and sadly, we still see the six grave children and armed conflict violations being committed globally. This tragic fact is starkly illustrated, on a scale that is really hard to imagine, in this year's report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525). Such violations include the continued killing and maiming of children, the recruitment and use of child soldiers, sexual violence and abduction, attacks against schools and hospitals, and denial of humanitarian access. Such acts must end, and perpetrators must be held to account. Even though many of us have taken steps to both help reduce the impact of armed conflict on children and support reintegration efforts around the world, our collective efforts and work on this issue are far from over, as so many have said already. Children continue to suffer in numerous places, including in Burma, Mali, Syria and Somalia. An added challenge, as others have highlighted, is the onset of the coronavirus disease, including in countries where violations and abuses against children continue to take place with impunity. I want to thank Mariam for her bravery in speaking with us today. Her testimony inspires us to work towards further support for reintegration and education, as Ms. Fore so passionately pleaded for, for children who have had similar experiences. The United States is horrified by reports of terrorists forcibly closing schools and killing teachers in Mali, depriving children and exposing them to trauma in truly awful ways. An entire generation of Malian children are impacted by these heinous tactics; the psychosocial effects alone will last for years. For our part, the United States has launched the Sahel Diplomatic Engagement Framework to focus on State legitimacy. As part of the Girls Leadership and Empowerment Through Education programme in Mali, the United States has contributed $23 million to address gender disparities and help gravely impacted women and girls in Mali. The provision of basic services such as schooling is essential for stabilizing not only Mali, but the entire Sahel region. Effective recovery from conflict also requires ensuring that the children impacted by conflict have the tools they need to succeed later on in the workforce. That includes accounting for their emotional and physical well-being while also providing access to education, age-appropriate vocational training and job opportunities. Those opportunities are the same ones desired by children who spoke to Ambassador Craft and so many of us on trips - but especially on Ambassador Craft's visit to South Sudan, where they told us they wished for all of this in their own lives. I hope the Council sees that investing in young people is a primary, cost-effective means of achieving sustainable human, social and economic development. In the long run, investing in the future of young people is vital to ensuring international peace and security. Additionally, in the wake of conflict, many children continue to experience trauma, rejection and social isolation from their communities. They require support for their long-term health and well-being, as well as to promote their future contribution to peaceful societies. The United States is committed to ensuring that children affected by conflict have the opportunity to thrive. We place a priority on life-saving child-protection programming, as well as support for longer-term recovery, resilience and healing. As a notable example, the United States has contributed $30 million to the Education Cannot Wait global fund, and we call on other international partners to do their part. The United States will continue to invest in preventive and responsive programming to protect children from violence. That will help empower children by creating the safe and protective environments they need and deserve, facilitating their access to essential social services, working with their families and other caregivers and ensuring their participation in peace processes that will positively shape their future for generations to come.
