Mr. Blanchard (Canada): Let me first offer
Canada's most sincere condolences to the family of the
deceased Russian Ambassador to Turkey, the members
of the Russian Federation diplomatic corps, and the
Government and the people of the Russian Federation.
Our thoughts and prayers are with them, and we all
share their pain and sadness.

(spoke in French)

I would like to thank the briefers for laying out the
multiple and complex challenges facing Afghanistan.

Canada fully supports an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process
and acknowledges the efforts made to date by the
Government of Afghanistan, despite the formidable
challenges that it faces. At the recent Brussels
Conference on Afghanistan, Canada renewed its
commitment to supporting Afghanistan's ambitions.
This year, Canada has committed $465 million for
Afghanistan for the period 2017-2020. That sum
includes $270 million for development assistance and
$195 million in security sector support. Canada will
continue to focus on women's and girls' rights in all
our health, education and human rights programmes
in Afghanistan.

We are pleased to see the Afghan Government's
commitment to the peace, stability and progress
of the country. We commend the constructive role
played by several political leaders in support of the
National Unity Government and the progress made
in the area of electoral reform. Canada welcomes the
peace agreement reached between the Government of
Afghanistan and Hezb-i Islami (Gulbuddin). We hope
that this agreement will be followed by a series ofpeace
agreements, including with the Taliban. We urge the
latter to renounce violence and come to the negotiating
table in good faith. A negotiated peace must respect
the Afghan Constitution and not be concluded at the
expense of the important gains made by and for Afghan
women. In that regard, Canada unconditionally supports
a meaningful role for women in peace negotiations at
all levels and in all areas.

(spoke in English)

If those present are to remember only one point
from my statement, let it be the role of women in
peace negotiations. I must register Canada's deep
concern over the continuing deterioration of security in
Afghanistan. We are dismayed by the toll on civilians.
Their displacement, increased vulnerability and losses
are unacceptable. We look to the constructive role that
neighbouring countries have offered to play, including
in General Assembly resolution 71/9 on Afghanistan
and at the sixth Ministerial Conference of the Heart of
Asia. In particular, we call on Afghanistan's neighbours
to work with the Government of Afghanistan to better
coordinate and manage the return of Afghan refugees.

Finally, I would be remiss if I did not also extend
Canada's sincere appreciation to the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011), Ambassador Gerard van
Bohemen. His leadership over the past two years
and the Committee's perspectives on how to advance
prospects for peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan
are invaluable. Canada welcomes the recommendations
made to further curtail the Taliban's activities. Those
include updating and strengthening the implementation
of sanctions measures, eliminating revenue flows to the
Taliban and engaging closely with the Government of
Afghanistan and regional actors. We look forward to
working with the incoming Chair, the Ambassador of
Kazakhstan, in carrying out those recommendations in
order advance peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan.

Canada stands with the Afghan people, especially
Afghan women and girls, as they strive for a more
secure, prosperous and peaceful future.

