Ms. Mindaoudou (spoke in French): I would like
to thank you and the members of the Security Council,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to present the latest
report (8/2017/89) of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Cote d'Ivoire and to brief the Council on
recent major developments in the country.

Since the previous time I briefed the Council (see S/PV.7601), a little more than a year ago, Cote d'Ivoire
has once again passed a test in its holding of democratic
elections, including a constitutional referendum on
30 October 2016 and elections to the legislature on
18 December. Despite a few protests in the run-up to
the referendum and some problems at various polling
stations during the legislative elections, the people
of Cote d'Ivoire voted peacefully and calmly. The
validation of the final results by the Constitutional
Council was carried out in a peaceful, orderly
atmosphere. All of the observer missions - national,
regional and international - agreed that the results
of the vote reflected the will of the electorate and that
the organization of the referendum and election was
transparent and trustworthy.

I would like take this opportunity to once again
commend the people of Cote d'Ivoire for their
determination to maintain a peaceful atmosphere
throughout the process; the national authorities,
including the Independent Electoral Commission, for
organizing both elections without major incident; and,
lastly, the security forces for doing their part to secure
the electoral process coolly and efficiently.

As I did prior to the presidential election of October
2015, in the period leading up to the constitutional
referendum and the legislative elections I used my
good offices to encourage the various stakeholders
to maintain an orderly environment conducive to the
election campaigns, which they did. In particular,
the women of Cote d'Ivoire took an active part in
the promotion and implementation of a non-partisan
approach to matters of national interest. Between the
2015 presidential election and the referendum and
legislative elections of 2015, they participated actively
in debates on social, economic, security and political
issues. A significant number also ran for office in the
legislative elections, and although the number of seats
held by women in the National Assembly decreased,
despite the new Constitution's proclamation of gender
parity, this bodes well for increased participation by
women in future elections and public office, among
other things. I would therefore like to pay tribute to
the tireless efforts of the Government, the majority and
opposition political parties, civil society, traditional,
religious and community leaders and women's and
youth groups.

The new Constitution, which launches a Third
Republic, and the new, representative Parliament that
resulted from inclusive elections afford C6te d'Ivoire
an opportunity and impetus to fully consolidate the
country's gains and establish long-term stability,
particularly if efforts are made to ensure that the
dividends of the economic recovery that has taken
place since the post-election crisis of 2010 and 2011
reach the people and enable them to benefit fully from
that growth.

While national reconciliation is making much
slower progress than the economic recovery, we are
still seeing notable advances. That is owed in part to
the publication of the report of the Dialogue, Truth and
Reconciliation Commission - as was recommended
by the Security Council in resolution 2226 (2015),
and which is a major step forward for the national
reconciliation process - and also to the upcoming
establishment of the new Senate, which could speed
up national reconciliation significantly. In addition
to that, the Government has continued to compensate
the victims of previous crises, unfreeze assets and
restore occupied properties. In his New Year's address,
President Ouattara also pardoned 2,942 detainees,
including some who had been imprisoned after the
post-electoral crisis. All of that has contributed to
positive momentum. Nonetheless, the prosecution of
those alleged to have committed crimes during the
post-election period is still feeble. In that regard, in
order to ensure Cote d'Ivoire's long-term stability, it is
crucial that investigations be carried out swiftly and in
full, if we are to create conditions in which all those
who committed serious abuses or violations of human
rights can be brought to justice, regardless of their
political affiliation.

On another front, the delays in prosecuting
alleged perpetrators of sexual abuse and gender-based
violence, and in providing care for their victims, despite
preventive efforts in that connection over the past 10
years, remains a concern. The timely adjudication of
such cases is critical to ensuring security and support
for victims, who represent the most vulnerable elements
of society - women and children.

The national police, gendarmerie and the armed
forces of Cote d'Ivoire were able to effectively secure
the referendum and legislative election despite certain
limitations and challenges. Although it is true that some
members of the armed forces revolted in January in
protest over their salaries and living standards - and
others from within the gendarmerie, corrections officers
and firefighters tried to follow suit, making the same
demands - those mutinies revealed that efforts must
continue to be made to enhance soldiers' standards of
living and to set up a professional army.

The expeditious implementation of the 2015 Law
on the Organization of the Defence Sector and the
Armed Forces of Cote d'Ivoire, the 2016-2020 Military
Planning Law and the 2016-2020 Domestic Security
Planning Law must successfully and definitively
address the grievances that were highlighted. The
January mutiny mirrored that of 18 November 2014,
in that the modus operandi was the same: the demands
were similar; both situations were settled in the same
way, through a negotiated agreement; and no soldier was
disciplined for insubordination. The implementation of
those laws are therefore integral to the transformation
of the security sector, which, inter alia, must touch
upon the themes of professionalism and responsibility.

It is therefore essential that the Government of Cote
d'Ivoire continue to prioritize the reform of the security
sector - military, gendarmerie and police - as well
as the sustainable reintegration of former combatants
into society, with support from its bilateral and
multilateral partners.

The security situation in Cote d'Ivoire remains
stable. Its national security institutions have
demonstrated their ability to effectively and even-
handedly address latent security threats, both within
and outside the country. Nevertheless, some challenges
remain with regard to the proper equipping and
financing of law enforcement agencies. Reported
human rights violations have also decreased over the
past five years.

In the past two years, the mission has supported the
National Human Rights Commission for C6te d'Ivoire
through institutional support and capacity-building at
the national and local levels, aimed at improving the
ability to monitor, investigate and report on human
rights violations and abuses, pursuant to the country's
legislation and international human rights treaties
ratified by Cote d'Ivoire. The Commission will then be
able to take over, among other things, the monitoring
and the implementation of the joint United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI)-Forces arme'es de
Cote d'Ivoire (FACI) mechanism, created on 24 August
2015, which seeks to enable swift action against any
allegation of soldiers committing human rights.

Since the adoption of resolution 2284 (2016),
we have worked closely with the Government, the
United Nations country team and key partners on
the development of a transition plan for UNOCI,
which was formally endorsed by stakeholders on
17 October 2016. It identifies residual priorities in
six key areas: social cohesion; human rights; security
sector reform; disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, weapons management and civilian
disarmament; defence, security and law enforcement;
and communications, particularly the transfer of
ONUCI FM. radio. I would like to praise the Ivorian
Government for its tireless efforts to ensure that the
transfer is carried out according to the recommendations
of the United Nations. In that regard, the plan also
identifies implementation partners and resource
requirements. The transfer of those priority functions
to the Government, the United Nations country team
and other partners is nearly complete.

Meanwhile, we are on schedule for the definitive
closure of UNOCI by 30 June. The civilian personnel
have been scaled back gradually and, by the end of
April only 159 will remain - of which 148 will work
exclusively on the physical closure of the mission. The
61 civilian, military and police field offices will be
fully closed by 15 February. The mission's assets are
being liquidated, in accordance with the plan drafted
and approved by Headquarters in New York. By that
date, the majority of the mission's uniformed personnel
will have left Cote d'Ivoire.

Major political milestones have been reached
with the successful holding of the referendum and
legislative elections in a peaceful environment.
Economically, the country continues to surge forward
with infrastructure works and increasing foreign
direct investment. However, we must bear in mind
that some challenges continue to require the attention
and engagement of the people and the Government
of Cote d'Ivoire and the support of their partners. In
particular, national reconciliation must be actively
pursued and transitional justice expedited; the security
sector needs to be overhauled, pursuant to applicable
laws; former combatants need to be sustainably
reintegrated into society; and the economic, social and
cultural rights of Ivorians must be promoted if we are
to avoid civil servants from making untimely demands
and carrying out crippling strikes and demonstrations.
Taken separately or together, all of those challenges
will determine Cote d'Ivoire's trajectory towards
lasting stability.

The departure of UNOCI is imminent, and only
four months away. Allow me to take this opportunity to
convey my appreciation and admiration to the Ivorian
people and the Government of C6te d'Ivoire for their
firm commitment to moving away definitively from the
past crisis to a future of peace and shared prosperity.
I would also like to appeal to our partners to continue
supporting the efforts of the Ivorian people, but
above all to continue supporting - in the very short
term - the implementation of the transition plan by
financing the identified activities for the consolidation
of the peacekeeping gains achieved by UNOCI during
its 14 years in Cote d'Ivoire. Only then will the United
Nations intervention in Cote d'Ivoire, through ONUCI,
be a real success story. On all of those issues, the
combined support of the Security Council, Member
States, international partners and the United Nations
country team remains essential to ensuring that Cote
d'Ivoire is headed irrevocably towards sustainable
peace and stability.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the troop- and police-contributing countries
for supporting the United Nations in the service of
peace and security. I commend UNOCI forces for their
courage and commitment. They have played a crucial
role in making that progress possible. Allow me also
to pay tribute to the military and civilian personnel
who made the ultimate sacrifice by giving their lives in
service to UNOCI.

Once again, I thank the members of the Security
Council for their invaluable support.

