Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): The
Government of Peru endorses the legal approach
requiring the Government of Iraq fully to comply with
all its obligations in the area of disarmament, including
the total elimination of its weapons of mass
destruction, according to the terms of resolution 1441
(2002) and the other applicable resolutions of the
Security Council. International norms also impose on
Iraq the obligation to cooperate with the United
Nations inspectors in an immediate, active and
unconditional fashion, as was stated by the Executive
Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission, Mr. Hans
Blix, in his report on Friday 14 February.

Unfortunately, we are still seeing a manifest lack
of cooperation from Iraq. The Government of Iraq must
understand once and for all that the only possibility
that it has of normalizing its relations with the
international community is immediate disarmament and
unconditional compliance with the Security Council
resolutions. Only such actions could be considered
by the international community as verifiable guarantees
that Iraq possesses no programmes or weapons of mass
destruction. Only in this way can we prevent the
authority and legitimacy of the United Nations from
being undermined.

The Government of Peru is convinced that
conflicts and threats to international peace and
security - as recently stated by the Secretary-General,

Mr. Kofi Annan - must be resolved pursuant to the
principles and mechanisms established in the Charter
of the United Nations. This means that the use of force,
as the Secretary-General has also asserted, must be
considered as the last available recourse, but it is also
important to note here that, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, it is also a legitimate
recourse in order to guarantee international peace and
security.
Current developments are putting to the test the
United Nations security system. But those
developments stem from the violation by the
Government of Iraq of the fundamental principles of
the Charter of the United Nations in attacking Kuwait
and, more recently, from its systematic refusal to
implement the measures for total disarmament of
weapons of mass destruction established by the
Security Council. More than a decade has elapsed, and
the problem still exists, jeopardizing the efficiency of
the system of collective security of this Organization.

It can be said that, as matters stand, the United
Nations and the international security system are being
put to the test.

Peru takes the View that the crisis must be
resolved within the normative framework of the United
Nations, in particular in the context of the decisions
taken by the Security Council, and that, as a matter of
priority, all possibilities for a peaceful solution must be
exhausted. We must do this. But such a peaceful
solution will also hinge on immediate, unilateral and
total disarmament on the part of the Government of
Iraq, according to the provisions and terms set by
resolution 1441 (2002).

The Government of Peru is aware of the complex
nature of the inspectors' verification task and of the
difficulty involved in arriving at unequivocal results in
their activities. However, at the same time it can be
inferred from their reports that the mandate of
complete and total disarmament of weapons of mass
destruction established by the Council has not been
complied with in full.

In this regard, my Government endorses the
demand for the full implementation of resolution 1441
(2002) within a set time frame. Time should not and
cannot be used to strip the resolutions of the Security
Council of all substance or useful effect.

