Mr. Schulz (Germany): As the host country of the Berlin Conference on Libya, we are very pleased to see Security Council endorse the conclusions of the Conference today. With the adoption of resolution 2510 (2020), the Council sends an important signal for peace in Libya that reaffirms the concrete commitments of all participants in the Berlin Conference. It is crucial for Libya that we are able to send this signal of unity.The adoption of the resolution is timely, just days before the inaugural meeting of the international follow-up committee to the Berlin Conference on Libya, to be held at a ministerial level chaired by German Foreign Minister Heiko Maas on 16 February on the margins of the Munich Security Conference. The international follow-up committee will coordinate efforts to ensure the implementation of the conclusions of the Berlin Conference. We are also encouraged by the progress made thus far in implementing some aspects of the Berlin Conference conclusions. We call upon the parties to continue their cooperation in the 5+5 Joint Military Commission in order to work out the conditions of the ceasefire. We also welcome the ongoing preparations for political talks and call for the inclusive participation and representation across all segments of Libyan society. While taking note of the meetings of the African Union High-Level Committee on Libya in Brazzaville and the session on Libya during the recent African Union summit in Addis Ababa, we welcome the ongoing efforts of the African Union in supporting the Berlin process. The African Union plays an important role in finally bringing peace to Libya. The implementation of the existing arms embargo remains key. There cannot be a sustainable military solution to the conflict in Libya. With today's resolution, the international community has once more demonstrated its resolve to hold violators accountable. We welcome that the resolution expressly denounces foreign interference in the conflict in Libya. The swift implementation of the Berlin conclusions is now crucial in the light of the ongoing violations of international humanitarian law and reports of mounting civilian casualties.
