Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): Let me begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
briefing today.

In recent weeks, there have been worrying reports
of an increase in the number of evictions, confiscations
and demolitions of Palestinian property in both East
Jerusalem and the West Bank. Homes and structures
in the Palestinian neighbourhoods of East Jerusalem
are being torn down and settlement activity continues
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory. Since
2009, more than 6,100 Palestinian structures have
been demolished, displacing more than 9,400 people.
Since 2009, no action has been taken to address
those injustices.

South Africa is particularly alarmed about the
continuing excavation of land beneath the Silwan
neighbourhood of East Jerusalem, whose population is
predominantly Palestinian. Such actions by the Israeli
Government cannot be tolerated. It is the responsibility
of the Security Council, as part of its duty to maintain
international peace and security, condemn those actions
and call on Israel to cease such actions with immediate
effect. Israel's persistent Violations of international law
and resolutions cannot transpire without comment or
action from the Security Council. The Security Council
should uphold its United Nations Charter-mandated
responsibilities and act accordingly.

Nelson Mandela stood unambiguously for the two-
State solution, in accordance with international law, as
captured in the resolutions of the Security Council, as
well as in the decisions of the International Court of
Justice. Tracing the history of South Africa and locating
it in an interconnected world, Nelson Mandela said,
"We know too well that our own freedom is incomplete
without the freedom of the Palestinians". Nelson
Mandela was also a friend of children and youth. In that
context, we would like to focus the rest of our statement
on the plight of the youth in Palestine and the impact of
the occupation on the lives of the new generation.

Palestinian young people comprise 27 per cent of
the total Palestinian population. Demographic trends
indicate that, in the future, youth will constitute an
ever-increasing proportion of Palestinian society. As a
result of the long-standing occupation by the State of
Israel, the daily reality facing the youth of Palestine is
one of oppression, violence and deprivation.

Military checkpoints and the illegal separation wall
have resulted in limited trade between Palestine and
other countries, particularly within the region, which
has reduced Palestinian employment opportunities and
limited the movement of people and goods alike in
and out of the West Bank and Gaza, all of which have
detrimental impacts on both the social and economic
welfare and the future of the youth of Palestine.

As a result of that alarming situation and driven
by desperation, an increasing number of Palestinian
young people are reconsidering their way of political
involvement. At the same time, we note that Palestinian
youth have positioned themselves at the forefront of
the ongoing Great March of Return, where they have
staged regular non-violent protests along the Gaza
border, even while bearing the brunt of a violent and
disproportionate Israeli response that has led to the
deaths of more than 200 unarmed demonstrators. Such
non-Violent activities prove that Palestinian youth want
to reclaim their legitimate aspirations in a considered
and thoughtful manner. They demonstrate their ability
to engage in peaceful activities to express their needs
and hopes.

We should harness that opportunity to become the
partners of Palestinian youth and acknowledge the role
they can play as agents of change in resolving the crisis
in their land. In that regard, we should also acknowledge
the important role that the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) plays in the lives of all Palestinians and, in
particular, in the lives of young people. South Africa
therefore welcomes the recent pledges made at the June
pledging conference in support ofUNRWA. We reaffirm
that such humanitarian support creates conditions
that contribute to easing the dire conditions of the
Palestinian people. Children in the region - be they
Palestinian, Israeli, Christian, Muslim or Jewish - all
have the right to live in peace and security alongside
one another.

In conclusion, as we mourn the untimely passing
yesterday of the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr. Yukiya
Amano, we praise his commitment to the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). The JCPOA
is a comprehensive international agreement that adds
much value to international peace and security. It
enhances transparency. Through a series of reports by
the IAEA, it also enhances confidence in the Iranian
nuclear programme.

