Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, Mr. President,
I wish to congratulate you on taking the initiative
of convening this important and far-reaching
open debate of the Security Council on the theme
"War, its lessons and the search for a permanent peace".
My delegation also expresses its appreciation to you
for the thought-provoking concept paper on that theme
(S/2014/40, annex). I should also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing.

I wish to begin by outlining Malaysia's commitment
as an active and strong partner in international efforts
to support peace. We were blessed with a peaceful
transition to independence in 1957, instilling in us a
belief in the peaceful resolution of conflicts via the
means stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations.
From the distant jungles of the Congo, less than three
years after our own independence, to the winters
of Bosnia and Herzegovina under United Nations
and NATO banners, and closer to home in Timor-
Leste, Malaysian peacekeepers are proud to have
been entrusted to participate in those and many other
multilateral peacekeeping operations.

From a regional perspective, Malaysia has
maintained a keen interest in taking a comprehensive
approach in addressing threats to regional security,
especially within the context of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations. In that regard, we have
been actively involved in facilitating peace talks and
constructive engagements, culminating in mutually
acceptable solutions such as the historical framework
agreement on 15 October 2012 between the Government
of the Philippines and the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front. Four days ago, the final and integral annexes to
that agreement were signed by both parties during a
landmark round of talks in Kuala Lumpur, paving the
way towards permanent peace in the region. Malaysia's
efforts to facilitate those important negotiations have
been recognized and commended by the Secretary-
General, the United States, the European Union and
members of the international contact group.

Malaysia also hosted the first Annual Asian
Peace and Reconciliation Council Meeting, from 11 to
12 November 2013, in Putrajaya. As Malaysian Prime
Minister, Dato' Sri Haji Mohammad Najib bin Tun
Haji Abdul Razak stated in his keynote address to that
forum, "We should be unafraid to use the power of
persuasion to counter the misguided rallying calls of the
extremists". That commitment to moderation from the
highest levels of Malaysia's leadership underlines our
conviction of the urgent need for common narratives to
address divergent perspectives in conflicts.

Responding to your suggestion, Sir, on the reverse
engineering of conflicts, Malaysia reiterates its long-
held beliefthat it is necessary to address the root causes
of such conflicts, be they underdevelopment, poverty,
political disputes, or the preservation of national,
socio-cultural and ethno-religious identities. Based
on our experiences, we would therefore submit that an
agreed or shared narrative could lead to undermining
the reason for conflicts, in particular those driven by
elements propagating an extremist or exclusionist point
of view. At the same time, my delegation is of the view
that we must continue to be guided by the principles of
international law in the persecution of those responsible
for such conflicts.

With regard to the specific suggestion to mandate
a United Nations historical advisory team to recover
or protect documents related to a shared historical
narrative, my delegation wishes to present the following
points to ponder.

It is our view that the involvement on the ground
of such a team should, in principle, depend upon the
request or concurrence of the host country. Malaysia has
already argued that nation-building programmes and
governmental reform cannot be imposed by external
entities; instead, such efforts must be inclusive, have
strong national ownership and, as well, possess a
legal mandate to lead change. However, that naturally
presents challenges should the host country itself be
one of the belligerent parties to the conflict, whereby it
could be in the interests of that host country to maintain
its own version of events.

In addition, we should be cautious in defining the
roles and capacities of the international community
when trying to implement such a step. It would be
detrimental to the interests of the United Nations if the
aims of its historical advisory teams were politically
motivated, as opposed to the work of independent and
impartial bodies. Furthermore, my delegation fears that
this process may lack transparency.

That notwithstanding, the important work of
collating a shared historical narrative of conflicts
should continue. In that regard, my delegation takes
note of the work of the Institute for Historical Justice
and Reconciliation, an institution that we believe has
benefited greatly from your personal participation,
