Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Nigerian presidency
of the Security Council for holding this debate on
regional organizations and contemporary challenges
of global security. I am also grateful for the concept
note (S/2015/599, annex) prepared on such an important
subject. We fully support it.

The founders responsible for the Charter of the
United Nations showed foresight in drafting Chapter VIII
of the Charter as the basis for a partnership between the
United Nations and the Security Council, as that body
responsible for international peace and security, on the
one hand, and regional and subregional organizations,
on the other. Given their important role in managing
and preventing conflicts, the seventieth anniversary of
the signing of the Charter is an opportunity to consider
these issues in the light of the increase in the number
of challenges and threats, which no party on its own
can face up to. Therefore, we need collective efforts
of a strategic nature to confront them. Egypt, which is
a founding Member of the United Nations and of two
major regional organizations - the African Union,
which is the largest in terms of membership and the
challenges it faces, and the League of Arab States,
which is one of the oldest regional organizations - has
always insisted on partnerships between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
order to face challenges. I would like to underscore the
following:

First, past experience has shown the comparative
advantage of regional organizations, including their
deep understanding of the underlying causes of
conflicts. That means that they play an important role
in terms of mediation and the peaceful settlement of
conflicts. They also have the capacity to take difficult,
even very difficult, decisions, to end conflicts at an
early stage when the international community may
be hesitant to intervene. The African Union and
subregional organizations in Africa cooperate on
Somalia, Darfur, Mali and the Central African Republic.
That demonstrates the capacity that Africa has to pay
the highest price to establish peace and security, while
respecting the need for there to be African solutions to
Africa's problems.

Secondly, the contemporary challenges to peace
and security, such as terrorism, organized crime,
piracy, arms and drug trafficking and trafficking in
natural resources are all cross-border in nature. They
are not limited to one single country, and they all pose
a threat to international security. Therefore, all those
problems need to be dealt with in a global manner,
as well as locally and internationally, in order to deal
with their security and humanitarian consequences. We
must also deal with the underlying causes. The post-
2015 development agenda could establish a proper
framework in that area.

Thirdly, the role of regional and subregional
organizations is not limited to peace and security. They
also play a role in the economic collective strategy
for sustainable development in order to ensure the
establishment of peace and stability. The report of the
High-level Independent Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446) shows the importance
played by regional organizations in preventive
diplomacy. The Panel has made a number of important
recommendations for cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in that context. The
report also servese to illustrate the importance such
bodies play in establishing and consolidating peace in
countries emerging from conflict.

In the light of all that, we must enhance the
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations - headed by the African Union and the
League of Arab States - so that everyone can benefit
from the respective comparatives advantage, while
duly allocating responsibilities through a plan of work
that enhances regional capacities and consultation
mechanisms. That would allow for the establishment
of a joint strategy that brings together the efforts
of the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. Accordingly, we reiterate the importance
of the support provided by the United Nations to regional
organizations, including the African Union through the
Ten-Year Capacity Building Programme, which will
end in 2016. Such support includes that provided for
the African Standby Force to help develop a vision for
the future. We therefore emphasize the importance
of the the current recommendations and those set out
in the 2008 Prodi report (S/2008/813) with regard to
peackeeping operations in which the African Union
participates via a Security Council mandate, while of
course taking into account the United Nations and the
Security Council's responsibility with regard to peace
and security.

I would like to point to the Sharm El-Sheikh
declaration adopted last year on establishing a joint
Arab peacekeeping force for Arab countries in order
to confront any challenge faced by them, including any
threat to Arab national security coming from terrorist
and other groups. We were among the first to establish
such a force.

With regard to the efforts being made to settle
problems faced by the Arab region, the same Sharm El-
Sheikh summit adopted a resolution that conferred upon
Egypt the chairmanship of a committee to do whatever
necessary to halt the Israeli occupation and come up
with a solution to the Palestinian question. Given the
changing nature of the security problems faced by the
world today, Egypt would like to reiterate the fact that
a deeper and broader partnership at the regional level is
of vital importance.

