Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Sir, for having convened this meeting. I also thank
the Special Envoy for her briefing and I offer her our
full support.

The immediate challenges posed by Ebola virus
disease in West Africa have attracted much of the
international community's attention in recent months.
However, it is important that we do not lose sight of a
subregion that faces its own particular concerns and is
thus far managing to avoid a full-blown assault from
Ebola.

Almost two years on from the beginning of the
crisis in Mali, the Sahel region remains on the front line
in the struggles against jihadist terrorists - such as
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Ansar Eddine and the
Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa - drug-
trafficking and organized crime, food insecurity and
poverty, and political instability. As we have seen
with recent events in Burkina Faso, the Sahel region
needs the support of the international community if
it is to stay on the path to long-lasting security and
development. That means not only responding to crises
effectively i and I commend the leadership of the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States in Burkina Faso - but also taking early
preventative action to avoid instability and violence,
and in this area we must do better.

Success in resolving the Mali crisis continues to
elude us. In 2014, 31 members of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) have been killed and almost
100 wounded in attacks by terrorists. I commend
the brave MINUSMA peacekeepers, in particular
those from Chad, who face such terrorist threats on a
daily basis. Attacks against United Nations staff are
totally unacceptable. While work is under way in the
Council to strengthen the Mission's capabilities and
its resilience to the terrorist threat, that alone will not
address the underlying causes of the crisis. Only a
political settlement will enable Mali to move forward to
a peaceful future. I commend the work of Algeria and
other mediators in bringing the parties to the negotiating
table. But let us be clear that the responsibility falls to
the parties themselves to find the peace that Mali's
citizens deserve. It is important that they redouble
their efforts, work in a spirit of compromise and joint
endeavour, and find practical arrangements that will
enable the citizens of Mali to pick up their lives once
again.

The challenges facing the Sahel come from both
within and outside the region. To the South, the barbaric
behaviour of Boko Haram has shocked the world, yet it
has also brought Nigeria and her neighbours, the Niger,
Chad and Cameroon, to a better understanding of and
cooperation on mutual security. The United Kingdom is
supporting, and will continue to support, this important
work.

To the north, the prolonged struggle in Libya
continues to have repercussions for the Sahel, and
the growth of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
could threaten the region further. Meanwhile the
trafficking in weapons and narcotics across porous
borders continues to damage the social fabric and
prevent States from governing effectively. In the face
of these challenges, United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel provides a strong framework to enable
the region to tackle these diverse challenges. Its three
pillars, of governance, security and resilience, remain,
in our view, the right ones. Yet much more can be done
to implement the strategy's priorities. A the Special
Envoy highlighted this morning, governance is critical.
We must work with Sahel States to strengthen human
rights, including the rights of women, and help to build
their capacity to deliver core services, particularly
outside the urban areas.

On security, we must continue to build States'
capacity to tackle organized crime, counter terrorism
and manage borders more effectively. The work of the
Global Counterterrorism Forum and the creation of the
Group of Five Sahel can help to develop more effective
regional approaches.

On resilience, we need to upstream work on
developing food security, including preparing for shocks
through regional cooperation. With a further United
Nations appeal for the Sahel expected in February next
year, the risks of not doing this important work are
clear to see. The United Kingdom recently announced
a multi-year assistance programme for the Sahel worth
more than $160 million.

In coordinating international work on the Sahel,
the Special Envoy will have a important role to play. As
she takes forward the implementation of the integrated
strategy into 2015, she and her team in Dakar will have
the United Kingdom's full support.

