Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
On behalf of the Government of Cote d'Ivoire, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General and the members of
the Security Council for their significant contribution
towards the restoration of peace and stability in my
country.

Since the signing of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement at Accra, political developments overall
have been relatively satisfactory. A Government of
reconciliation has been formed and is meeting on a
weekly basis, with a Government council meeting on
Tuesdays and a council of ministers meeting on
Thursdays. Having seen the Government at work, I can
say to the Council that the general working atmosphere
is very good. The ministers, who are drawn from all the
political spheres, are determined to make an effort to
move Cote d'Ivoire towards peace and stability. The
Government's first important decision pertains to
security in cote d'Ivoire. The Government has
therefore banned all demonstrations which are
accompanied by violence. It has also banned all
militias and so-called self-defence committees.

A meeting of the Government council was held
today at Abidjan. The Government has taken the
decision to mobilize combat helicopters. We have
noted that there are increasingly fewer violations of the
ceasefire on the front lines. The Government is now
establishing security corridors to promote exchanges
between Cote d'Ivoire and neighbouring countries. In
that context, the Minister of Trade has already visited
Niger, Burkina Faso and Mali in order to gain the
support of those Governments so that trade can be
established with those countries as soon as possible.
The Government has also sent a delegation to Burkina
Faso so that we may very soon initiate train service
between Abidjan and Ouagadougou.

The people of Cote d'Ivoire are aware of their
country's role in the subregion. We are also aware of
the fact that the problems in Cote d'Ivoire are affecting
all the neighbouring countries of the subregion. It is for
that reason that we would solemnly like to say here that
the Government will abide by all of its international
commitments, in particular with the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement of Kleber and Accra. However, despite the
Government's efforts, the situation continues to be
fragile. It is not easy to restore confidence among
belligerent forces in a very short period. But the
Government is determined to make the march towards
peace irreversible, and it has made reconciliation
among Ivorians and between Ivorians and their
neighbours a reality.

Our concern today is with the situation in the
western part of the country, where there are rebels from
Liberia and Sierra Leone. It can be said that there is
war in that part of the country today.

On the diplomatic level, the heads of State of
Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia met two days ago in Kara,
Togo. One of the main decisions to come out of that
meeting concerned the interposition of forces along the
700 kilometre border between Cote d'Ivoire and
Liberia. Those forces will essentially be composed of
national forces from Cote d'Ivoire, and forces from
Liberia, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Peace Force for Cote d'Ivoire
(ECOFORCE) and France in the context of Operation
Unicorn. The second decision was to hold a meeting,
either today or tomorrow, between the chiefs of staff of
the Liberian and Ivorian armies in order to implement
the first decision, to which I have just referred.

A second major concern pertains to the flow of
small weapons in the region. This is a factor for
destabilization. For that reason, we believe that what is
occurring in Cote d'Ivoire could take place in any
country if nothing is done to control the dissemination
of such weapons in the subregion.

That was a brief summary of the situation. I
should like to say that we need the ongoing assistance
of the Security Council and of the entire international
community in order for us quickly to emerge from this
crisis situation and for peace and stability to be
restored to C6te d'Ivoire and to the subregion. Cote
d'Ivoire needs ECOFORCE, and we hope that it will
remain in Cote d'Ivoire until the upcoming elections in
2005.

We hope also that, with the support of the
international community and with the presence of
ECOFORCE, we will be able to implement all the
provisions of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement in an
atmosphere of peace and calm. We keenly hope that the
international community will agree to contribute to
ECOFORCE, so that it can play its role side by side
with the French soldiers of Operation Unicorn.

