Mr. Ele Ela (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): In taking the floor on this particular agenda
item, we would like to once again welcome Ms. Fatou
Bensouda and thank her for her report, which is
virtually the same as the preceding one on the most
recent judicial activities and ongoing investigations of
the Office of the Prosecutor and on the specifics of the
issue of cooperation on the Darfur issue. According
to the document circulated, which we have studied
carefully, there have been no significant changes since
the previous report of the Office of the Prosecutor,
and while it states that the research team has made
significant progress, it does not clarify what that
progress is. I am sure everyone here would be interested
in a clarification about what is new in the report and
the most significant developments that have occurred
in the reporting period.

We are pleased about the gradual improvements in
the security situation, but we deplore the armed clashes
that occurred in southern Jebel Marra in September and
that resulted in further displacements and the killing of
10 civilians in Gubbo. We also condemn the attacks on
civilians, sexual violence against women and internally
displaced persons. In that regard, we appeal to the
international community and the parties to the conflict
to work to improve the living standards and restore
dignity to the people of Darfur.

With regard to the fugitives sought by the
International Criminal Court, the report cites Equatorial
Guinea as one of the countries visited by President
Omar Hassan Al-Bashir of the Sudan. Certainly, as
Head of State, he was invited to Malabo along with his
counterparts to celebrate and commemorate the fiftieth
anniversary of the independence of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea on 12 October. In that regard, I
would like to make it clear that Equatorial Guinea is
not a party to the Rome Statute or to the International
Criminal Court. We therefore do not accept or endorse
the selective prosecution policies applied by the Court,
which do not even take into consideration the respect
and immunity due to Heads of State in the full exercise
of their functions, as in the case of President Al-Bashir.
We believe that such actions and approaches hinder
cooperation with the Court whether by States that are
party to the Rome Statute or those that are not, and that
they cast doubt on the Court's credibility.

