Mr. Ahsan (Bangladesh): We, too, are grateful to
you, Sir, for scheduling this important and timely
meeting on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine.

The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories and East Jerusalem has been deteriorating
for some time now. Mindless violence continues and
the defenceless Palestinian population bears the brunt,
with hundreds dead, thousands injured and properties
destroyed. My delegation would like to express sincere
condolences to the families of the victims.

Excessive use of force has fuelled the dangerous
escalation of violence. The policy of collective
punishment, inflicted by Israel through the imposition
of a blockade and closures, is crippling the economy.
This has caused intense hardship, unemployment and
deprivation. The net result has been a worrisome crisis
of confidence, leading to what the Secretary-General
has characterized as the unravelling of the progress that
had been made between Israelis and Palestinians in
moving towards a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace.

The Security Council cannot watch this situation
continue, as it only strengthens those who do not want
peace. We believe, first of all, that further escalation of
violence must be prevented. The onus is on those who
insist on using lethal force on civilians. The
commitment to peace has to be demonstrated in
practice by reversing these actions on the ground. As
the situation deteriorates, the Security Council must
re-engage itself and continue to explore a way out of
this crisis, which is truly an international one, as the
Ambassador of the United Kingdom reaffirmed today.
We believe that the proposal to establish an
international observer force is a good basis for the
Council's deliberations and we fully support it.

In our View, the Council is unanimous on the
need for the immediate and unconditional lifting of the
economic blockade. We agree with the Secretary-
General that donor assistance is absolutely critical to
alleviating the hardship of the Palestinian population.
We appreciate the role that the European Union has
played in this regard and encourage it to continue its
assistance.

Nobody is under the illusion that the negotiation
of a final settlement is easy. However, the parties must
be encouraged to continue efforts to achieve their
objective through peaceful negotiation. We also believe
that it is important to preserve the gains made by the
painful efforts of both sides to date and to build upon
that. The initiative of the Deputy Prime Minister of
Israel to come to the Council was appreciated by all
here yesterday. We believe that it is a clear recognition
by Israel of the Council's role in this issue. That role is
as relevant today as it was at the time of the adoption
of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), which together constitute the framework for a
final settlement.

Bangladesh strongly supports the Secretary-
General's role in facilitating the Sharm el-Sheikh
understanding. We believe that he can also play a
constructive role in helping both sides return to the
negotiating table. The Security Council must work
towards that end.
