Mr. Panayotov (Bulgaria): At the outset, allow me to express my county's gratitude to Viet Nam, Deputy Prime Minister Pham Binh Minh, and to you, Mr. President, for convening today's open debate dedicated to a fundamentally important topic - upholding the United Nations Charter for the maintenance of international peace and security. It is a privilege and honour for me to be here today to engage in this discussion. My country fully aligns itself with the statement delivered by the observer of the European Union (see S/PV.8699). Seventy-five years ago, the drafters of the Charter of the United Nations wisely and humbly acknowledged that global peace and security can be restored and sustained only by collective efforts. They, who twice in their lifetimes suffered the devastating effects of war, managed to choose the path of cooperation, instead of confrontation, and to set the foundation of a new, more just and rules-based global order. The United Nations and its Charter are the legacy and the promise to future generations that all peace-loving nations will be equal and have the right and responsibility to settle their international disputes by non-violent means. Since then, our world has faced multiple shifts. Despite the ever-changing circumstances, the United Nations Charter, particularly its purposes and principles, has proved its role as a cornerstone in upholding the international rule of law and maintaining global peace and security. To keep the momentum, and for our common benefit, we need to reconfirm its relevance and validity on the eve of its seventy-fifth anniversary. Nowadays, we witness security challenges of an increasingly complex nature. Just a few days ago, the Secretary-General stated that geopolitical tensions are at their highest level since the beginning of the new millennium. This is particularly relevant for the Middle East, where utmost restraint and de-escalationare crucial now to prevent violence from spiralling out of control and developments that may have detrimental consequences. Addressing some of the newly arising threats, such as terrorism, violent extremism, asymmetric and hybrid attacks, space and cyberwarfare, requires qualitatively new levels of international cooperation and dialogue, whose foundations lie at the core of the United Nations system and its Charter. In addition to our commitment to the United Nations Charter, Bulgaria has lent its full support to the Alliance for Multilateralism and Good Human Rights Stories, two recently launched initiatives that further contribute to building a stable and secure world. Against the backdrop of the current international tensions, the Republic of Bulgaria shares the deep concern about the crisis of multilateralism. Many multilateral agreements and institutions, including those in the field of non-proliferation and arms control, which for years have served us well, now suffer from lack of consensus, stalemate and even violations. We firmly believe that only through multilateralism will our nations be able to preserve international security and stability and build upon the achievements of the rules-based global system. The moment is critical, and active engagement and concerted collective efforts are needed now more than ever. With a view to strengthening multilateralism, Bulgaria also stresses the importance of good- neighbourly relations, regional stability and mutual cooperation and puts special emphasis on finding and implementing definitive, inclusive and binding solutions to bilateral disputes in the Western Balkans and on dedicating additional efforts to reconciliation. Today's commitment to respecting and upholding the United Nations Charter will be our nations' joint legacy for succeeding generations. Commemorating the sixty-fifth anniversary of its membership in the United Nations, the Republic of Bulgaria joins all those who continue to advocate global peace, international rule of law, respect for human rights and mutually benefiting sustainable development.
