Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you Mr. President - Minister
Yun Byung-se, member of the Cabinet of the first
woman President of the Republic of Korea, President
Park Geun-Hye - for your initiative in convening
this meeting on an issue of such great importance
for the international community, especially on such a
meaningful date as the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004). I should also like to thank
Mr. Jan Eliasson for his statement and his briefing. I
also want to congratuate you Sir, for the excellent work
being done by Ambassador Oh Joon and his team in the
chairmanship of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), thereby continuing the
outstanding work done by his predecessor, the fondly
remembered Ambassador Kim Sook. Above all, Sir, I
commend you for your national commitment behind the
effort to achieve the universal submission of reports by
Member States. You and your delegation have the full
support of my country, both during your presidency of
the Security Council as well as in the 1540 Committee.

In addition, allow me to say that Argentina resolutely
supports presidential statement S/PRST/2014/7,
adopted this morning. As we mark 10 years since the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), this debate provides
an opportunity to highlight the challenges as well as
a chance for each of our countries to take stock in
connection with this issue.

Having already referred to this, I should also like
to point to the constructive efforts that were long
made by members of the Security Council, as well as
by countries not serving on the Council, to arrive at
resolution 1540 (2004). I should like to point out that
our colleague Rosemary DiCarlo was working at that
time with a great deal of commitment towards the
adoption of the resolution. All permanent members
of the Council have worked, and continue to work, on
efforts to support those standards.

I should like to emphasize the two pillars of my
country's approach, as a State policy, to resolution 1540
(2004). The first is respect for the sovereign right of
States to the development and peaceful use of advanced
technologies, and the second calls for disarmament and
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

Argentina has submitted its report on its activities
related to the implementation of the resolution adopted
in 2004, and has also described what it has done in
subsequent years. In 2009, we were the second country
to present a national action plan. We are currently
working on updating that document.

I would like, once again, to reaffirm the sovereign
right of countries to the development and use of sensitive
and dual-use technologies in advanced industrial
sectors, including in nuclear, chemical, biological,
pharmaceutical, space and nanotechnologies, among
other areas, in coordination with the State and private
sectors, in the case of my country, and as a means of
achieving the development of our industries.

Argentina is actively involved in the initiatives of
the international community to achieve a world free of
nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction of
any kind, and it upholds the principle of a total ban on
the development, possession, acquisition, transfer or
use of such weapons by State and non-State actors.

As mentioned, Argentina has made significant
progress in the peaceful uses of dual-use technologies.
Even before 2004, we had implemented a series of
national and international control measures. Following
the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), my country
expanded those measures in relation to non-State actors
and joined regional and global actions in that area.

Argentina is party to the legal instruments
that constitute the pillars of the disarmament
and non-proliferation agenda: the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical
Weapons Convention, the Biological Weapons
Convention and the International Code of Conduct
against Ballistic Missile Proliferation.

Argentina is convinced that an effective system of
export controls must be based upon four fundamental
pillars. First, we need a transparent and standardized
national system for licensing. Secondly, there should
be effective compliance with the current legislation
applicable to export controls. Thirdly, we should
promote corporate awareness of the importance of the
system for industrial development and for security in
international trade. Fourthly, there should be close
regional cooperation.

Reflecting its commitment to disarmament and
non-proliferation, my country is the only one in our
region that is part of the five control regimes for
sensitive exports - the Australia Group, on chemical
and biological material, the Zangger Committee, the
Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Missile Technology
Control Regime, in space technology, and the
Wassenaar Arrangement in the field of conventional
arms. We have hosted many events in our country, the
idea being to ensure true cooperation on the regional
and international levels on this agenda.

At the national level, the lists and criteria that have
come out of those regimes nourish the work of our
national commission for the control of sensitive exports
and military material, which has been in operation for
over 20 years.

In addition, Argentina has ratified the Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and
the amendment to article 5. We are in the advanced
stages of legislative consideration of the adoption of the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism. In that regard, cooperation between
the Inter-Parliamentary Union and the 1540 Committee
has been valuable.

In its commitment to the peaceful use of
technology and non-proliferation, since 2010 and the
inception of the Nuclear Security Summit, Argentina
has actively joined the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism. We are working to strengthen our
capacity to control our ports and have become part of
the Megaports Initiative.

In the area of cooperation, we might mention
what has been done in our region to generate a culture
of security with trained human resources and the
necessary infrastructure and equipment, all of which
are necessary to bring about a culture of security.
I would like to refer to the workshops we have held,
within the framework of South-South cooperation, on
the control of weapons and dual-use technology. A
regional meeting for education about chemical weapons
was held, and an Argentine programme was prepared
for the responsible use of dual-use chemicals.

Finally, within the framework of the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, there will be in
August a cabinet-level exercise, held with Chile, on the
response to, and mitigation of, acts of nuclear terrorism.
Other members of the Initiative will also be present.

On the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004), we believe that it is necessary
to reaffirm that there are no good weapons of mass
destruction, where some others are bad. As expressed
by the Secretary-General in his statement of 28 April
(see S/PV.7161), there are no right hands that can handle
these wrong weapons.

We believe that the significant efforts of the
international community in the areas of physical
protection, export controls and combating illicit
trafficking in dual-use technologies will achieve
only limited success globally as long as there remain
stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction. For that
reason, we believe that there should be universal and
strict compliance with the existing treaties by all States
and under equal conditions. The only way to ensure
that weapons of mass destruction do not fall into the
wrong hands is through their total elimination.

