The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Togo.

I would like to thank Mr. Abou Moussa for his very
detailed briefing and to commend once again the work
he carries out as Head of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).

The report presented to us today (S/2013/297)
makes it clear that progress has been made in recent
months in strengthening democracy, the rule of law
and political and economic governance. Elections have

been organized in one country in particular and efforts
are being made to strengthen economic growth.

The same goes for the upcoming summit in
Cameroon on the subject of piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea, pursuant to resolution 2039 (2012). We believe
that all efforts must be made to ensure the success of
that summit.
Unfortunately, every time we hear of some
encouraging progress, especially in countries emerging
from armed conflicts, new cycles of violence emerge
elsewhere, as if to remind us that the path to lasting
peace is long and rife with ambushes. The recent crisis
in the Central African Republic and the tragedy taking
place there are a perfect illustration of this, so much so
that many agree that that country became a failed State
in only a few days following the attack by Seleka.

Against that backdrop, it is urgent for the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, to consider the appropriate measures to take,
in particular on the security and humanitarian fronts,
with a View to helping the country to recover. In that
regard, one such measure would be to adopt individual
sanctions against the rebels responsible, who must
answer for their actions before judicial institutions.

We welcome the decision just announced by the
African Union to establish a rapid intervention force,
which should be operational in the immediate future
thanks to the contributions of troops, material support
and financing from South Africa, Uganda and Ethiopia.

With regard to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the international community has exhibited an
unprecedented level of mobilization over recent months
to come to the aid of that country. The recent mission
carried out by the Secretary-General to the country and
other States of the region is the most tangible proof of
that.

Togo wishes to repeat its thanks to all of the actors
involved in seeking a lasting solution to the recurrent
conflict in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The tireless efforts of the Secretary-
General, the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern
African Development Community in that regard are
praiseworthy.

My country remains convinced that with the
political process that is being supported by all of the
countries of the region, and, most recently, by the
military component deployment of the Intervention
Brigade, peace and security could be reestablished in the
region as long as all parties respect their commitments
and effective and coordinated follow-up on the new
strategy is ensured.

That is why we regret and condemn the resumption
of hostilities, on 20 May, between the Congolese army
and the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23). We encourage
the Congolese Government to remain engaged in the
Kampala talks and we appeal to the M-23 to return to
the negotiating table without delay to swiftly conclude
a peace agreement.

The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) continues to
pose a genuine threat to the civilian population, and to
women and children in particular, in the areas where
this armed group operates. The report of the Secretary-
General confirms that, although weakened, this armed
group retains enough force to pose a threat, especially
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Central African Republic.

Despite all that, the fight against the LRA continues
on all fronts, as reflected by the fact that no attacks by
this criminal group have been recorded in South Sudan
since the latter half of 2011, thanks in particular to the
efforts made by the Government of that country, its
various partners and the civilian population.

Moreover, the international community has become
aware that the struggle against the LRA cannot be only
a military one, but must also be fought on the judicial
front. That is why my delegation believes that the
success of this fight will require, among other things,
the capture of the leader of the LRA, Joseph Kony, and
his principal lieutenants, and their delivery to trial. In
that regard, it is important for all States of the region
to cooperate with the International Criminal Court to
apply as swiftly as possible the international arrest
warrants issued against these criminals, whose arrest
would allow, without a doubt, the swift surrender of
fighters, who would then have to be incorporated into
an effective disarmament, demobilization, repatriation
and reintegration process.

In the context ofcontinuing efforts, we also welcome
the Secretary-General's submission to the Council, on
19 April, of the implementation plan to support the
United Nations regional strategy to address the threat
and impact of the Lord's Resistance Army (S/2013/240, annex). It is important that the various actions taken in
the context ofthe fight against the LRA be accompanied
on the socioeconomic front with appropriate measures,
in particular by the Governments of the countries
concerned and their partners, to sustainably address
critical problems created by extreme poverty and youth
unemployment, which are both potential threats to

peace and security.

The role of key actors in the fight against the LRA,
in particular of the United States of America, the United
Kingdom, Germany and the European Union, remains
crucial for containing the threat posed by this criminal
group, especially in terms of financing and logistics.
Beyond the criminal acts of the LRA, we also
express our concern about the poaching and massacring
of elephants, which are taking place in some countries
in the region, and the subsequent sale of ivory that
constitutes a source of funding for criminal and rebel
groups. We therefore encourage the States concerned
to strengthen, with the support of their partners, the
security measures around parks and other protected
areas where these animals live.

The causes of recurrent conflicts in Africa, in
particular in Central Africa, are well known. The
numerous meetings of the Security Council devoted to
this subject have taken decisions to bring them to an
end. What remains is for the international community,
including the Council, to take further conflict-
prevention measures, which have the advantage of
being less costly in human, material and financial
resources than peacekeeping operations and the fight
against criminal groups.

To respond in general to the recurrent crises in the
region, we believe that the international community
should above all maintain a high-level of vigilance
and react swiftly to early-warning signs of renewed
instability in these countries.

I would like to conclude by paying tribute to the
staff of UNOCA and to all United Nations, African
Union and subregional organization missions that
are working tirelessly to ensure the maintenance and
consolidation of peace and security in Central Africa.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
condemnation of the attacks and atrocities carried
out by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) and its
violations of international humanitarian law and
abuses of human rights. The Council condemns
further the LRA's recruitment and use of children in
armed conflict, killing and maiming, rape, sexual
slavery and other sexual violence, and abductions.
The Council demands an immediate end to all
attacks by the LRA and urges the LRA to release
all those abducted, disarm and demobilize.

"The Security Council welcomes the
conclusions of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict adopted on 19 April 2013,
concerning the situation of children and armed
conflict affected by the Lord's Resistance Army.
The Council calls for their full implementation.

"The Security Council welcomes the
development of the implementation plan for the
United Nations regional strategy to address the
threat and impact of the activities of the LRA as
well as other strategic documents. The Council
urges the United Nations Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), in its coordination role, as well as the
United Nations political and peacekeeping missions
in the region and other relevant United Nations
presences, to enhance their efforts in support of the
implementation of the strategy, as appropriate and
within the limits of their mandates and capacities.
The Security Council also calls on the international
community to provide assistance where possible.

"The Security Council reiterates its support for
the African Union Regional Cooperation Initiative
against the LRA, welcomes the finalization of the
concept of operations and other strategic documents
required for the operationalization of the African
Union Regional Task Force, and encourages the
deployment of child-protection advisers. The
Council urges all regional Governments to fulfil
their commitments under the Initiative, and
encourages neighbouring States to cooperate with
it, in order to end the LRA threat. The Council
further encourages all States in the region to

take measures to ensure that the LRA is not able
to operate with impunity in their territory. The
Council underlines the need for all military action
against the LRA to be conducted in compliance with
applicable international law, including international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee
law, and to minimize the risk ofharm to civilians in
those areas. The Council welcomes the steps taken
to deliver an enhanced, comprehensive and more
regional approach to the humanitarian situation,
including assistance to Victims of sexual Violence
and other attacks, and urges further progress in this
regard.

"The Security Council underlines the primary
responsibility of States in the LRA-affected region
to protect civilians. In this regard, the Council
welcomes the efforts undertaken by the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Republic of South Sudan and Uganda to
end the threat posed by the LRA, and urges further
efforts from these countries, as well as from other
countries in the region. In this regard, the Security
Council encourages those countries affected by
the LRA that have not yet done so to establish
standard operating procedures for the reception
and handover of LRA children to civilian child-
protection actors.

"The Council expresses concern at the recent
pause of counter-LRA operations in the Central
African Republic in the context of the current
crisis in the country due to the seizure of power by
force, on 24 March 2013, by the Sele'ka coalition
as well as the ensuing violence and looting,
which worsened the humanitarian and security
situation and weakened the institutions of the
Central African Republic. Recognizing the need
in the short term for the transitional authorities
of the Central African Republic, the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS),
the African Union (AU) and the United Nations to
strengthen their coordination to solve the current
crisis in the Central African Republic as soon as
possible, and emphasizing that those responsible
for any abuses or violations of human rights or
Violations of international humanitarian law must
be held accountable, the Council encourages
continued coordination to allow regional counter-
LRA operations to resume in the Central African
Republic as soon as possible. In this regard, the
Council calls on the transitional authorities in
the Central African Republic to uphold their
commitment to the AU Regional Task Force and
allow regional counter-LRA operations to resume
without hindrance. The Security Council underlines
its appreciation for Uganda's steadfast commitment
and leadership to counter the LRA.

"The Council welcomes the efforts of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) in tackling the LRA. In this context,
the Council encourages further and reinforced
efforts by MONUSCO to tackle the LRA, including
through training and capacity-building of the
Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo, support to the Joint Information Operations
Centre, and implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration (DDRRR) programme to encourage
and facilitate further LRA defections.

"The Council notes the mandate of
MONUSCO and the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) to help protect civilians
in LRA-affected areas in their respective countries,
and urges their continued efforts to implement this
mandate, as well as the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic (BINUCA)
to cooperate and share swiftly information related
to the regional threat of the LRA. The Council
stresses the need for enhanced cross-border
coordination, including through the adoption of
common standard operating procedures and swift
information-sharing between these missions, as
well as among all other actors in the region, to
better anticipate LRA movements and imminent
threats of attack. The Council expresses concern
about the continued reports of LRA attacks in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo during the first
quarter of 2013, and calls on those MONUSCO
forces operating in LRA-affected areas to reinforce
their efforts to target and promote defections from
the LRA through active patrols and increased
information-sharing.

"The Security Council takes note of reports
suggesting the existence of an LRA base in the
disputed enclave of Kafia Kinga, on the border of

the Central African Republic and between South
Sudan and the Sudan.

"The Council encourages the United Nations,
the AU and ECCAS to work together, including
throughjoint field assessments, to develop a common
operating picture of the LRA's current capabilities
and areas of operation, as well as to investigate the
LRA's logistical networks and possible sources of
military support and illicit financing, including
alleged involvement in elephant poaching and
related illicit smuggling. The Council calls on the
Secretary-General to report on possible findings
in his reports on the implementation of the United
Nations counter-LRA strategy.

"The Council urges MONUSCO, BINUCA,
UNMISS and other United Nations actors in
the LRA-affected region to continue to work
with regional forces and non-governmental
organizations to promote a common approach to
defections and support the DDRRR efforts across
the LRA-affected area. The Council highlights
the importance of programmes in support of the
release, return and successful reintegration of
children abducted by the LRA, in particular those
targeting community acceptance of such children.

"The Security Council commends efforts
by international donors to provide humanitarian
assistance to LRA-affected populations in the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo and the Republic of South Sudan. The
Council reaffirms the requirement for all parties to
allow safe and unhindered access for humanitarian
organizations to the civilian population, in
accordance with international law, including
applicable international humanitarian law, and the
United Nations guiding principles for humanitarian
assistance. The Council expresses concern about
the lack of regular humanitarian access to many
LRA-affected communities in the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including because of poor infrastructure,
and encourages increased United Nations efforts
and international donor support for humanitarian
access.

"The Security Council recalls that the
International Criminal Court's arrest warrants
for Joseph Kony, Okot Odhiambo and Dominic
Ongwen on charges of, inter alia, war crimes and
crimes against humanity, including murder, rape
and forced enlistment of children, have yet to be
enforced, and calls upon all States to cooperate with
relevant national authorities and the International
Criminal Court, in accordance with their respective
obligations, in order to implement those warrants
and to bring to justice those responsible.

"The Security Council requests that the

Secretary-General keep it informed on the activities
of UNOCA, the progress of implementation of the
regional strategy and the efforts being undertaken
respectively by missions in the region and other
relevant United Nations agencies to that end,
including through a single report on UNOCA and
the LRA to be submitted before 15 November
2013."

This statement will be issued as a document of the

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2013/6.

There are no further speakers inscribed on the list

of speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at12.35p.m.
