Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this emergency meeting to discuss the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories.

We regret having had to witness the Israeli
Government's recent escalation of events at a time
when the international community is trying to maintain
the momentum of the progress made in the past few
weeks, in order to advance the peace process. The
Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
expresses its condemnation of and dismay at the latest
Israeli aggression in Gaza, which caused the death of
15 and the injury of more than 150. That act is a
flagrant violation of the principles of international
humanitarian law.

I will not be giving away any secrets if I recall
the difficult circumstances under which the Palestinian
leadership is living, the daily humiliation of the
Palestinian people under siege, closures and the strict
curfew imposed on them by the occupying forces. The
Palestinians under occupation have never felt secure;
nor have they lived normal lives that we all live.
Mistrust, humiliation and fear have been the defining
elements of the people of Palestine for more than 35
years.

Israel continues to commit war crimes against
Palestinian civilians. It undertakes internationally
condemned extrajudicial assassinations. It deliberately
uses excessive force and imposes collective
punishment against the Palestinian people. Such acts
further exacerbate the security, economic and
humanitarian situation in the occupied territories.
Israel's approach undoubtedly is on a crash course with
the aspirations of the other peoples of the region to live
in peace and security. It is regrettable that Israel has
never understood the instability from which the
Palestinian and the Arab region suffer.
Instead of correcting the stark shortcomings and
pursuing an integrated approach that addresses the root
causes of the crisis, Israel has preferred to resort to the
excessive use of force. The Security Council has thus
far been unable to take any steps to bring about Israel's
compliance with its resolutions, let alone convince it of
the need to do so.

I wish to stress my Government's position with
regard to the need for all parties to commit themselves
to the "quartet" communique issued in New York and
to the progress achieved in the political process over
the past few weeks. We renew our support for the ideas
and the positive vision included in the June statement
of President Bush of the United States with regard to
the declaration of a Palestinian State within the 4 June
1967 borders and the establishment of two States living
side by side in peace.

We reaffirm once again our commitment to the
Arab initiative, based on the principle of land for peace
and on security based on a serious comprehensive
solution, in return for Israel's implementation of all its
international commitments, beginning with its
withdrawal from the Palestinian territories that have
been reoccupied since September 2000, and including
an end to the expansion of settlements and the building
of new ones.

The terms of reference for the peace process are
clear. They frame a political vision that will allow us to
achieve a final solution between Israel and the
Palestinians. The time has come for all parties to act in
accordance with their commitments to the peace
process, to realize the objective of the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State within the 4 June
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, based
on the principles of international legitimacy
represented in Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 1397 (2002).

While Jordan reaffirms its condemnation of all
suicide attacks against civilians in Israel, it calls on the
Israelis to work with us to achieve peace, recognizing
that the protracted conflict and the high toll among
innocent civilians on both sides will not bring about the
desired result. How many more Palestinian and Israeli
victims must there be before Israel realizes that the
military solution will not lead to peace? The political
option is the only genuine way to put an end to the
Arab-Israeli conflict.

In conclusion, the Jordanian Government calls on
the Security Council to assume its responsibility with
regard to Israel's deliberate and systematic acts of
aggression against the Palestinian people and to
provide it with the necessary protection under the
Fourth Geneva Convention and the rules of
international humanitarian law.

