Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to express my appreciation to you, Madam
President, for holding this debate on the situation in
Afghanistan. I would also like to thank Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
for his briefing.

I offer my condolences to the people and Government
of Afghanistan for the losses they have incurred in
the terrorist attacks carried out by the Taliban against
them, including the attack on Parliament that took place
earlier today.

The Islamic Republic of Iran has always
supported peace, stability, security and socioeconomic
development in Afghanistan and considers that
country's security tantamount to security within its
own borders. Our policy of steadfast support for the
Afghan Government has not changed, and will not. We
are confident that the National Unity Government is
best positioned to face the major challenges to peace
and development in Afghanistan, and in that regard we
will spare no effort in lending it our support.
Once again, unfortunately, the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2015/422) indicates a deterioration in the country's
security situation, describing an increase in armed
attacks and violence that is 6 per cent higher than in the
same period in 2014 and 45 per cent higher than in 2013.
Those figures should be a matter of grave concern to all
of us in the region and beyond. Insecurity, instability
and poverty continue to provide fertile ground for the
continued presence in Afghanistan of Violent extremist
groups such as the Taliban and Al-Qaida, as well as
of the more recently emerged Daesh and other foreign
terrorist fighters, as the Secretary-General mentions in
the report.

Unfortunately, the report also indicates that the
number of terrorist actions has increased. We regard
activities by all Violent extremists in Afghanistan as a
security threat to Iran and the whole region. Iran has
always condemned all violent attacks committed by
terrorist groups, and we reject any cooperation with
them, since we believe that would be counterproductive
in establishing peace in Afghanistan.

On bilateral cooperation, Iran hosted President
Ghani on 19 and 20 April for his first official visit
to Iran and meetings with Supreme Leader Ayatollah
Ali Khamenei and President Hassan Rouhani, during
which the two countries pledged greater cooperation
in the areas of security information-sharing, counter-
narcotics operations, the sharing of water resources,
and refugees. The two presidents also underlined their
determination to cooperate in fighting extremism and
terrorism throughout the region by eliminating those
menaces.

In the View of the Iranian Government, trade and
transit are two main fields that are ripe for expansion in
Tehran-Kabul relations. The railroad project between
Herat and the city of Khaf in Iran and Iran's readiness
to make its port facilities in Chahbahar available to
Afghanistan are two major and ongoing projects in
that field. As Afghanistan is a landlocked country, it
is agreed that those two projects are very important.
We need to move forward with those activities in the
framework of the tripartite agreement between India,
Afghanistan and Iran as soon as possible.

On counter-narcotics efforts, we are particularly
concerned about the reports indicating an increase in
opium-poppy cultivation in Afghanistan during recent
years. It is a real warning sign for the region and beyond.
That threat should be addressed by the international
community in a very serious manner. In that regard, we
welcome the regional initiatives taken by the countries
of the region, including China, Pakistan, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Iran, to combat the
production and transfer of narcotics. At the same time,
strong support and commitment by the international
donors, Afghan authorities and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime is essential in order to deter
the menace of drug cultivation and drug trafficking.
Illicit drugs are not only a major social and public-
health challenge, but also, and more importantly, a main
source of income for extremist and terrorist groups.
Therefore, the international community should provide
special support to the triangular cooperation initiative
on countering narcotics agreed by Afghanistan, Iran
and Pakistan. That is a useful initiative that will benefit
Afghanistan as well as transit and destination countries.

Afghan refugees continue to live in Iran. Voluntary
repatriations of Afghan refugees and undocumented
Afghans must be supported through efforts to meet the
reasonable needs ofrepatriated and repatriating refugees
in Afghanistan, with a View to enabling them to be
permanently reintegrated into their home country. That
underscores the need to mobilize more international
support to ensure the success of repatriation efforts.

We support UNAMA and United Nations
agencies in their efforts to providing development
and reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan through
robust regional engagement. UNAMA should be
further strengthened, given its unique role and
multifaceted functions vis-a-vis the important political
and socioeconomic challenges facing Afghanistan.

