Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation welcomes Ghana's
initiative to have the Security Council meet to consider
the most urgent issues relating to the consolidation of
peace in the West African subregion.

Recent developments in Africa have clearly
shown that the most important means of preventing
internal conflicts are strengthening the rule of law and
developing democracy and good governance. All of
that is crucial to the States of West Africa, including
Liberia, Sierra Leone, Cote d'Ivoire and Guinea-
Bissau, where, as a result of bloody conflicts, more
than 2 million people have died, according to the
estimates of the Economic Commission for Africa.

The Security Council's consideration of ways to
settle the current conflict situations in West Africa has
found quite clearly that the greatest difficulties are
encountered when addressing problems related to the
transitional period. Truces and peace agreements exist,
but are not fully implemented. New Governments are
established, but are systematically overwhelmed.
Legislative activity is slow. Timetables for political
processes are not observed. Election deadlines are
systematically violated. Disarmament and
demobilization programmes are implemented with
difficulty or simply obstructed. Impunity leads to the
resurgence of massive violations of human rights and
humanitarian law.

The new Peacebuilding Commission has a role to
play in resolving problems relating to peace
consolidation in West Africa. It recently commenced its
work, and it has begun to consider how to assist Sierra
Leone and Burundi.

Intensified cooperation between the United
Nations and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) is important for resolving problems
related to peace consolidation in West Africa.
ECOWAS initiatives aimed at resolving key issues
facing its member countries deserve all possible
encouragement. Naturally, such initiatives will be
doomed to failure without specific support from
leading donor countries and international financial
institutions. The dire economic situation of Liberia,
Guinea-Bissau and, to a certain extent, Sierra Leone
could be a factor nullifying the international
community's achievements towards final settlement of
the conflicts in those countries.

In our view, post-conflict recovery and
development assistance should be an important element
of any international strategy to ensure peace and
prevent conflict in Africa. The operational funds and
programmes of the United Nations can play an
important role in monitoring and analysing the risks of
conflict arising in Africa. At the post-conflict recovery
stage in West African countries, it is important to focus
on preventing a relapse into crisis once an effective
link has been forged between emergency assistance and
follow-on action to support long-term sustainable
development and the integration into society of the
most vulnerable population groups. All of this should
be subordinate to the main goal of achieving political
stability in post-conflict countries.

As a permanent member of the Security Council
and as current Chair of the Group of Eight (G-S), the
Russian Federation attaches exceptional importance to
the settlement of conflict in Africa and to helping
African countries emerge from instability and attain
economic prosperity. The search for solutions to such
problems accounted for a significant portion of the
agenda of the G-8 summit held at Saint Petersburg in
July.

My country approaches the issue of cooperation
with Africa from the standpoint of an open, equal and

mutually advantageous partnership. That is also the
basis on which we are prepared to participate in
international assistance to build Africa's peace
consolidation capacity, on the understanding that
international assistance in that area should supplement,
not replace, measures taken by African States
themselves.

