Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I offer my most sincere gratitude to the French
delegation for organizing today's important open
debate. We also thank the Secretary-General for the
report before us(S/2017/821) and welcome his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba. She can count on our full support.

Terrorist groups such as Da'esh and Al-Qaida
continue to carry out attacks on children in Syria, Libya,
Yemen and Somalia. Children are abducted and turned
into soldiers; they are used as human shields or suicide
bombers - a growing phenomenon in armed conflicts.
The Kingdom of Bahrain condemns those practices of
terrorist groups in the strongest possible terms.

The protection of children in armed conflict is a
priority for the international community, especially
in the light of the number and complexity of those
conflicts. That is why, as a member of the Coalition to
Restore Legitimacy in Yemen, which was established
at the request of the Government of Yemen and in
compliance with resolution 2216 (2015), we have taken
steps to stop the attacks being carried out by terrorist
groups that are receiving assistance, including military
assistance and weapons that are smuggled into Yemeni
territory, from foreign sources. We wanted to act within
the Coalition to protect civilians, particularly children,
and to uphold international law and international
humanitarian law.

With regard to the annual report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict, it is important
to review the mechanisms that we use to protect children
in armed conflict, because the information and data we
use must be accurate and well documented.

Children around the world, particularly in Yemen
and Palestine, are in danger. The crises should seize our
collective conscience. We continue to work with our

partners, brotherly countries and neighbours to protect
children and uphold our commitments to providing
humanitarian assistance and cooperating with various
mechanisms of the United Nations in that area.

