Mr. Al-Salafi (League of Arab States) (interpretation from Arabic): I should like at the outset to extend to you,
Sir, my congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I am also pleased
to express my appreciation to Ambassador Mahugu, the
Permanent Representative of Kenya, for his efforts in
presiding over the Council last month.

The question of Jerusalem is one of the most
important issues that was deferred to the final status
negotiations by the agreements concluded in Oslo in 1993
between the Palestine Liberation Organization and the
Israeli Government. The decision by the Israeli Government
on 21 June to annex to the municipality of Israel several
villages west of the city and some of the settlements in the
Palestinian territories is designed to tighten the Israeli grip
on the Holy City and to separate it from the other
Palestinian territories. The objective of this decision is to
Judaize Jerusalem, eliminate its Arab character and alter its
demographic composition.

The League of Arab States is concerned about these
measures adopted by the Israeli Government, which
represent a clear violation of the agreements reached
between the Palestine Liberation Organization and the
Israeli Government. The Israeli plan to expand the Holy
City, whether to the east or to the west, represents a clear
violation of international legitimacy as established in the 16
resolutions of the Security Council on Jerusalem, especially
252 (1968) and 267 (1969), adopted some 30 years ago.

Security Council resolution 267 (1969), provides, in
paragraph 4

"that all legislative and administrative measures and
actions taken by Israel which purport to alter the
status of Jerusalem, including expropriation of land
and properties thereon, are invalid and cannot change
that status;"

and in paragraph 7
 

"that, in the event of a negative response or no
response from Israel, the Security Council shall
reconvene without delay to consider what further
action should be taken in this matter".

In addition, the Security Council, in resolution 476
(1980), decided that, inter alia, all measures adopted by
Israel to change the character and status of Jerusalem are
null and void; and in resolution 478 (1980) that, inter
alia, the Council refused to recognize the "basic law".

It is high time for the Council to assume its
responsibilities for international peace and security in
accordance with the Charter and to examine this issue.
With regard to the status of Holy Jerusalem, it is clear
that Israel is trying to surround Jerusalem with three
settlement belts, leading to a decrease in the percentage
of Arab citizens, who in East Jerusalem now make up 47
per cent, as opposed to 53 per cent for Jewish citizens. If
those figures are combined with figures for the whole of
Jerusalem, the result is a three-to-one ratio in favour of
Jewish citizens.

As for the possession of Palestinian territory, when
the Balfour Declaration was made in 1917, Jews owned
4 per cent of Jerusalem, Arabs 94 per cent and foreigners
2 per cent. Now Jews own 84 per cent of the territory of
Jerusalem, with Arabs owning 14 per cent and foreigners
2 per cent. With regard to the possession of territory in
East Jerusalem, Jews now own 74 per cent of the territory
and Arabs 26 per cent. Israel has seized most of that
territory by force.

That brief comparison of the situation in Jerusalem
clarifies the situation. The programme and plan adopted
by Israel on 21 June are aimed at expanding the
boundaries of Holy Jerusalem to 184 square kilometres -
in 1967 it comprised only 7 square kilometres - so as to
tighten the grip of the municipal authority of Jerusalem as
part of the Israeli plan to Judaize Holy Jerusalem.

Arab States have adopted peace as a strategic option.
This was affirmed at the Summit of Arab States in Cairo
in 1996 and was based on the desire to make it possible
for the area to avoid more wars and more pain and to
develop economically, culturally and in a way that would
make it civilized.

The Israeli Government, however, continued its
practice of settlement expansion in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Holy Jerusalem, in
violation of international law, United Nations resolutions
 

and the agreements signed with the Palestinian Authority.
The League of Arab States, in view of the stalling of the
peace process as a consequence of Israel's decisions and
practices which constitute negative indications, calls upon
the sponsors of the peace process - the United States and
the Russian Federation - and all peace-loving countries to
take a stand against the irresponsible Israeli measures.

We call upon the United States to maintain its positive
response in the wake of the declaration of that settlement
plan in order to maintain the peace and security of the area
in the interest of all the countries of the region, and to
move the peace process forward towards a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace, because a continuation of the Israeli
policies and practices will plunge the area into the cycle of
conflict once again.

We would like to refer to the 1991 American letter of
assurances wherein the United States does not recognize the
annexation of East Jerusalem or the municipal expansion
and encourages all parties to avoid unilateral measures that
would increase tension, make negotiations more difficult
and pre-empt their final outcome.

The city of Holy Jerusalem is important to the Arabs
as well as to millions of Muslims and Christians throughout
the world. The League of Arab States expresses its
appreciation for the clear international consensus which
condemns the Israeli programme and plans. It calls on all
to support Arab rights in the face of Israeli provocations,
which represent a clear violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949. This plan aims at seizing the territory
by force and eliminating the rights of the Palestinian people
in the occupied territories, as well as foreclosing the
possibility of any peaceful solution in the region. We
therefore called for an urgent meeting of the Security
Council so that the Council could assume its responsibilities
in the maintenance of international peace and security under
the Charter of the United Nations and on the basis of the
resolutions of the Council. The Council should take
measures against the plan adopted by the Israeli Cabinet on
21 June. This would send a clear message to Israel to desist
from its practices, which represent a contravention of
international legitimacy and the position adopted by the
international community.

