Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour and privilege, Madam President, for my
delegation to participate in this meeting of the Security
Council under Spain's very effective and dynamic
presidency during the month of July.

(spoke in French)

First, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his participation in our debate today and for his
report (S/20003/715) on the implementation of
resolution 1483 (2003). I thank him also for his
introductory statement, in which he set forth the
principles and objectives of United Nations action in
Iraq. Bulgaria fully shares his views. I also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for his briefing and,
above all, for his activities in Iraq. He has listened to
the active members of Iraqi society and faithfully
interpret their views. He has forged extremely useful
contacts with other countries in the region. He has
created good synergy in working with the Coalition
Provisional Authority, which I believe redounds to his
credit. We thank him and extend our full support to
him.

It is a pleasure to welcome to the Council
representatives of the interim Governing Council of
Iraq: Mr. Pachachi, Mr. Chalabi and Ms. al-Hashemi.
The establishment of the Governing Council was an
important step for the Iraqis as they seek to regain
control of their future. Bulgaria welcomes that very
positive development. We assure the Governing
Council members present here of Bulgaria's full
support for the Iraqis as they seek to establish a free
and independent Iraq and to resume the warm and
friendly relations that had always existed between our
two countries.

The United Nations must play a central role in
Iraq. That role should become ever greater and
stronger. That is Bulgaria's profound belief. We are
pleased that the first steps taken by the United Nations
in Iraq have been successful ones despite the extremely
difficult conditions in which Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello's team is working there. The results are very
encouraging. In our opinion, the approach adopted by
Mr. Vieira de Mello will yield increasingly tangible
results.

Bulgaria considers the work of the United
Nations in the area of human rights to be of particular
importance. Human rights are especially important for
a country that is seeking to emerge from decades of
murderous dictatorship and to establish the rule of law.

As the representative of a country that in the
recent past had to face a similar, though not identical,
situation, I am particularly sensitive to the aspiration
just voiced by Mr. Pachachi: to move towards national
reconciliation by shedding light on the recent past.
Unfortunately, as Mr. Vieira de Mello said, that past
was of the darkest and most brutal. We believe that the
United Nations has a role to play in helping the Iraqis
shed light on their recent past. In that context, the
United Nations is the principal means by which the
international community can, as it must, help the Iraqi
people face the great challenges before them.

Security is still extremely fragile, and major
problems remain. The responsibility of the Coalition
Provisional Authority is clearly fundamental in that
area. We think that the international community must
find the way to help the Iraqis retake control of the
management of the situation as quickly as possible. We
fully agree with the Secretary-General's approach on
the structure and objectives of a United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq. We believe that the future
role of the United Nations should be defined in
accordance with how the situation on the ground
develops. Things are changing fairly quickly. It was
very encouraging to hear that Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello shares that approach.

Before concluding, on a more personal note, I
was very moved to hear Mr. Pachachi, at the beginning
of his statement, stress the word "freedom". Clearly,
freedom is essential for all development and
independence. I express my heartfelt wish for a free
and independent Iraq in the near future.

