Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
to this meeting of the Security Council and thank him
for his briefing outlining the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) priorities under his
chairmanship. We wish Serbia the greatest of success in
discharging these responsibilities.

Cooperation with regional arrangements strengthens
United Nations efforts to maintain international peace
and security, prevent conflicts and restore stability in
post-conflict situations. Chapter VI of the Charter of
United Nations provides the appropriate framework
for promoting greater participation of regional
arrangements in matters related to international security
international peace under Security Council authority.

Forty years after the conclusion of the Helsinki
Final Act, an important agreement for stabilizing
peaceful coexistence amid the Cold War, we praise the
important role played by the OSCE in strengthening
security and cooperation in early warning, conflict
prevention, crisis management and post-conflict
rehabilitation, proving that the organization continues
to play a key role as a reliable partner of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security in the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian regions.

Angola also praises the important role played
by the OSCE in post-conflict transition processes,
including in supporting the promotion of dialogue
among Kosovo communities, a wide range of reforms
in the Western Balkan countries and the continued
efforts of the co-Chairs of the OSCE Minsk Group in
assisting Azerbaijan and Armenia in finding a peaceful
solution for the Nagorno Karabakh conflict. We also
acknowledge the positive role played by the OSCE in
Ukraine, in particular the role played by the Special
Representative of the Chairperson-in-Office of the
OSCE, Ambassador Heidi Tagliavini, and the Special
Monitoring Mission with a view to reducing tensions
and thus fostering peace, stability and security.

We support the call made by the trilateral contact
group to all sides in the conflict in Ukraine to fully
respect and ensure the safety and security of the
personnel of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission. It
is our expectation that the OSCE will be able to make
a positive contribution to the implementation of the
package of measures agreed in Minsk on 12 February
and that the sustained ceasefire will allow for the
further implementation of the package of measures and
the establishment of peace in Ukraine.

We welcome the priorities outlined by Serbia for
its OSCE chairmanship, and we note the particular
importance attached to regional and interregional
cooperation and a balanced approach to the three OSCE
security dimensions, namely, the political and military,
the economic and environmental and the human, with
a view to addressing conflicts and the root causes of
security-related problems.

Angola attaches great value to the mandate of
the OSCE, and we would like to encourage the OSCE
to strengthen cooperation with African regional
and subregional organizations in the framework of
shared responsibility in addressing counter-terrorism,
cybersecurity, transnational organized crime, drug
trafficking, human trafficking, trafficking in weapons,
foreign terrorist fighters, violent extremism and
radicalization, in particular youth radicalization.

