Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Mr. Shearer, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, for his briefing.

At present, the overall situation in South Sudan
continues to improve. Violent conflicts have decreased
sharply and the ceasefire has continued to hold in most
areas. The implementation of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan has steadily moved ahead and progress has
been made in establishing a unified national army and
amending the Constitution. Thanks to the facilitation
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the Sudan and other countries, South Sudan
President Kiir and opposition leader Machar met in
Juba on 9 and 11 September, and the two sides reached
important consensus on advancing the peace process
and the forming of a new transitional Government
on 12 November, as scheduled. That demonstrates
the political will and determination of both sides to
achieve peace and invigorate the implementation
of the agreement. China appreciates and welcomes
that development.

At the same time, there are still obstacles to the
achievement of peace and stability in South Sudan.
Certain opposition parties have yet to join the agreement,
the humanitarian situation is grim and there are serious
food shortages. We hope the international community
will bolster its support for the peace process in the
country, consolidate the existing positive momentum
and provide assistance, as needed, by the country.

First, we must support the parties in South Sudan
in accelerating the implementation of the agreement.
Its effective implementation is the only way to
resolve the conflict in South Sudan. We are less than
two months away from the end of the pre-transition
period - 12 November. China hopes that the parties to
the conflict in South Sudan will seize this opportunity
to unite as one in accelerating the implementation of the
agreement and restoring peace and stability at an early
date so that the people of South Sudan can enjoy the
peace dividends as soon as possible. The international
community should provide financial and material
support to South Sudan for the implementation of the
agreement and the formation of a unified army.

Secondly, we should continue to support countries
of the region and regional organizations in their good
offices. It has been shown that greater knowledge of
the situation on the ground can help them in their good
offices. The international community should enhance
coordination with the African Union, IGAD and other
subregional organizations, as well as countries such
as the Sudan. It should also support their mediation
efforts and help the South Sudanese Government and
the opposition to consolidate mutual trust, maintain
dialogue and reach consensus as soon as possible
on issues such as the number of states and border
demarcations. Finally, it should urge the opposition
parties that have not yet subscribed to the peace
agreement to join the peace process soon.

Thirdly, humanitarian and economic assistance
should be enhanced. As mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2019/741), the current state of
affairs in the protection of civilian sites is untenable.
Those sites are not a durable solution to the problem
of displacement. The international community should
increase its assistance in the settlement of displaced
persons and facilitate their early return to their homes.
The number of people in South Sudan facing severe
food shortages - 6.96 million - is the highest ever
recorded. The country is also facing the risk of Ebola
spreading from other countries. The international
community should now focus on helping the country
address the food shortages and improve its capacity
to prevent the spread of Ebola, while increasing its
investment in agriculture, energy, infrastructure,
education, health care and other fields with a view to
helping the country achieve national reconstruction and
economic development.

China greatly appreciates the important contribution
of United Nations Mission in South Sudan to the
maintenance of peace and stability in South Sudan.
We support the Mission's continued implementation
of its mandate of supporting the implementation of
the agreement and the protection of civilians, among
other things. We hope the Mission will continue to
strengthen communication and coordination with
troop-contributing countries, promote the security and
protection of peacekeepers and enhance their ability to
cope with complex situations.

China has always strongly supported the peace
process in South Sudan. Recently, in order to support
South Sudan's efforts to implement the agreement,
the Chinese Government decided to provide material
assistance to the South Sudanese Government. The
first batch, which is 1,500 tons of food, has arrived
in South Sudan, and other in-kind assistance, such as
tents, blankets and medicine, are in the pipeline. China
is willing to work with the international community
by continuing to play a constructive role in achieving
peace, stability and development in South Sudan.

