Mr. Alshamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I congratulate the Dominican
Republic on presiding over the Security Council for
this month and I thank you, Mr. President, for holding
this important debate. I also take this opportunity
to express my delegation's appreciation to the five
outgoing members of the Council and to welcome
the new non-permanent members, to whom we wish
every success.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
to be delivered by the representatives of Bangladesh,
and Libya on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the Group of Arab States, respectively.
We also thank Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing this morning.

The current situation in the Middle East requires
the international community and the Security Council
to find solutions to the crises in the region. That
would prompt us to move from crises management
to a comprehensive conflict resolution approach in
order to prevent the outbreak of conflicts and work
seriously toward establishing peace and stability. The
international community - and the Security Council in
particular - must confront the parties that continue to
undermine regional stability and peaceful coexistence.
That would enable the region to invest its energies
and resources in building societies that enjoy peace,
prosperity and tolerance free of conflicts, violence
and terrorism.

My country believes that ending the Israeli
occupation of all Arab and Palestinian territories;
reaching a just, comprehensive and lasting solution to
the Palestinian question; and the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State within the borders of
4 June 1967 and with East Jerusalem as its capital, in line
with the resolutions of the international legitimacy, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Madrid principles, are all
prerequisites for stability in the region. We emphasize
the need for Israel to end all its illegal practices against
the Palestinian people, particularly the construction
and expansion of settlements and the violation of holy
sites, as well as its law of Jewish nationalism, all of
which undermine the two-State solution and hinder
international peace efforts.

In that regard, we underscore the responsibility
of the international community, under international
law and the Charter of the United Nations, to take all
measures that advance the peace process in the Middle
East and end the Israeli occupation of all Palestinian and
Arab territories. The United Arab Emirates commends
the efforts of the Arab Republic of Egypt to promote
Palestinian reconciliation.

In the absence of a just and comprehensive solution,
the international community should continue to assist
the Palestinian people in all areas, including education,
health care and food security, in order to let them
cope with the challenges of occupation and attain the
Sustainable Development Goals, just like other peoples.
In 2017 and 2018, the United Arab Emirates donated
more than $173 million to assist Palestine and the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). We stress our
historic commitment to supporting UNRWA and our
brotherly Palestinian people directly.

We continue to assist in restoring peace and stability
within the coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen by
meeting the humanitarian needs of the Yemeni people
and supporting the political process overseen by the
United Nations with the aim of expediting a lasting
and sustained political solution based on resolution
2216 (2015). In that context, the United Arab Emirates
reaffirms its support for the tireless efforts of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen to
reach a comprehensive political settlement.

The coalition welcomes the Stockholm Agreement
on Al-Hudaydah and resolutions 2451 (2018) and 2452
(2019). It has proved its commitment to implementing
them at a practical level. The Houthi militias have not
fulfilled their obligations and continue to violate the
agreement on a daily and repeated basis, committing
the most heinous crimes against the Yemeni people
and threatening the security and stability of the
region, as well as international navigation. They are
also looting international aid. All of those acts are
documented violations.

Those crimes and violations would not have taken
place if the Houthis had not received support and care
from Iran, which continues to violate resolutions 2216
(2015) and 2231 (2015) by supplying the Houthis with
weapons, ballistic missiles and drones, as documented
by the reports of the Panel of Experts of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), as well
as reports of the Secretary-General concerning the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

We are all aware of Iran's negative and destabilizing
influence in Syria. The Iranian presence in that Arab
country is obstructing any political solution that would
allow the Syrians themselves to determine the future
of their country without external interference. In that
regard, we stress the importance of an Arab role in
reaching a political solution. We express our full support
for the efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, in seeking a
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political solution within
the framework of resolution 2254 (2015).

On the situations in Syria and Yemen, it is clear
that Iran is the common denominator in both conflicts.
It represents a serious threat to the stability and security
of the Middle East region. We therefore call on the
international community and the Security Council to
put pressure on Iran in order to end its destabilizing
and expansionist intervention in the region, let alone
supporting and arming terrorist and sectarian militias
in the Arab countries.

The United Arab Emirates believes that the United
Nations action plan for Libya represents the most
viable framework for resolving the political crisis in
that country. We welcome the progress made so far
and reaffirm our full support for the tireless efforts of
the Special Envoy for Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salame', to
implement the action plan, starting with the convening
of a national gathering early this year, to include all
Libyan actors, with the aim of agreeing a solution to the
currentpolitical crisis. However, we express our concern
at the growing threat of terrorist groups in Libya and
emphasize the need to prevent their spread to all areas
of the country and to vital Libyan infrastructure. More
international efforts should be made to restore security
and stability in Libya.

In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its cooperation with regional and international partners
in order to achieve stability and progress in the region,
combat terrorism, prevent extremism and reject external
interference in the internal affairs of other countries.
We should revitalize the Arab role in resolving Arab
issues, while promoting values of moderation to protect
communities and achieve prosperity.

