Mr. Merores (Haiti) (spoke in French): Allow me
first, Mr. President, to congratulate you on Mexico's
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. As
you know, Mexico is a country friendly with ours.
Also, I would like to congratulate you on the
exemplary manner in which you have been conducting
the work of the Council during your presidency. I wish
to thank you too for having taken the initiative to hold
this open debate on the question of Haiti.

I also congratulate the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Annabi, for the briefing he
gave us this morning, which admirably complements
the Secretary-General's recent report on the situation in
Haiti. On behalf of the Government of Haiti, I wish to
congratulate him on the outstanding job done under his
enlightened leadership by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

I would like to take this opportunity to express
once again, on behalf of the Government and people of
Haiti, our gratitude to the many countries of the region,
of CARICOM, which, under Brazil, are participating in
MINUSTAH. The positive results of the Mission were
covered at length by many speakers and do not need
any additional comments.

In that regard, before I go on, I wish to make
particular mention of all those workers for peace who,
day and night, are present throughout Haiti and who
are giving the authorities and people of Haiti their
contributions to the renewal of the country. They come
from all continents and from various horizons, but they
are all inspired and united by their desire to help
redress a situation that has gone on all too long. The
Government of Haiti salutes their efforts. I wish to take
this opportunity to humbly pay my respects to those
who have perished on the field of honour.

Once again I should like to thank the members of
the Security Council and the international community
as a whole for the ongoing interest in Haiti. I carefully
noted the various comments, analyses and suggestions
that provided a backdrop to the various statements.
Very sincerely, I would like to thank all speakers, from
CARICOM. and the Latin American region or
elsewhere, for the support they have shown with regard
to my country. I convey to them the gratitude of the
Government and people of Haiti.

I need not recall the importance and symbolism
of the recent visit to Haiti by a high-level delegation
led by the Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon, and the
former United States President, Bill Clinton, a visit
referred to by several speakers. It was followed by the
Security Council's Visit, from 11 to 14 March, under
the leadership of Ambassador Urbina of Costa Rica,
which was very much appreciated by the Haitian
people and Government. They see it as tangible proof
of the international community's interest in the
situation in Haiti and its commitment to support us in
rebuilding the country. The Government and people of
Haiti remain fully committed, with the strong support
of regional and international institutions and the entire
international community, to building a new, modern,
democratic society, one geared towards sustainable
development.

The Secretary-General's report in document
S/2009/129, before us today, is very timely and
commands our attention. It has come at a crucial time,
when the Haitian people are preparing to cast their
votes on the 19'h of this month in order to fill 12
vacancies in the Senate of the Republic. These
elections, as the report says, could help facilitate the
functioning of the upper house and reinforce the bases
of democratic renewal to which the Haitian nation
aspires.

While, as the report stresses, the security
situation has definitely improved thanks to better
coordination between the Haitian National Police and
MINUSTAH, we cannot declare victory, because the
situation clearly remains fragile. The report itself
acknowledges that. I would like to say that the
Government is perfectly aware, just as we all are, that
much remains to be done in that area. That is why we
attach special importance to initiatives to give the
country a 14,000-strong police force by 2011, while
increasing and improving our efforts with regard to the
judicial and correctional systems, to which some
speakers referred today.

Regarding socio-economic development, as many
speakers have acknowledged, Haiti is still struggling to
recover from the adverse effects of last April's food
crisis and of the storms that struck the country in
August and September 2008, caused considerable
destruction to major infrastructure and almost wiped
out our agriculture sector. As a result, the national
economy is still suffering enormously, which is
compounded by the global economic and financial
crisis affecting the whole world. We know only too
well that 78 per cent of the population still lives below
the poverty line and that the efforts of the Haitian
authorities and the international community to meet the
Millennium Development Goals are being sorely
tested.

That is why my delegation would like, through
this body, to once again thank the Secretary-General
for his active commitment to the success of the donor
conference on Haiti's social and economic
development that will take place in Washington on
14 April, that is to say next week. In that connection, it
is worth underscoring the trip that the economist Paul
Collier recently made to Haiti at the Secretary-
General's request and the resulting report. The needs
and the possibilities were in most cases identified and
are taken up in our national strategy paper for growth
and poverty reduction.

Aligning the interventions of our partners with
the priorities of the Government and the funds to be
released following that conference will, we hope, give
the country a boost and enable it to move forward on a
different, far more stable economic basis. Once again,
our thanks go to delegations that have shown their
interest in the success of the conference and have
already expressed their intention to actively participate.
The Haitian Government has no doubt that, with their
support, the goals that it has set for the economic
recovery of the country and for meeting the basic needs
of the population will be achieved. More than one
speaker has made the point today that Haiti is at a
decisive turning point and that the country and the
international community should seize the moment. We
would like to affirm that, for its part, Haiti stands ready
to do so.

It has very often been said that economic
development and security are closely linked and that
no country can escape that linkage. Moreover, in
addition to the efforts that the Security Council is
making through MINUSTAH to stabilize the country,
as various speakers have recalled, it is also clear that
that stabilization is contingent on progress in the area
of socio-economic development. That is why my
Government, aware of that crucial link, attaches great
importance to the success of the Washington
conference next week and affirms that it looks forward
to the strong support the international community at
this conference.

