Mr. Covic (Serbia and Montenegro) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I
thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
participate in the discussion. I just wish to address
some of the points I have heard.

It was said that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) can
motivate the Albanians to engage in the
decentralization process once the Special
Representative convinces them that Kosovo will not be
partitioned. We believe that is true. However, in that
same way we can motivate the Serbs to participate in
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government by
convincing them that Kosovo and Metohija will not
become independent. But how are we to do that when,
on a daily basis, those Institutions propose
independence as a solution? We have to ask ourselves
why Serbs would enter institutions committed to the
independence of Kosovo and Metohija. Thus, I call on
officials of UNMIK and the international community to
convince the Serbs that Kosovo and Metohija will not
become independent and that the sovereignty and the
territorial integrity of Serbia and Montenegro will be
respected. That way, Kosovo Serbs can be persuaded to
participate in the institutions of Kosovo and Metohija.

I wish to remind the Council that Kosovo Serbs
participated in those institutions after the 2001
elections. They participated in 2002 and 2003, and
through March 2004. The same old story went on again
and again, and I had an opportunity to hear it. We were
told to persuade them to enter the Provisional
Institutions. We tried to do that. What happened in the
end? The events of 17 March 2004 took place. And the
consequences of the ethnic cleansing have not been
remedied to date. Of the 4,500 persons who were
internally displaced following 17 March, 1,600 have
not yet returned to their homes. I have no intention of
telling the Council nice stories with happy endings. I
only wish to be realistic, whether the Council likes it or
not. That is why I think the statement of the United
Kingdom was incorrect and unfair. Please, do unto
others as you would have them do unto you.

With respect to the freedom of movement, the
real test of whether there is freedom of movement
comes when those people go back to their schools.
What kind of freedom of movement is there when
children need military escorts to go to school? Of
course, we are grateful for everything UNMIK and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) have done. I would not like my
statement to lead to the removal of the KFOR presence,
because there is no freedom of movement. We should
all commit ourselves to solving this problem. We
generally agree that the future status of Kosovo and
Metohija can influence regional stability and trade, but
a one-sided solution to the problem of Kosovo and
Metohija would be a very poor compromise. That is a
topic for discussion between Belgrade and Pristina. A
compromise on the future status of Kosovo and
Metohija would create the conditions for dialogue and
free trade in the region and would be accepted by our
neighbours as well.

Of course, finding a peaceful, comprehensive and
lasting solution takes time. Our discussion today
concerning the difficulties of implementing the
standards clearly indicates that it is not possible to
solve the issue of the status of Kosovo and Metohija in
an accelerated fashion.

I should also like to draw attention to incorrect
and untrue views asserting that for some internally
displaced persons, the fear of a lack of economic
opportunities, not the fear of the lack of security, is the
factor discouraging return.

I therefore ask: Why should a person return to his
house, farm or apartment unless he can be assured of
surviving? If there are economic reasons preventing the
return of Serbs, they are of secondary importance and
easily solved. I must stress, however, that we cannot
divert our attention from UNMIK's lack of activity on
the main issue. We will be very constructive in our
approach, but must not be expected to hide our heads
in the sand.

