Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Morocco for the initiative of holding today's
ministerial meeting to discuss the situation in the
Sahel region. I am pleased to see you, Sir, presiding
over today's meeting. I thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; Mr. Romano Prodi, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Sahel; and Mr. Antonio
Guterres, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, for their respective briefings, and Mr. Charles
Koffi Diby for his statement. I welcome the presence
of high-ranking representatives of regional and
subregional organizations.

The Sahel region holds an important strategic
position. It runs across the African continent from the
Atlantic Ocean in the west to the Horn of Africa in
the east. Peace, stability and development in the Sahel
region have a direct bearing on the long-term peace and
stability of the African continent. At present, the Sahel
is facing a severe food crisis, and conflict in Libya
and Mali have further exacerbated the humanitarian
situation and added to the already heavy economic and
social burdens of the countries of the region. Arms
trafficking, transnational organized crime, and terrorist
and extremist activities represent severe challenges to
regional stability.

With a view to addressing the various challenges
facing the region, I would like to make the following
four points. First, an integrated strategy is important
for dealing with the current situation. The various
problems of the Sahel region are interlinked and
mutually reinforcing, and therefore require an
integrated approach. We hope that, as urged by the
Security Council, the Secretary-General will broadly
seek the views ofthe countries ofthe region and regional
and subregional organizations in order to develop an
integrated United Nations strategy as soon as possible,
with clearly defined objectives and practical measures.

Secondly, the key to long-term peace and stability
in the Sahel lies in resolving the fundamental problems
underpinning the current situation, which arose in
response to a complex series of factors, including
lack of development and poverty. The international
community, especially the donors and the international
financial institutions, should enhance their funding
and technical assistance to the countries of the region,
addressing economic and social development as a
priority. The priority for the time being is to tackle
the current food crisis in the Sahel and to resolve the
funding gap in the humanitarian assistance, to be
provided by the United Nations.

Thirdly, any effort to resolve the crisis in the Sahel
must be based on full respect for the ownership of the
countries and organizations of the region. The countries
of the region, the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States ave been working
actively to address the various economic, security and
humanitarian crises in the region. The international
community, in its efforts to assist in the process, should
fully respect the sovereignty and independence of the
countries of the region in order to fully include the
initiatives and plans development by regional countries
and regional organizations.

Fourthly, given the complex and diverse nature of
the challenges facing the Sahel region, it is important
that the international community adopt a coordinated
approach. The primary focus for the Council should
be on threats to peace and stability in the Sahel. In
addition, various United Nations agencies should work
together in responding to the current crisis, based on a
clear division of labour. China hopes to see synergies
generated between the good offices of the United
Nations and countries and organizations of the region,
and supports the work of Special Envoy Prodi to that
end.

At present, a solution to the Mali question brooks
no delay. The international community must take swift
and effective action to assist Mali, in full respect for its
sovereignty, in dealing with the separatist, terroristic
and extremist threats. We support the efforts of the
Malian transitional authorities to promote a political
process and to quickly and fully restore constitutional
order and maintain national unity and territorial
integrity.

China has actively supported the initiatives of
African countries and regional organizations to
strengthen cooperation and maintaining peace and
stability on the continent. The Council should pay close
attention to the call and proposal of Mali, the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States concerning the deployment of an international
force to Mali.

The Chinese Government attaches great
importance to the situation in the Sahel and has been
working actively and through various means to support
the efforts of countries of the region to achieve stability
and development. China has consistently provided
assistance, within its capacities, to the countries of the
region. In the past year, China has provided emergency
food assistance to many countries of the region and
strengthened cooperation efforts with the African
Union and countries of the region in the fight against
terrorism.

China is ready to continue to play its role in order to
find an early and comprehensive solution to the current
crisis in the Sahel.

