Ms. Palacio (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): It is not
mere rhetoric that I begin by joining previous speakers
in stressing the timeliness of the British initiative to
allow us to address what is undoubtedly a formidable
challenge to the international community - doing
away with legal vacuums and pockets of lawlessness.
The United Nations must prove itself in the fulfilment
of what has been its fundamental mission since its
foundation on the ashes of a League of Nations that,
lacking connection to the real world of its time, became
irrelevant.

The primary objective of the United Nations, and
especially of the Security Council, is to ensure
international peace and security. That goal is
inseparable from the existence of a concept of law
common to all international society, a body of legal
categories basically accepted by all.

All law, in the sense of a legal order, is based on
values. There can be no credible prospect for any peace
if it is not based on common respect for universal
values, which provide in turn the basis for universally
accepted norms. The rule of law, as an expression
of national and supranational socio-political
organizations - of which the European Union is a
good example - embodies and presupposes a concept
ofjustice shared by citizens, who give their consent on
the basis of a common recognition of that concept. On
that consent, too, is based the ultimate guarantee of the
effectiveness of the rule of law. That guarantee is the
legitimate use of force.

Thus, the United Nations has a double intellectual
challenge before it. On the one hand, it must consider
the idea of coercion, backed by the concept of common
justice, as a last resort in facing up to the gravest
threats to the international community. On the other,
the United Nations must address the debate on the
universality of human rights vis-a-vis those who claim
those fundamental categories of our coexistence to be
relative and subject to modification according to
culture.

In order to establish its legal order, international
society, while it has not yet reached the level of
interconnectedness of the communities within national
States or the European Union, nevertheless needs a
similar acceptance of principles of universal validity.
The fact that its normative development is less
advanced than that of national States does not allow us
to skirt the twofold issue of universal applicability and
capacity for ultimate implementation that arises for any
legal order. Without both of these there can be no legal
system - at least not one founded in democracy.

The strengthening of the rule of law is especially
necessary in meeting the major challenges of the
twenty-first century: terrorism and organized crime in
their various forms - in particular the illegal traffic in
drugs, weapons and persons - which today are a
source of ridicule and anxiety to an international
society that is unable to react with sufficient vigour to
protect the victims. And we are all potential victims.

This challenge is also especially relevant today
because, in the international arena, there are a number
of societies that are either emerging from conflict,
facing situations of instability or lacking in respect for
the minimal norms of coexistence and human rights.
Those societies are far from the standards of the rule of
law. So long as they have not embarked on a resolute
course of action to endow themselves with such
standards, they cannot help themselves to overcome the
underlying causes of conflict or contribute to the
common struggle against the great scourges of
terrorism and organized crime.

For some time now the idea has been accepted in
international doctrine that the principle of
non-interference in others' internal affairs cannot be
invoked as a means of excluding the international
community from monitoring violations of basic human
rights. We must urgently ensure that a global
community of shared political values can enable us to
take the next step in the construction of an order based
on fundamental principles of coexistence and the
protection of the rights of the weakest members of
society.

As is well known, Spain has been pioneering the
idea of the creation - initially within the European
Union - of a common space of freedom, security and
justice that would help us to deal with the threats of
crime and terror that we face. Since the Vienna,
Amsterdam, Tampere and Feria summits - and during
its presidency of the European Union - Spain has led
the effort to help an increasing number of States share
what has been our conviction for some time: that the
resolute implementation of shared values in daily life
and the effective protection of our citizens is our most
useful tool in combating the scourge of terrorism and
those who support it, as well as organized crime in all
its forms.
The United Nations is already working in this
area, but much remains to be done. The General
Assembly has been making important contributions in
this area since 1985, approving the Basic Principles On
the Independence of the Judiciary and, later, the Basic
Principles on the Role of Lawyers, as well as the
Guidelines on the Role of Prosecutors. Nor should we
forget the work of the Commission on Human Rights
aimed at promoting the independence of the judiciary
and the administration of justice, the advisory services
provided in this field by the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human rights or the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, chaired by my country.

The United Nations today has before it an urgent
task - a true test of its capacity to respond to the real
needs of international society: contributing to
establishing the rule of law and reforming the
administration of justice in Iraq. Resolution 1483
(2003) entrusts the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General with the task of promoting the legal
and judicial reform of the country. I stress again what I
said in the Council on 22 July: the political transition
to democracy and the economic reconstruction of Iraq
are not enough in and of themselves; they must be part
of a body of law and a system of administering justice
that enshrine respect for human rights.

Our efforts must be focused on three areas. First,
establishing the truth and insuring accountability and
reconciliation. Secondly, there must be legal reforms to
ensure that human rights law in Iraq conforms to
internationally accepted standards. In reforming the
body of law as a whole in Iraq, care should be taken to
guarantee that one group can never again prevail over
another, as unfortunately occurred in the past.
Similarly, institutional reform is also a matter of
priority. Such reform must include a broad range of
actions, relating to the courts, the civil police, the
prison system, the security services and military
establishments. Iraq can now begin a new phase in its
history. Iraqis must adopt basic rules for coexistence
enabling them to live in peace and freedom.

If the substantive issue is the capacity of the
United Nations to move ahead with the progress of
international law, making it truly operative, credible
and implementable, it will be necessary to engage in a
rigorous analysis of the means with which we confront
that task today. We therefore welcome the Secretary-
General's proposals that, on the basis of the ideas
expressed in today's debate and in a subsequent open
debate with other States Members of the United
Nations, a comprehensive study be elaborated
containing guidelines and proposing action. In this
task, dialogue with other organizations and institutions
active in this field, in particular the Council of Europe,
will prove fruitful.

My statement began with the challenge that each
of us faces today in seeking to contribute to expanding
justice and the rule of law. This task is as ambitious as
it is difficult - some might call it Utopian. But the
road is before us, and every voyage - even the
longest - starts with the decision to embark.

