Mr. Siala (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to thank the presidency and members
of the Council and wish them all every success. I
also thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Ghassan Salame for his briefing on the latest
developments in my country, Libya. We wish him
every success in his endeavours to end the crisis in
my country. I also thank His Excellency Ambassador
Juergen Schulz, Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), for his briefing on
the work of the sanctions Committee.

The aggression waged against Tripoli by the
Haftar militias started eight months ago and continues
to this day. The city has seen the most abhorrent
crimes, including the shelling of civilian sites,
inhabited neighbourhoods, civilian airports, hospitals,
schools, books warehouses and headquarters of State
institutions. The latest of such acts was the drone attack
on a food factory, which killed a number of citizens
of Libya, Egypt and other African countries. It is a
war crime by any definition. These are criminal acts
of killing and punishment carried out against civilians
by terrorist groups affiliated with the militias and
illustrate the criminal intent of the militia leaders and
their blatant violations of all national and international
human rights instruments.

Regrettably, all of this is happening in the face of
silence from the international community, which is
the result of differences among the Council members
regarding the situation in Libya. All members of the
Council should reach some form of agreement with a
view to ending atrocities and crimes in my country and
follow a unified strategy to stand up to those trying
to prevent Libyans from reaching an agreement and
from coming together to start the process of building
a modern State.

Foreign intervention is one of the most important
key drivers of the ongoing crisis in my country, Libya.
We have repeatedly warned against the exacerbation
of the crisis due to the irresponsible interference of
certain States and their indifference in the face of its
consequences. They insist on courses of action that
seem to have no aim but to leave my country in a state
of deadlocked fratricide among Libyans and halted
development. We do not see these States proposing any
initiatives that could contribute to a solution to stop the
bloodshed. They are explicitly breaching the relevant
Security Council resolutions, which always call for a
peaceful solution to the Libyan crisis and for refraining
from resort to the military option to settle the crisis,
which leads to implementing a policy of "might
makes right" that may result in violating international
humanitarian law. This is totally incompatible with
the Libyan people's desire to establish a State ruled by
institutions in which the rule of law prevails and where
we all have equal rights and duties.

Someone could say that all parties, and I mean
here Libyan parties, are dealing with certain States. I
would like to remind the Security Council that State
institutions are under attack here; these institutions
are run by the Government of National Accord, which
has been recognized by the Council. The Council also
called on all States Members of the United Nations to
refrain from interacting with any parallel institutions
other than those of the Government of National Accord.
My Government would like to highlight further serious
acts carried out by the aggressor force against Tripoli,
using foreign elements as mercenaries fighting in its
ranks. This has been confirmed by the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1973 (2011) in its
various reports. We call on the Security Council to
urge the States involved to take the measures necessary
to prevent such actions, which are fuelling the conflict
and damaging Libya's relationship with those States.

My reference to foreign interference leads me to
raise an important issue here in the Council - that of
the arms embargo that has been imposed on Libya since
2011, which the Council has been urging Member States
to adhere to in accordance with resolution 1970 (2011).
My delegation wishes to reiterate that many States
have violated this resolution and supplied the aggressor
forces attacking the city of Tripoli with sophisticated
weapons, such as fighter drones and offensive weapons
that even some States do not possess.

In that connection, we cannot help but wonder
what how the international community expects the
Government of National Accord and the Libyan
National Army to confront this aggression. Do we
stand idly by and leave the country's capital vulnerable
to damage and destruction by gangs and irresponsible
individuals whose sole purpose is to gain power?
The actions that the Libyan National Army of the
Government of National Accord is taking to confront
this aggression are an obligation in line with the
natural right of every Government to defend its people.
Logically, the aggressor forces - namely, the militias
of Haftar - should be questioned and held accountable
here, not the Government of National Accord, which
emerged from the Libyan Political Agreement that has
been recognized by the Council. We must ask ourselves
how those militias have obtained such an arsenal
of weapons to carry out their continued aggression
against the city of Tripoli, right under the noses of the
United Nations.
We wish also to stress that the Council could have
done a great deal in the face of the aggression against
the city of Tripoli had it stood united and adopted a
clear approach, based on its various resolutions on
Libya, and held everyone, including States Members of
the United Nations, to comply. However, some Member
States are currently tampering with the fate and unity of
Libya, the evidence for which is clearly and consistently
documented in the reports of the Security Council and
its various committees and panels, particularly those of
the Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution
1973 (2011). Those reports provide ongoing evidence
of the grave violations that have fuelled the war and
aggression against Tripoli under pretexts and for
reasons that could have been resolved through serious
negotiations, with the participation of all Libyans.

My country welcomes all international efforts
to end the crisis and bring peace to our country.
The Government of National Accord stresses the
importance of activating the Libya Quartet, composed
of the European Union and the United Nations, among
others. We reaffirm the fundamental importance of
the African Union's role in working with the United
Nations to find a formula for cooperation among them
in order to coordinate efforts aimed at ensuring the
success of international efforts to achieve peace in my
country. My delegation would also like to take this
opportunity to commend the efforts currently under
way, in cooperation with the United Nations through
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ghassan Salame, aimed at making a success of
the international conference on Libya, to be held in
Berlin. We are confident in Germany's ability to host a
successful conference and reach a unified international
position that will put an end to all polarization or
disputes among a number of States whose differences
have greatly contributed to fuelling the situation in
Libya and exposing it to risks and levels of tragedy that
the country has not witnessed since its independence.

My Government would also like to emphasize that
the success of any such effort should not overlook the
following points.

First, the aggressor forces must withdraw
to their former positions before 4 April 2019,
without preconditions.

Secondly, we reiterate the importance of the
ceasefire following that withdrawal through the
implementation of an international monitoring
mechanism, under the auspices of the United Nations,
and the adoption of a Security Council resolution on
the matter.

Thirdly, the States involved in the situation in
Libya must be compelled to refrain from any act that
would undermine national and international efforts to
bring peace to Libya.

Fourthly, the Government of National Accord
reaffirms that it continues to address the concerns
of States vis-a-vis Libya, particularly with regard to
terrorism, and calls on them to provide any information
concerning individuals or entities that they consider
to be engaged in terrorist acts that pose a threat their
security and stability. We also call for a strategy
based on cooperation with the relevant authorities
of the Libyan State and stress the need to adhere to
the implementation of bilateral and international
agreements in this field.

Fifthly, we must emphasize the necessity of
concluding this stage and finalizing the steps to be
negotiated among Libyans at an inclusive national
conference, as stipulated in the United Nations action
plan and the initiative to resolve the Libyan crisis
proposed by the Chairman of the Presidential Council
on 16 June, in order to reach an agreement on the rules to
form a constitutional basis for organizing parliamentary
and presidential elections as soon as possible.

Sixthly, all countries concerned with the Libyan
file should be involved in the Berlin conference,
especially our neighbouring States. This will allow
us to reach an agreement whereby those States can
commit to refraining from any action that would
undermine domestic and international efforts to resolve
the Libyan crisis.

The Government of National Accord also reiterates
its previous requests submitted to the International
Criminal Court and to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Haftar to
hold him accountable for the violations and crimes he
has committed against civilians and the infrastructure
of the city of Tripoli and surrounding areas. My

Government also calls for the expedited deployment of
a fact-finding mission to document such Violations and
identify those responsible.

With regard to illegal migrants, my Government
has taken swift measures to protect them,by moving
them out of the area where clashes are taking place.
We conducted this process in cooperation with the
International Organization for Migration. Furthermore,
my Government intends to complement efforts to
provide them with the necessary protection. We
reiterate the need for concerted international efforts to
address this crisis in view of the repeated aggressions,
such as when Haftar warplanes carried out an air strike
on a migrant detention centre in the vicinity of Tajoura,
in Tripoli.

On the work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), we recall the situation of
the frozen assets of the Libyan Investment Authority.
These assets have diminished owing to the actions of
the sanctions system in place since 2011 and because
of the negative interest on the frozen accounts and
the management fees that are withdrawn from them.
Those charges are withdrawn from the frozen accounts
without being duly managed through the banks into
which they are deposited. There is no option to reinvest
these assets, and their value diminishes because they
are not invested in a timely manner. In addition, we
cannot even maintain the investments of the Libyan
real estate and hotels owned by the Authority that are
all over the world because of the sanctions imposed on
its assets. The Authority is facing many challenges in
managing these investments and because of the failure
to consider their profitability. In some cases, the Libyan
Investment Authority has not been able to carry out the
maintenance of the hotels it owns to ensure their proper
functioning. The pretext advanced by the authorities of
some States was that the Authority has been affected
by the freeze.

In order to find effective solutions for the
difficulties facing the Authority as a result of the
sanctions regime, on 12 September a delegation of the
Libyan Investment Authority met with the sanctions
Committee and clarified for its members the challenges,
difficulties and negative consequences of the existing
sanctions regime. The Authority has also presented a
notification to the Committee regarding the negative
consequences of the sanctions and the strategy of the
Libyan Investment Authority to enhance transparency,
good governance and accountability with regard to its
management and assets. In this respect, we hope that
the Council will take the measures necessary to address
the negative consequences of the sanctions regime as
soon as possible in order to improve the management
of assets without lifting the freeze. That would enable
us to stop the unnecessary losses that we have warned
against since March 2016.

The sanctions regime was presumably established
in the first place to protect against the diminishing
of frozen assets. The purpose is to serve interests of
the Libyan people and its sovereign wealth fund for
future generations. The sanctions regime in the case
of Libya is a measure to protect assets and preserve
them; it is not intended to be punitive. We therefore
call once again on the Security Council and the Libya
sanctions Committee - given their ethical and legal
responsibilities - to urgently amend the measures
taken by the sanctions Committee with regard to
frozen assets in effect since 2011, in order to stop the
losses on these assets and preserve the wealth of the
Libyan people, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

In closing, we reiterate the position of the
Government of National Accord. We are fully
convinced that dialogue among the Libyan people, with
the assistance of the United Nations, is the only way to
achieve safety and peace and meet the aspirations of
our people. We have high hopes that the Council will
duly assume its role, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, to maintain international peace
and security. I also emphasize what was said by Ms. Al
Tubuly regarding the importance of the participation
of women and their role in the future of Libya, that
Libya is going through an unconventional political
stage and that Libyans are not the only ones who have
put the country in such a situation. Indeed, the foreign
interference of many States, which are well known to
the Council, is also to blame.

I conclude my statement by reiterating the
reference made by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salame', to the effect
that the international community should be united on
the situation in Libya. We hope that the Berlin summit
will play a crucial role in that direction and foster
support for the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. That action may lead to the resolution of the
Libyan crisis.

The meeting rose at 11.35 am.
