Mr. Rutte (Netherlands): The direct threat posed
by foreign terrorist fighters concerns us all. Both our
international and our national security are at risk. As
a country of origin for such fighters, the Netherlands
raised its terrorism level to the second highest level
18 months ago. Our national security is directly affected
by this issue. But most alarming of all is the situation in
the conflict zones themselves.

Ms. Power took the Chair.
Innocent civilians are victims ofmerciless violence.
The threat is serious, and it calls for a serious response.
This is a duty that rests on us, the international
community. That is also the reason why today the
Dutch Government decided to increase its support
to the international effort to stop the Islamic State of
Iraq and the Levant by providing military means. We
will provide F-l6s to join the fight against ISIL, and
furthermore, we will provide military training and
advice. In total, we will deploy 380 men and women.

Last year, in the framework of the Global
Counterterrorism Forum, the Netherlands and
Morocco launched a joint initiative to formulate good
practices in tackling the problem of foreign terrorist
fighters. Yesterday, at the Forum ministerial meeting,
we presented the outcome a a comprehensive set of
guidelines focused on every aspect of the foreign
fighter threat. Those recommendations cover not
only counter-terrorism responses, but also preventive
efforts. As co-leader of the Forum's working group on
foreign terrorist fighters, the Netherlands will promote
the adoption of those good practices, and we are open
to working actively with all United Nations Member
States and United Nations partners on this important
issue.

The United Nations sanctions regime is essential
to addressing the problem of foreign terrorist fighters.
Sanctions are an important instrument for depriving
terrorist organisations and fighters of their sources
of finance, and sanctions could be tightened further.
These sanctions, however, must be implemented and
monitored properly, or they will not be effective in
practice. I believe that at the United Nations level we
should examine whether the monitoring and technical
assistance provided to Member States can be enhanced.

It is vital that the international community act jointly
on this issue. Resolution 2178 (2014), co-sponsored
by the Netherlands and adopted today, sends a strong
signal that we stand shoulder to shoulder to confront
the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters.

