Mr. Christian (Ghana): I wish to begin by
thanking the Chairpersons of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), the 1267 Committee and the 1540
Committee - Ambassadors Ellen Margrethe Loj,
Cesar Mayoral and Peter Burian, respectively - for
their comprehensive briefings.

We note with satisfaction that the Counter-
Terrorism Committee has decided to focus its work for
the first part of this year on the revision of the
reporting regime, how it should enhance dialogue with

Member States in need of technical assistance and
deepen its relations with international, regional and
subregional organizations.

In connection with the reporting regimes, we
support the introduction by the Committee of the
analytical tool, referred to as the preliminary
implementation assessment, to monitor the extent of
States' implementation of their obligations under
resolution 1373 (2001). We wish to reiterate the call
made by my delegation in February 2006 for the 1373
Committee, in consultation with the 1267 and 1540
Committees, to work on the consolidation of the three
reporting regimes, as recommended in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome document (General Assembly resolution 60/1).
With regard to technical assistance to States in
need, we are appreciative of consultations being
undertaken by the Committee with Member States and
with potential donors, and hope that the ongoing
dialogue will yield fruitful results. The emphasis of
that consultation should be on a regional and
subregional approach, which appears to be the most
cost-effective method to channel assistance to as many
countries as possible in a region or subregion.

My delegation wishes to stress that cooperation
with international, regional and subregional
organizations should be an integral part of the
Committee's work. In that regard, we hope that the
fifth special meeting of the CTC with international,
regional and subregional organizations, which is
scheduled for later this year, will focus on how best to
utilize regional institutions as a medium to facilitate
and strengthen the capacities of States, particularly in
developing regions, to meet their obligations under the
regime established by resolution 1373 (2001).

With regard to the Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions
Committee, my delegation considers country visits by
the Chairman and the Monitoring Team as one of the
key pillars by which the implementation of the
sanctions regime can be evaluated. It is through that
interaction between the Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions
Committee and Member States that implementation can
be monitored, and practical steps taken, to correct
weaknesses in the sanctions regime.

We wish to raise the issue of recent court
challenges to the listing decisions of the Committee in
some countries. That raises a fundamental issue: Is a
decision of the Security Council taken under Chapter

Sll'V.5446

 

VII subject to judicial review in a Member State? It
appears we have an essentially political process
conflicting with the judicial norms of some member
countries. That problem will persist until the issue of
which system should have primacy is resolved, with
the potential to undermine the credibility of the
Committee.

We are particularly grateful to the Governments
of Sweden, Switzerland and Germany for sponsoring a
paper by the Watson Institute for International Studies
that has made a thorough study of that delicate legal
problem and come up with interesting proposals. My
delegation supports the option of a review mechanism
distinct from the 1267 Committee as an approach to
pre-empting that problem.

The unanimous adoption of resolution 1673
(2006) in April 2006, renewing the 1540 Committee's
mandate for another two years, is an unambiguous
affirmation of the Council's determination to live up to
its cardinal responsibility to maintain international
peace and security. The coming two years will be a
critical period for the 1540 Committee as it seeks to
achieve universal reportage and to examine, monitor
and assist in the implementation of operative
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of resolution 1540 (2004), as was
lucidly affirmed in operative paragraph 5 of resolution
1673 (2006).

Due to the current position on the submission of
first and additional reports by States, we find merit in
the intensification and widening of outreach activities
to sensitize, encourage and offer States the necessary
guidance to implement the provisions of resolution
1540 (2004). My delegation's wholehearted support for
that decision informed Ghana's favourable
consideration of the request to host the outreach
programme for Africa, which regrettably is the region
with an appreciable number of countries that are yet to
submit their first reports.

Another important element that needs to be
strengthened is the Committee's role in the provision
of resources and assistance in the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), especially to most developing
countries. The political will and commitment of those
countries are undermined by the absence of the
requisite national capacity, particularly with respect to
the technical sphere. Although bilateral arrangements
are generally welcomed, international cooperation is
imperative, and the Committee has a critical role to
play by acting as a clearing house on that issue.

Given the ever-evolving nature of terrorism, an
intensification of cooperation among the three
Committees and their experts would definitely enhance
the international community's effort to address that
scourge. By extension, cooperation between the three
Committees and regional and subregional
organizations, as well as international financial
institutions and multilateral bodies, should be enhanced
if we are to achieve a comprehensive and sustainable
solution to that menace.

