Mr. Gorita (Romania) (interpretation from French):
Allow me first of all, Sir, to express to you our
congratulations on your accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for January. Under your competent
direction the Council has already carried out substantial
work. I should also like to congratulate your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of Rwanda, on his
performance as President of the Council for December.

This discussion of the Secretary-General's report
"Supplement to An Agenda for Peace" has given rise to
a whole series of activities, exchanges of View and
possible recommendations, decisions and measures in
connection with the long-term prospects for the United
Nations in the light of the fiftieth anniversary of the
world Organization.

The quantitative and qualitative developments in the
world with regard to stability and security which are
referred to in chapter II of the report evoke analyses and
possible conclusions, both conceptual and practical.

 

Preventive diplomacy and peacemaking, peace-
keeping, peace-building and peace enforcement -
designated by the Secretary-General as instruments of peace
and security - have become standard terminology for
collective efforts to achieve international peace and
security. Developing those instruments is only logical given
the state of affairs.

The wide participation in this discussion and the
preceding statements have demonstrated the importance
attached to the subject and the readiness of Member States
to contribute to the dialogue in this context. We fully share
the view presented here by Ambassador Merimee on behalf
of the European Union.

I propose now to set forth some of our views on, in
particular, such salient topics such as peace-keeping
operations and sanctions.

Instruments such as preventive diplomacy and
peacemaking have a dominant political component. It seems
to us very important that this political component maintain
its central place, even in those instances where efforts at
prevention have not succeeded and resort to other peace-
keeping instruments has become necessary. Experience has
shown the importance of the political component during the
mandate of a peace-keeping operation. From this point of
View, material resources and personnel must be well
calibrated. Conceptually, this implies the beneficial
coexistence of the peace-keeping efforts, the functioning of
the operations begun to that end, and the pursuit of
sustained political action for the settlement of disputes and
conflicts and the full restoration of peace.

We have studied with special attention the detailed
analysis in the Supplement to An Agenda for Peace of
United Nations peace-keeping operations. We find
arguments there for the need for the international
community to adopt a new attitude towards this increasingly
complex dynamic field.

Romania has fully supported in the last five years the
realistic and innovative ideas put before the Security
Council and the General Assembly and its subsidiary
bodies. The document presented by the Secretary-General
is a laudable effort to make conceptual clarifications and to
find the means to bridge the gap which continues to exist
between the concrete operational capacity of the United
Nations and the ambitious goals pursued. In my
delegation's View, the increase in United Nations
responsibility requires not only a clear determination by
Member States to use already existing means but also the
exploration of new means. To be sure, all the possible
options have to be in keeping with the spirit of the
Charter and must respect the criteria and the principles of
time-tested United Nations operations.

The opinions expressed regarding command and
control, dialogue between permanent members of the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the troop-
contributing countries, and a coherent approach to the
tasks entrusted to United Nations missions offer additional
elements for future developments.

Romania is prepared to make its contribution to the
conceptual debate and is also prepared to participate
effectively in the field.

The increasingly frequent resort to sanctions regimes
as an instrument of security raises problems related to
their impact and their unintended effects. In the report
which is the subject of our debate, emphasis is placed on
the legitimacy and the importance of sharing the costs of
sanctions, so that they are not borne solely by a limited
number of States that have the misfortune of being
neighbours or principal economic partners of the State
subjected to sanctions.

We must find the necessary ways and modalities to
bring about, in the case of sanctions, the kind of solidarity
that exists in the sharing of other costs resulting from
United Nations peace-keeping and peacemaking
operations. Ensuring that the political impact of sanctions
is maximized while minimizing the collateral unintended
damage seems to us a particularly relevant idea in this
context.

We consider that the suggestions put forward by the
Secretary-General in paragraphs 75 and 76 of his report
deserve the full attention of the Security Council and of
the United Nations in general.

The Supplement to "An Agenda for Peace" rightly
emphasizes the relevance - the increasingly decisive
relevance - of coordination and effective interaction
between the United Nations and regional organizations to
ensure international stability and security. For Romania,
as for other countries in the central and eastern European
region, the hopes for real stability and security are
essentially linked to integration into the political, security
and economic structures of the European-Atlantic
community - the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), the European Union and the Western European
Union.

 

The establishment of a strategy calling for a supple
and coherent approach in relationships of partnership
between NATO, the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United Nations,
where each has its own responsibilities, powers and ways
of operating, is of Vital importance to the entire matter of
Euro-Atlantic security, with beneficial effects for the entire
collective security system based on the United Nations
Charter.

I should like, before concluding, to make two more
comments.

It is necessary to emphasize the importance of placing
arms control and disarmament in the context of
international stability and security. We pay tribute
especially to the attention that the Secretary-General has
given in his report to micro-disarmament. Full respect for
arms embargo regimes is particularly relevant in this
context.

In our opinion, one remarkable merit of the
Supplement to "An Agenda for Peace" is the frank and
realistic presentation of a special section on problems that
arise with regard to enforcement action against those
responsible for threats to the peace, breaches of the peace
or acts of aggression.

