Mr. Kapanga (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Today's open meeting of the Security
Council on the situation in Africa - and more specifically
on the partnership between the United Nations and
Africa - is an initiative of the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of its
Permanent Representative to the United Nations. My
delegation joins preceding speakers in sincerely
congratulating you, Mr. President, and in thanking you for
highlighting the importance of this debate by your presence.

Today's meeting is taking place just one week after
the General Assembly's debate on cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), during which Ambassador Baali, Permanent
Representative of Algeria and representative of the current
Chairman of the OAU, ably, clearly and eloquently set
forth Africa's vision of the partnership between this world
Organization and the regional organization that is the pride
of all Africa.
The question of cooperation between the United
Nations - and more specifically the Security Council -
and the OAU is a timely one, given the many hotbeds of
tension that have emerged on our beloved continent since
the end of the cold war. If it is to be effective, that
cooperation must raise the thorny question of the in-depth
reform of the United Nations decision-making system,
which must be able to adapt to the challenges of the
emerging new world. Here, my delegation is thinking more
specifically of the inexorable advance of globalization.

Under the Charter, the Security Council is the United
Nations organ responsible for collective security and bears
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Article 51 of the Charter recognizes the
inherent right of States to individual or collective self-
defence, although that must be seen in the context of
Article 27, paragraph 3, which grants permanent members
of the Security Council the right of veto, in effect
institutionalizing the power to block the collective security
mechanism. That has had a devastating impact on
attempts to define the aggression against my country by
its neighbours. It has also had a devastating impact on
various initiatives to promote peace and national harmony
within my country and within other African countries.

I wish on behalf of my Government to congratulate
most sincerely the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, on
his tireless efforts to bring peace back to my country and
to see to that a United Nations mission to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo finally becomes a reality.

The system of collective security lost definition with
the end of the cold war, and encouraged and tolerated the
emergence of alliances. These diplomatic divisions or
alignments with respect to open conflicts go against or
even prevent the impartial functioning of collective
security. Today's growth of alliances is broadly viewed as
a consequence of the systematic blockage of collective
security.

The way the United Nations has evolved reveals the
close relationship between such alliances and the flawed
functioning of the collective security mechanism. This has
given rise to a diplomacy of coercion, which aims to
resolve armed conflict and its uncertainties through the
acceptance in agreements of conditions set by the party
that proposed them. Crisis often limits one's options -
especially the military option - to a choice between
preexisting alternatives or plans. The resolute adversary
does not generally face the same limitation, and
theoretically enjoys freedom of movement.

So, in the case of the war in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, my country is surprised at the
inconsistencies that emerged within the Security Council.
We are also surprised at how slowly its resolutions and
decisions were implemented owing to the action of certain
Council members that opposed them. We note with regret
that those members are actually perpetuating the poverty,
desolation and suffering of civilian populations, including
women, children and old people.

These States members of the Council do not hesitate
to push their cynicism to the point of requiring that the
adversary - whom they themselves have determined is
the adversary - apply respect for human rights in a

 

discriminatory way. It is astonishing that these same
Council members are the first to deny civilian populations
the same rights they are claiming to protect for them. This
comportment is pathetic and deplorable.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, because of
this irresponsible attitude, there are about 800,000 internally
displaced persons and 200,000 refugees wandering
throughout our national territory waiting while the Security
Council, or certain member States, lose their way in the
search for some solution to this war under the threat of
deadly cannons from the east.

To conclude, my delegation believes that the current
challenges most characteristic of the present period of
uncertainty the world is living through are the threat of
nuclear war, international terrorism by small, desperate
groups, the drowning of certain regions such as the Great
Lakes in great masses of foreigners driven by sharp
economic and population imbalances and - why not -
peace being bought at the cost of tolerating major crises.

Profound reform of the United Nations is overdue. The
Security Council must undergo major changes, both in its
membership and the use of the veto. Article 27, paragraph
3 must be amended.

The Secretary-General must no longer simply be the
chief administrative officer of this Organization. An
adequate distribution of powers between the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Secretary-General
is necessary so that the Secretary-General, working closely
with regional organizations, can define and carry out
preventive diplomacy. This preventive diplomacy, in
stabilizing a local conflict including by placing a military
force in the situation, is the best way to prevent more
widespread conflict between the major powers. This
approach, namely in-depth reform of the United Nations
system, is a prerequisite for this universal Organization to
be able to tackle effectively the challenges of world peace
and also the challenges of Africa.

My delegation assures you of its complete readiness to
work with you when the time comes.

