Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
thank the delegation of Canada for organizing today's
meeting. Our thanks go also to Mr. Carlsson for
introducing the report of the Independent Inquiry. The
Inquiry has succeeded in summing up the experiences
gained and lessons learned by the United Nations with
respect to the massive killings in Rwanda. We convey our
appreciation to the Inquiry for its conscientious and
careful work.

The international community failed to prevent the
tragedy that took place in Rwanda six years ago. The
lessons to be drawn from that tragedy merit sober
reflection. We believe that today's discussion will help us
analyze the experiences and learn lessons with a view to

 

effectively improving United Nations peacekeeping
operations and to increasing the capacity of the Security
Council to react to and deal with similar crises in the
future.

The Inquiry made many recommendations touching
upon a variety of areas. They have a bearing on
coordination and cooperation among various United Nations
departments. The recommendations relate to such matters
as reform of the United Nations, enhancement of the
efficiency of the Security Council, strengthening of the
political will of Member States, mobilization of adequate
resources, and many other matters. These recommendations
warrant attention and study by the relevant departments,
and deserve comprehensive consideration in the context of
strengthening the role of the United Nations in the twenty-
first century.

We have noted that in recent years the United Nations
has been making efforts to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of its peacekeeping operations. How to carry out
effective peacekeeping operations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in Sierra Leone, and how to
transform the priority attention we give to African issues
into action in such a way that success will be achieved and
mistakes reduced to the minimum: these are matters of
increasing public concern. We believe that summarizing the
lessons and experience gained from the Rwanda tragedy
will be illuminating in that regard.

