Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): France is
gratified by the unanimous adoption of resolution 1773
(2007), renewing, unchanged, the mandate of the
07-48907

United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for
one year, in keeping with the request voiced by the
Government of Lebanon. The decision reflects the full
support of the Security Council for the activities of the
force within the context of its mandate. It also reflects
the international community's gratitude for the
effectiveness with which UNIFIL is discharging its
mandate in support of the Lebanese Armed Forces.

As the Secretary-General stated in his most recent
report (S/2007/392), UNIFIL has helped to establish a
new strategic military and security environment in
southern Lebanon. That result would not have been
possible without the dedication and valour of the
civilian and military personnel of UNIFIL, to whom
my country wishes to pay tribute. In particular, France
pays tribute to the memory of the soldiers of the
Spanish contingent who were killed on 24 June and the
French demining expert killed while performing his
duties. Those human losses remind us that, despite
improvements in the security situation in southern
Lebanon over the past year, UNIFIL continues to
operate in a difficult and unstable environment.

Under those conditions, it is imperative that
UNIFIL be able to rely on the cooperation of all parties
in order to discharge its mandate. That requires, on the
one hand, pursuing and strengthening mechanisms for
cooperation in the field, including tripartite
arrangements currently in force, which have been
shown to be effective. It also requires the full
implementation by the parties of the Security Council's
demands as set forth in resolution 1701 (2006) and
reiterated today by the Council, in particular respect
for the cessation of hostilities and for the Blue Line in
its entirety, and respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon, as well as for its unity
and political independence within its internationally
recognized borders. This also requires progress
towards achieving a lasting ceasefire and a long-term
political solution, as called for by resolution 1701
(2006) and the Council's 3 August presidential
statement (S/PRST/2007/29).

Finally, I wish to reaffirm the full commitment of
France, side by side with Lebanon and the Lebanese:
its commitment on the ground, with more than 1,600
French soldiers deployed within UNIFIL; and its
political commitment as demonstrated by the resolute
efforts of the French authorities to help the Lebanese
find the path to lasting stability through dialogue with
07-48907
respect for Lebanese sovereignty and Lebanese
institutions.

