Ms. Anderson (United States of America): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
for his briefing.

Israeli and Palestinian leaders have continued to
engage in proximity talks, with the help of Special
Envoy George Mitchell. The gaps have narrowed, and
we believe there are opportunities to narrow them
further in direct talks, which we encourage the parties
to begin as soon as possible. Special Envoy Mitchell
was in the region again this week to continue this
process. Based on President Obama's recent meetings
in Washington with President Abbas and Prime
Minister Netanyahu, we believe that we have an
opportunity to make progress towards Middle East
peace, which can ultimately be achieved only through
direct negotiations, and we urge all concerned to work
with us towards this goal.

Only through good-faith negotiations can the
parties mutually agree on an outcome that ends the
conflict and reconciles the Palestinian goal of an
independent and viable State based on the 1967 lines,
with agreed swaps, and the Israeli goal of a Jewish
State with secure and recognized borders that reflect
subsequent developments and meets Israeli security
requirements. We should all seek to assist the parties as
they make the hard choices necessary for lasting peace
and do nothing to hinder them.

The United States has welcomed the new policy
towards Gaza announced by the Government of Israel,
which responds to the calls of many in the international
community. Israel's 5 July announcement of a list of
controlled items for Gaza is an important step towards
successful implementation of this new policy. With this
change, the flow of goods and material into Gaza
should significantly improve, along with the access
that the people of Gaza have to those items.

We are already seeing progress, with an
expansion of both the scope and the quantity of goods
entering Gaza through the crossings. We welcome
these increases and expect the number of truckloads to
continue to rise in the days and weeks ahead. These
arrangements should improve conditions for the people
in Gaza while preventing the entry of weapons for
Hamas. We urge all those wishing to deliver goods to
do so through established channels so that their cargo
can be inspected and transferred via land crossings into
Gaza, to ensure that Israel's legitimate security needs
are addressed even as the Palestinians' humanitarian
needs are met.

Hamas interference with international assistance
and with the work of non-governmental organizations
continues to seriously complicate efforts in Gaza. On
28 June, for example, an armed band of masked men
attacked and destroyed one of the sites of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) summer games
for children in Gaza. This was the second such attack
in a month, another craven attempt to impose an
extremist Viewpoint on Gaza's population.
We commend UNRWA for conducting a
programme that promotes human rights and tolerance
and that serves as a Viable alternative to Hamas camps
that promote radicalism and violence. Continued arms
smuggling by Hamas and its commitment to terrorism
undermine security and prosperity for Palestinians and
Israelis alike. And Hamas continues to hold captive the
Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, whom it abducted in 2006.
We call again for his immediate release.

In its 1 June statement on the Gaza flotilla
incident (S/PRST/2010/9), the Council expressed
support for the proximity talks, urged the parties to act
with restraint, avoiding any unilateral or provocative
actions, and called on all international partners to
promote an atmosphere of cooperation between the
parties and throughout the region.

We urge the international community to shun
unilateral action and confrontation and instead
undertake conciliatory steps that promote cooperation
between the parties.

We call on all parties to act responsibly to meet
the recovery needs of the people of Gaza and to rebuild
Gaza's civilian private sector, which will be the engine
of Gaza's recovery.

In this context, Israel, like any nation, should be
allowed to undertake an investigation into events that
involve its national security. Israel is capable of
conducting a serious and credible investigation, and the
structure and terms of reference of the independent
public commission on the Gaza flotilla can meet the
standard of a prompt, impartial, credible and
transparent investigation. We will prejudge neither the
process nor its outcome, and we will await the conduct
and findings of the investigation before drawing further
conclusions.

The United States has expressed its concern about
the reports of Israeli Government actions in Jerusalem,
including the demolition of a number of buildings in
East Jerusalem. We have urged all parties to avoid
actions that could undermine trust, and we continue to
oppose unilateral actions that prejudge negotiations on
the status of Jerusalem, which, like all other permanent
status issues, must be resolved by the parties through
negotiations.

Let me conclude by noting our firm and abiding
commitment to Lebanon's sovereignty and
independence and thus to the full implementation of
the Council's resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and
1701 (2006). The United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) is integral not only to the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) but also to
maintaining calm along the Blue Line. The United
States fully supports UNIFIL, and we commend the
active role it plays in ensuring the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006). We call on all parties to
preserve UNIFIL's freedom of movement within its
area of operations, and we strongly support its mission.

