Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation wishes to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi for his briefing. We would
like to make the following observations regarding the
situation in Kosovo.

First, the situation in Kosovo, and in particular
the personal safety and security of Serbs and other
ethnic minorities, has not fundamentally improved.
Incidents of violence in which Serbs and other ethnic
minorities have been the primary targets have
continued, with no end in sight. As a result of fear and
an acute sense of insecurity, Serbs and other ethnic
minorities have not been able to return to their homes
under normal conditions. At the same time, the Kosovo
Liberation Army has continued to carry out its
activities in one form or another. We wish to express
our deep concern over this situation.

It has now been 14 months since the United
Nations took over the administration of Kosovo.
According to the Secretariat's briefing, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) have made
great efforts and achieved some progress. But the
indisputable fact remains that the security situation in
Kosovo remains a cause for serious concern. Unless
timely and effective measures are taken to reverse
these trends, the credibility of the United Nations will
continue to be undermined.

Secondly, we are of the view that the upcoming
municipal elections in Kosovo must be fully well
planned and prepared. In particular, the personal safety
and freedom of movement of all residents must be
ensured so that the elections can be held in an
atmosphere of freedom and peace. If the equitable
representation of various constituencies cannot be
ensured - in particular that of ethnic minorities - it
would be difficult to envisage a fair and equitable
election. An unfair election will likely become the
cause of further ethnic conflict, thereby having
unfavourable consequences for peace and security.

Thirdly, with regard of the takeover of the Trepca
complex by KFOR, we are of the view that this is not
merely an environmental issue. It is a very sensitive
political issue because the livelihood of thousands of
Serbs depends on that complex. Moreover, this is not
the only business in Kosovo with environmental
problems. If UNMIK adopts such Draconian measures
only in cases of businesses owned and managed by
Serbs, that will undoubtedly serve to aggravate ethnic
strife. We hope that UNMIK will adopt an attitude
marked by prudence and fairness.

Fourthly, we wish to express our concern about
the many events that serve to undermine the
sovereignty of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. For
example, a number of foreigners have visited Kosovo
and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, but that
country has had no say about their visits. Moreover,
quite a number of quasi-diplomatic organizations have
been set up that even enjoy diplomatic privileges and
immunity. We would like to emphasize that any course
of action designed to lead to Kosovo's independence is
illegal and will surely fail.

Finally, the Chinese delegation would like to
express its support for the work of UNMIK. At the
same time, we wish to reiterate that the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia must be fully respected. Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) must be fully implemented.

