Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Let me begin by thanking
the Peruvian presidency for organizing this important
high-level briefing. We are pleased to see you,
Mr. Minister, presiding over this meeting.

I would like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2018/43) two years after the twin resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council (General Assembly resolution 70/262 and resolution 2282 (2016))
on the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture were adopted. We thank him for his
presentation of the report, which outlines how he intends
to implement the new approach to sustaining peace.

We also thank the State Secretary for Regional
Affairs and Multilateral Global Affairs in the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of Romania, as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

We are indeed very pleased to see Commissioner
Chergui among us, and his presence here today
signifies the need to forge necessary partnerships with
regional organizations in addressing the challenges of
sustaining peace. We draw satisfaction from the fact
that cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) is currently at the highest level
that it has ever been. Commissioner Chergui rightfully
paid tribute to the Secretary-General for the role that
he has been playing in strengthening that partnership
between the United Nations and the AU. We, of course,
look forward in the same spirit to further strengthening
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union.

The timing of this high-level meeting could not be
any more appropriate in the light of the unprecedented
challenges facing the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security. All indications are
that we are passing through a period characterized by
increasing geopolitical tensions. The proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction is now becoming a major
threat. Terrorism and violent extremism also remain
a grave danger to international peace and security.
Cybercrime and the possibility of the disruption of
critical infrastructure are becoming an almost realized
nightmare. The spread of small arms and light weapons
and the increasing activities of transnational organized
criminals continue to foment instability around the
world. The impact of that on Africa is cause for great
concern. Nevertheless, we are encouraged by the
ongoing reform process that the Secretary-General is
undertaking to make the Organization fit for purpose
in responding to current security challenges.

In view of the enormous peace and security
challengeswe face today, prioritizing conflictprevention
is not really an option. The concept of sustaining peace
is also perfectly aligned with that important priority,
and it has certainly brought about a new paradigm shift
in the manner in which we should deal with peace and
security issues. It is hence encouraging to note that
the proposed reform of the United Nations peace and
security pillar has prioritized prevention and sustaining
peace as its overarching goal. That is very critical, in
our View, as it provides the necessary framework to
coordinate a coherent response in addressing root
causes and violence across various stages of conflict.

We believe that the reform outcome will allow
the United Nations to develop an integrated capability
to comprehensively tackle contemporary security
challenges, including, among other ways, by reducing
duplicative structures and overlapping mandates;
ensuring greater transparency and accountability; and
improved planning and budgetary process. We feel that
this would ultimately strengthen the Organization's
ability to deliver effective and efficient operational
support in the field, including in complex security
terrains where peacekeeping and special political
missions are deployed. That is why we welcome the latest
report of the Secretary-General on the review of the
peacebuilding architecture and his recommendations
contained therein.

It has been emphasized time and again that peace
and security, development and human rights are
inextricably linked, and therefore closer collaboration
among various United Nations organs and other
stakeholders is required for building peaceful and
inclusive societies. As rightly stressed in the latest
report, addressing institutional fragmentation and
ensuring policy and operational coherence across the
entire United Nations system is also essential to ensure
that conflict prevention and sustaining peace are placed
at the heart of the Organization's work and activities.

However, we have to realize that we cannot
achieve that without fully utilizing the potential role
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), particularly
its convening, bridging and advisory roles with
principal and relevant organs of the United Nations.
We therefore need to scale up the PBC's contribution
along that line, and continuous focus and engagement
are needed to ensure that the Commission continues
to promote an integrated, strategic and coherent
approach. In that regard, we are encouraged to note
the recent comprehensive advice of the PBC to the
Security Council on a number of regional and country-
specific issues. We are also encouraged to note that
the Secretary-General has underscored in his reform
proposal the hinge role of the Peacebuilding Support
Office in linking the peace and security pillar with
development and humanitarian efforts.

We believe that the United Nations cannot address
the myriad international security challenges alone.
In order to achieve the end goal of sustaining peace,
there is a need to enhance partnerships with various
stakeholders, including with regional and subregional
organizations, international financial institutions,
national Governments and various civil society and
private organizations across the whole spectrum of
conflict cycles, including prevention, peacekeeping
and special political missions, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding.

For instance, the African Union's peacebuilding
efforts in Africa in line with the implementation of the
AU post-conflict reconstruction and development policy
framework, as well as the African Solidarity Initiative,
certainly complements the work of the PBC. We hope
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security will be
instrumental in further strengthening the cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU in peacebuilding
and sustaining peace in Africa. We also welcome the
signing of the memorandum of understanding between
the PBC and the Economic Community of West African
States, which provides a framework for cooperation and
partnership in peacebuilding.

Ultimately, sustaining peace is of course a national
endeavour, and the national ownership and inclusivity
of all stakeholders, including the Government, the
private sector and civil society, is key to achieving the
objective of sustaining peace. What is really required of
the United Nations and international partners is to help
build national and local capacities for sustaining peace.
That has to be very well explained and understood
by all so as to avoid any misunderstanding. Building
the necessary confidence among Member States is
absolutely important to facilitate the implementation
and operationalization of this new approach to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.

Finally, we believe there is a need for a change
of mindset, without which no amount of structural
adjustments and innovations can help us achieve
the ultimate objective of making peace and security
sustainable and avert what otherwise could be a
calamity of immeasurable consequences. That should
not be considered as too difficult or complex to achieve,
for a good start can be made by summoning our
earlier commitment to multilateralism, without which
the creation of the United Nations would have been
inconceivable, and reining in the short-sighted and
undisciplined pursuit of national interest, in which the
rationale for the United Nations is anchored and which
the Second World War made a lesson to be ignored
only at our peril. This, no doubt, is a period when much
wisdom is needed in relations among States.

The meeting rose at 5.25 pm.
