Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to express our sincere congratulations to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We wish you every
success. I should also like to thank you for your

response to the request of the Non-Aligned Movement
to convene this extremely important meeting in order
to give Member States an opportunity to express their
views on the important matter being debated by the
Council: the question of the critical situation in Iraq
and the charges levelled against it that it possesses
weapons of mass destruction.

Today, we are experiencing dire circumstances
that place the world order at a crucial crossroads, an
order represented in the United Nations and its
purposes and principles and international law, which all
seek to consolidate the rules of coexistence and
international relations and to preserve the
independence and sovereignty of all States. Indeed,
those circumstances might thoroughly shake all the
efforts that have been made since the Second World
War to consolidate the rules of international peace and
security and to avoid the scourges of war around the
world. Aggravating our concern are the unknown
appalling consequences of a new war, which have
increased tension in the region and the rest of the
world, with no way to foresee its outcome.

Member States joined the United Nations,
accepted its Charter and committed themselves to
working sincerely with all other States in order to bring
views closer together, to strengthen international
relations and to respect international treaties. This is
done with a view to attaining the greater goal of living
in peace and good-neighbourliness, so that States
would unite their energies in order to maintain
international peace and security and would not use
military force, except to serve common interests, in
order to preserve mankind's common heritage from
war's devastation and destruction.

The State of Qatar has supported and continues to
firmly support all efforts aimed at achieving a peaceful
resolution of the current world crisis related to the
situation in Iraq and at finding an acceptable formula
that will save Iraq and its people from the devastation
of a new war, since Iraq has suffered enough as a result
of a series of wars that have left a trail of destruction in
the region in terms of human losses, damaged physical
infrastructure and environmental pollution in the
region. As can be seen from recent indicators, a new
war in Iraq would create a new catastrophe with dire
consequences, not only for Iraq itself, but also for its
neighbours in the region. It might also lead to a series
of accelerated changes in the geopolitical map of the
whole Middle East region.
In the heavily clouded atmosphere of war, the
State of Qatar has consistently sought to find the best
possible way out of this ominous crisis.

As a result, and by virtue of Qatar's capacity as
Chairman of the Ninth Islamic Summit Conference of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), my
Government has called for an extraordinary summit
meeting of the OIC member States in order to discuss
the best political ways to reach a peaceful solution that
will spare Iraq and its people the dangers of a new
humanitarian catastrophe. The State of Qatar and the
OIC have every hope that the Security Council will
reach an agreement that will save the region from
tension and war.

On Friday, 14 February, we listened closely to the
reports submitted by Mr. Hans Blix, the Executive
Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC),
and by Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
Afterwards, we also listened carefully to the
contributions of the members of the Security Council
and their reactions to the two reports of the
international inspectors.

In our view, the two reports did not substantially
differ from the inspectors' presentation on 27 January
of their initial reports on the outcome of their search
for weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. My delegation
further notes that, judging by the extensive exchange of
views among States Members of the United Nations,
opinions in the international community, represented
by the Security Council, remain divided. We also note,
however, that there is overwhelming support for
allowing the international inspectors more time and
greater authority and to give the diplomatic efforts a
better chance to achieve a peaceful solution. We also
continue to insist on the importance of the need to
reach a peaceful settlement of the Iraqi question.

In our turn, we call on Iraq to respond to and
implement fully the Security Council's resolutions. We
appreciate Iraq's response to the resolutions adopted at
the Arab summit meeting, held in March 2002,
regarding the situation between Iraq and Kuwait. We
call on Iraq to resolve the remaining issues with
Kuwait, including the question of Kuwaiti prisoners
and third-country detainees, and to return the Kuwaiti
property remaining in its possession.

While we are on the subject of weapons of mass
destruction and the need to respect resolutions of
international legitimacy, we wish to place on record our
conviction that the work of the Security Council must
be transparent and must abandon selectivity and double
standards. We also wish to place on record our belief
that the United Nations should not offer certain
countries special treatment while it insists on the
implementation of international resolutions.

The resolutions of the Security Council must be
implemented by Israel, which possesses an arsenal of
nuclear weapons and refuses to accede to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We call on
the international system to subject Israeli nuclear
installations and nuclear power facilities to the
safeguards of the IAEA.

