Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): Estonia aligns itselfwith
the statement made on behalf of the European Union.

First of all, we would like to commend the Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), the Permanent Representative
of Spain, and all members of the 1540 Committee for
their dedicated work on the comprehensive review
process. I would also like to take this opportunity to
thank Spain for its excellent work during its term in the
Security Council, including promoting the objectives of
non-proliferation and counter-terrorism.

We cannot agree more that the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery constitute serious threats to international
peace and security. Those threats are continually
evolving and include the use of developments in
science, technology and international commerce by
non-State actors for proliferation purposes. As proof of
that new phenomenon, we have confirmed information
by the United Nations-Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons Joint Investigative Mechanism
that toxic chemicals were used as weapons in Syria by
both the Syrian Government and Da'esh, and there are
new allegations that terrorists used chemical weapons
in Iraq.
Resolution 1540 (2004) remains the fundamental
pillar in the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. We welcome the report of the 1540
Committee on the comprehensive review, as well as
resolution 2325 (2016), which Estonia also co-sponsored.
We are particularly pleased that the resolution reflects
new and emerging risks and developments in the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and
stresses the need to continue enhancing cooperation
between the 1540 committee and other relevant Security
Council Committees, such as the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
It is also important that the resolution underlines the
importance of a dialogue between the 1540 Committee
and Member States, including visits to States, and points
out the involvement and crucial role of civil society,
industry and academia in the effective implementation
of the resolution.

Estonia attaches great importance to its
commitment to the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destructions, as evidenced through its implementation
of the resolution 1540 (2004). We support multilateral
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control
treaties and regimes and we are commited to their
full implementation. We will continue to contribute
to a number of global and regional non-proliferation
initiatives, such as the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism and the Proliferation Security
Initiative. We will also continue supporting the
resolution by sharing our experience and knowledge in
the area of export control of dual-use items.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Estonia's
readiness to proactively implement the outcome of the
2016 comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004).

