The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of cote d'Ivoire, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the consideration of the item Without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bailly (Cdte d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
communique dated 18 May 2009 of the
Permanent Consultative Framework of the
Ouagadougou Political Agreement, which
provides a comprehensive electoral time frame
leading to the first round of the presidential
election in Cote d'Ivoire on 29 November 2009.
It stresses that this time frame has been endorsed
by all the main Ivorian political actors, as
requested by the statement of the President of the
Security Council S/PRST/2008/42 and resolution
1865 (2009).

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of the effective implementation of
each of the five stages leading to the elections, as
referred to in the report of the Secretary-General
dated 13 April 2009 (S/2009/196), namely:
(1) the publication of the provisional voters list at
the end of voter registration operations; (2) the
publication of the final voters list; (3) the
production of identification and voter cards;
(4) the distribution of identification and voter
cards; and (5) the electoral campaigning period.

"The Security Council, consistent with its
resolution 1865 (2009), underlines that this
timeline binds the Ivorian political actors and that
the way it will be implemented will reflect their
level of political commitment towards the holding
of free, fair, open and transparent elections in a
secure environment. The Security Council urges
the Ivorian political actors to meet their
commitments in full and without further delay. It
urges again the political actors in particular to
comply fully with the Code of Good Conduct for
elections they signed under the auspices of the
Secretary-General on 24 April 2008.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for cote d'Ivoire and to the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, and
recalls that the Special Representative shall certify
that all stages of the electoral process provide all
the necessary guarantees for the holding of free,
fair, open and transparent presidential and
legislative elections in accordance with
international standards, consistent with paragraph
20 of resolution 1865 (2009). It takes note of the
request by the Ivorian parties that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General make
known and explain to all Ivorian stakeholders the
content and modus operandi of the five-criteria
framework referred to in document S/2008/250
and in resolution 1865 (2009).

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support for the Facilitator, and calls on the
Ivorian political actors to continue to cooperate
fully with him, in particular in this critical phase
of the peace process.

"The Security Council expresses the hope
that the announcement of the electoral time frame
will give a new impetus to the implementation of
the Ouagadougou Political Agreement and its
Supplementary Agreements, It takes note of the
ceremony of transfer of authority held in Bouake'
on 26 May 2009 as a positive development and
urges the Ivorian parties to continue to make
progress.
09-35353
"The Security Council reiterates its
determination to bring its full support to a
credible electoral process in Cote d'Ivoire. To
this end, it requests the Secretary-General to keep
it closely and regularly informed of the progress
made by the parties in the implementation of each

of the key stages of the electoral time frame."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/16.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
09-35353

Before I adjourn this meeting, and as we hope
this is the last meeting in May - that is, the last under
the Russian presidency - I would like to thank all my
colleagues in the Security Council and all delegations
of United Nations Member States that in some way
participated in the work of the Security Council in May
for their cooperation, understanding and support. I
would of course like to convey my gratitude to my
colleagues in the Secretariat, the interpreters and all
those who enable us to carry out effective, intensive
work.

The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

