Mr. Roet (Israel): I would like to thank the Foreign
Minister of Chad for presiding over today's debate.

Before I begin, I would like to say a few words
about the recent terrorist attacks in Pakistan and
Australia. The cowardly attacks on children in a school
and on innocent civilians in a coffee shop are a painful
reminder that no nation is immune to terrorism. We
condemn in the strongest possible terms those heinous
and senseless acts of violence. The thoughts and prayers
of the Israeli people are with the families of the victims
in Pakistan and Australia, and we pray for a speedy
recovery for all those who were injured.

I want to tell the Council about a small start-up
that emerged in our region just a few years ago. Like
any new enterprise, it secured funding, recruited talent
and acquired the equipment needed for its day-to-day
operations. The venture gained momentum and was
able to recruit more people, grow its revenue base and
acquire more sophisticated tools. Like many start-ups,
it turned to social media to amplify its messages and
gain greater prominence - that too fueled further
growth. It soon expanded its portfolio to deal in illicit
enterprises, including stealing and selling crude oil,
kidnapping, smuggling and trafficking in goods. Today,
that billion-dollar enterprise is a household name - the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), also known
as Daesh.

The meteoric rise of ISIS is just one example of
"terrorism 2.0". Extremist groups are using every
tool and means at their disposal to further their
radical ideological goals and commit senseless acts
of brutality. The haunting images of terrorism will
forever be in our minds - school children murdered
by the Taliban, journalists beheaded by ISIS, innocent
Christians massacred by al-Shabaab and the countless
innocent civilians who were victims of suicide attacks
perpetrated by Hizbullah and Hamas. In order to
effectively counter the threat posed by terrorists, the
international community must address every means by
which radical groups take root and grow. To confront
terrorism 2.0, we must prevent, preempt and undermine
terrorism. In other words, we must invest in counter-
terrorism 3.0 - a three-pronged approach to combating
and preventing terrorism.

First, we must cut offthe supply lines that originate
with organized crime networks. Terrorist groups rely
on criminal networks to provide them with weaponry
and munitions. Hizbullah, for example, runs one of
the largest and most sophisticated global criminal
operations in the world. For years, it has funded
terrorism through criminal enterprises, including
narcotics trafficking and forging currency. In 2008,
German authorities arrested two Lebanese members
of Hizbullah carrying more than €8 million generated
from cocaine smuggling. In 2011, American authorities
uncovered an extensive Hizbullah narcotics-trafficking
and money-laundering scheme that was generating
as much as $200 million a month for the terrorist
organization.

In addition to raising funds through drug sales,
Hizbullah is deeply involved in the trafficking of
counterfeit and stolen currency and goods. In 2009, the
United States Federal Bureau of Investigation revealed
that a Hizbullah member tied to the Philadelphia
criminal underworld was trying to sell stolen cell
phones, laptops and cars. The international community
must develop a robust strategy to interrupt the flow of
funds from criminal enterprises to terrorist groups. By
severing the connection, we will cut the financial and
logistical lifeline that keeps terrorist groups afloat.

Secondly, the Security Council must address the
State sponsors of terrorism. The fact of the matter is
that some Member States in this Organization support,
harbour, finance, train and smuggle terrorists and
weapons in our region. Qatar is aggressively funding
the Taliban in Afghanistan, the Al-Nusra Front in
Syria, and Hamas in Gaza. In fact, in Gaza just a few
days ago, Hamas held a rally at which Abu Obeida, the
spokesman for the military wing of Hamas, publicly
thanked Qatar and Iran for their ongoing support.
In addition to financing Hamas, Iran is bankrolling
Hizbullah with up to $200 million a year to wage war
on its behalf. In the last two years alone, Hizbullah
operatives have been detained in Nigeria, Thailand
and Cyprus for plotting attacks on civilians. And at
the instruction of Iran, Hizbollah Secretary-General
Hassan Nasrallah publicly declared that his forces will
ensure the survival of Syria's Al-Assad regime.

The international community can no longer ignore
or downplay the global threat posed by Hizbullah. Its
founding manifesto pledges loyalty to Iran's supreme
leader, seeks the establishment of an Islamic regime
and calls for war against Israel and the West. Terrorist
groups will continue to undermine international peace
and security so long as State actors supply them with
weaponry, financing, training and safe havens. A stable
and prosperous Middle East will remain elusive until
the Security Council unmasks those rogue regimes and
compels them to end their support for terrorism.

Thirdly, the international community must broaden
and strengthen sanctions against terror groups. More
effective procedures are needed to bring individuals
involved in terrorist activities to justice. Mechanisms
must be put in place to freeze their financial assets
and prevent their movement through the territories of
Member States. Every democracy walks a fine line
between defending civil liberties and upholding the rule
of law. It is not easy, but we can never allow terrorist
groups to gain the upper hand.

The recent decision of the European Court of
Justice is an injustice to the victims of Hamas terror
attacks. Terrorism is a global problem, and all those
who stand for freedom must make a continuous effort
to fight it. Terrorism will not retreat on its own. It
cannot be stopped by embracing moderates or making
concessions. Complacency breeds catastrophe and we
will all bear the consequences. For the sake of our
children, our nations and our common future, we must
stand shoulder to shoulder and hold to account all those
who support and engage in terrorism.

