The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. De
Mistura for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Uruguay.

We reiterate our full support for the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, and his entire team. We thank them for their
tireless efforts and their willingness to push ahead, in
spite of the notorious obstacles that repeatedly emerge.

We welcome the fact that yet another round of
negotiations has taken place and that some progress
made on the four baskets of issues on the Geneva
agenda, in particular with regard to the drafting of
a new constitution. Nonetheless, it is important to
step up efforts and set earlier deadlines to achieve a
political transition that would gradually restore a sense
of normalcy to the country. Once again, we reiterate
our conviction that there is no military solution to
the conflict and that we will be able to emerge from
this labyrinth and put an end to the humanitarian
tragedy only through a process of political transition
agreed to by the Syrian people and with mediation
by the United Nations. We trust that unilateral action
that would prevent us from reaching that goal will be
avoided, which would give the Security Council greater
credibility as a key player in resolving the crisis.

As we mentioned on previous occasions, the United
Nations and the Special Envoy are not protagonists
in the tragedy that has been occurring in Syria since
2011; they are merely mediators, assisting the parties
to the conflict. The primary responsibility for ending
the conflict lies directly with the Syrian people, and
in particular with the Government, on the one hand,
and all individuals and entities that make up the
opposition, including armed groups, on the other. We
support the efforts of the Special Envoy to ensure
that the process towards a political transition in Syria
is genuinely inclusive and we commend him on his
commitment to working with large sections of Syrian
civil society, religious leaders and women's groups.
Third States - those in the region and outside of it
that are direct or indirect participants in the situation in
Syria - also bear responsibility in the conflict.

In that regard, Uruguay understands that the
Security Council's responsibility in this issue is to
continue putting pressure on and persuading the parties
to remain at the negotiating table and make gradual and
tangible progress on the road map outlined in resolution
2254 (2015). It is essential now more than ever to
strengthen political will in the various multilateral
forums in which the Syrian crisis is discussed - the
Security Council, negotiations in Geneva and the Astana
process. The memorandum that established four safe
zones in Syria, signed in early May in Astana, appears
to have been a step forward towards achieving the
goal of strengthening the ceasefire and in reducing the
extremely high levels of violence in the majority of
areas in Syria.

Although we do not yet have detailed information
on how the agreement will be implemented, we are
nonetheless concerned that, thus far, provisions have
not been made for the unimpeded access of the United
Nations to the interior of those zones. It is essential that
humanitarian access be guaranteed and that the civilian
population be allowed to move freely and be able to
enter and leave those areas, as they please.
The Syrian crisis, with its high economic and
humanitarian costs, has led to the spread of a even
more extremist type of terrorism, which creates greater
instability in the Middle East and throughout the world.
After more than six years of war, a peaceful solution to
the conflict in Syria is a moral imperative for the Council
and for the entire international community. We urge the
parties to the conflict - those that have influence with
them and those that, in one way or another, take part in
the conflict - to cease hostilities, engage in good-faith
negotiations, and reach an agreement that would allow
the Syrian people to open a new chapter on peace and
national reconciliation.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to those Council members who wish
to make statements.

