Mr. Fowler (spoke in French): Thank you for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the report of
the Panel of Experts on violations of the Security Council
sanctions against UNITA. I am particularly glad that the
Minister for External Relations of Angola, Mr. J 0510
Bernardo de Miranda, has been able to attend the meeting
today.

The Panel has produced a consensus report which I
highly commend to the Council. It is, I think, an
outstanding product, despite the very short time the Panel
members had to produce it. I extend my thanks to the
Panel, three members of which are with me today:
Ambassador Anders Mollander, the Chairman; Colonel
Tiroyamodimo, the Vice-Chairman; and Mr. Stanlake
Samkange, the Rapporteur.

The Panel was created pursuant to the Council's
resolution 1237 (1999) of 7 May 1999. This was the first
time the Council created a body of this kind. The Group's
mandate was to collect information on how the Council's
sanctions against UNITA were being violated and on
those responsible for these violations, and to offer
recommendations on how these sanctions might be made
to work. The Panel has done just that with regard to each
of the five areas of the sanctions regime implemented
since 1993: the prohibition on the sale or supply of
weapons and related material and other forms of military
assistance to UNITA; the prohibition against the sale or
supply of petroleum and petroleum products to UNITA;
the seizing of bank accounts and other financial assets of
UNITA; the sanctions against representation abroad and
travel by the UNITA leadership and the adult members of
their immediate families; and lastly, the prohibition on the
sale or export of diamonds by UNITA.

 

As the Panel's report makes clear in paragraph 2, the
underlying objective of the sanctions is to foster a durable
political settlement to the civil war in Angola by limiting
UNITA's ability to pursue its objectives by military means.
If these recommendations are acted upon, this report will
have a real and substantial impact on UNITA's ability to
wage war by reducing its revenues, increasing its costs and
choking off its supply. The Panel's recommendations stand
to thwart Mr. Savimbi's plans to take through force of arms
what he was denied by Angola's voters eight years ago -
if, that is, the Council acts on this report with the same
clear-eyed purpose and sense of responsibility that informed
the work of the Expert Panel.

The Security Council has repeatedly declared that
UNITA, led by Jonas Savimbi, is the principal cause of the
resumption of Angola's civil war. More than a million
Angolans have lost their lives during this 30-year war. Two
hundred more die each day. It is a brutal and odious war in
which the principal victims are innocent civilians. Five out
of six Angolans alive today have never known peace and
have never experienced what virtually everyone in this
room understands to be a normal existence. There is not a
person, a building, an enterprise or an institution in Angola
which has not been damaged by this horrible war. Indeed,
UNICEF tells us that Angola is the worst country in the
world in which to be a child.

Humanitarian agencies and human rights observers,
who have access only to the outer edge of the human
catastrophe unfolding in Angola, offer terrifying data
suggesting that as much as a third of Angola's beleaguered
population is internally displaced. In this connection, I am
very grateful to Mr. Holbrooke for focusing this Council's
attention on the issue of persons internally displaced within
their own country. Most Angolans do not even have the
option of fleeing across borders. The horror in Angola is far
worse than even these terrible statistics indicate. It is,
however, both possible and necessary for the Council to
respond and finally change the situation. This report offers
us a clear design for doing so.

The war has undermined Angola's bright prospects for
development and continues to undermine good governance.
It persistently threatens to further destabilize neighbouring
countries. Our priority must be to end this war soon.
Sanctions alone cannot do this, but they can contribute
significantly to creating conditions conducive to stopping
this war once and for all.

(spoke in English)

Security Council sanctions against UNITA have not
worked well. More than a few people I have encountered
in my travels as Committee Chairman have accused me
of idealism in suggesting that these sanctions were ever
intended to have any real impact. Many regarded their
imposition as a political gesture on which the Council had
little intention of following through. The result has been
not only a culture of impunity regarding the violation of
Security Council sanctions, but also a massive failure
even to communicate the activities covered by sanctions
and an imperfect understanding of what they were
intended to achieve.

Mr. Savimbi, however, was one of the few who did
understand both the scope and purpose of these sanctions,
and he took methodical and far-sighted action to
neutralize their impact by systematically establishing a
variety of overlapping supply systems and by purchasing
friends and facilitators in a number of countries and
within the international arms bazaar, the diamond market
and among rogue air services. As sanctions began to bite,
Mr. Savimbi adapted his plans, constantly jinking and
twisting to thwart - until recently, very successfully -
the objectives of the sanctions regime.

This excellent report chronicles how Mr. Savimbi
was able to do this - how diamonds were used to buy
arms, and how inadequate arms export control regimes,
largely in Eastern Europe, coupled with the secretive
practices and opaque operations of the international
diamond market and the advent of ample and
freewheeling "pirate" air services in the post-cold-war era,
combined to provide UNITA with just-in-time deliveries
of state-of-the-art weaponry. The report highlights the fact
that these all-too-willing suppliers of services could not
have provided Mr. Savimbi with the wherewithal he
needed without the active support of some foreign
Governments, sometimes at the highest level.

The report further notes that despite the meticulous,
specific prohibitions against access to the outside world,
many officials - mostly in Western capitals - have
continued to allow UNITA's representatives to lobby
Governments and the media. Other Governments have
continued to extend warm welcomes to members of
Savimbi's extended family and those of his senior
lieutenants, opening their schools and universities and
issuing residence permits and travel documents -
specifically contrary to measures imposed by the Council

 

to deny UNITA's leadership these precious benefits of
international legitimacy and acceptance.

The report does name names, including, in a few
instances, at the highest level. This, of course, makes
everyone nervous, because, frankly, it has not been done.
Some, it is claimed, are beyond criticism. However, African
leaders, at their Organization of African Unity (OAU)
summit meeting in Algiers last July, set, I believe, a new
standard for acceptable behaviour, one designed to ensure
that the "African renaissance" takes root and flourishes. I
doubt that such findings would have been possible without
such a brave and unequivocal signal, and I salute the
leadership of the OAU for setting the stage for such a
report.

As was made clear by the Panel in paragraph 99,
violations did not occur along clear geographical,
ideological or linguistic lines - a fact fully reflected in the
body of the report. Sanctions busting was not limited to any
particular region or subregion.

Panel members visited almost 30 countries over a
six-month period and amassed a very large body of
information from a very wide variety of sources. The Panel
reported only information that had been confirmed or
corroborated by more than one source in which its members
had confidence. As a result of the Panel's unwillingness to
use information that was not so corroborated, the
information contained in the report is less detailed than
would have been the case had a less rigorous standard been
applied.

The Panel offers 39 recommendations, all of which
strike me, as Chairman, as being realistic and achievable.
Some are essentially procedural; others are more complex.
Among the most challenging for us, I suspect, will be those
recommendations that would have the Council apply
sanctions against leaders and Governments found to have
been deliberately and methodically violating the sanctions
against UNITA. The recommendations propose means
through which this might be done, including the imposition
of an embargo on arms sales to named countries for a
period of three years - the first recommendation - and
the imposition of visa requirements and the revocation of
special travel privileges on the nationals of countries that
enable UNITA to flout restrictions on travel by its senior
members and their immediate families; that is
recommendation 22. The Panel also proposes, in
recommendation 37, a ban on the holding of United Nations
or other international governmental conferences in countries
deemed to be in breach of these sanctions, and it further
recommends that such countries not be elected to senior
positions within the United Nations system or as
chairman-in-office of any international or regional
organization.

In the area of weapons and military assistance,
recommendation 2 would have Governments register,
license and monitor the activities of arms brokers and
make relevant information available to international
organizations seeking to curtail illicit arms transfers.
Recommendation 4 would provide for the mandatory
authentication and reconciliation of all end-user
certificates, and recommendation 3 would encourage the
destruction of surplus arms. The Panel supports the idea
advanced by Ukraine of bringing together Eastern
European suppliers of arms with a view to formulating
concrete proposals on how best to stem the illicit flow of
arms from this region into Angola, and it recommends
that representatives of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) be included in these discussions.

Unfortunately, in the time available, the Panel was
not able to learn more about how precisely and from
where the international arms merchants hired by UNITA
were able to obtain such a large range of sophisticated
weaponry. The report chronicles how Mr. Savimbi bought
end-user certificates from friendly Governments, through
which those arms dealers were able to fill their orders.
But there are still some important missing links between
these bureaucratic niceties and the decisions we all know
must have occurred within some of the manufacturing and
exporting countries - and the motivations behind such
decisions - which led to the release of such lethal
material, with or without a credible paper trail.

From my perspective, this ought to be a principal
focus of any decision we might take in the Security
Council to pursue our monitoring efforts, and I commend
to the Council, in this regard, the recommendation of the
Government of Ukraine and of the Panel to convene the
conference I mentioned earlier with respect to
arms-exporting countries to determine how the supply of
arms to UNITA might be better curtailed.

With respect to petroleum and petroleum products,
recommendation 8 calls for the monitoring of the border
areas adjacent to Angola, and recommendation 9 calls for
the institutionalization of information-exchange
mechanisms among oil companies and Governments to
facilitate the flow of information regarding possible illegal
diversions of fuel. The creation within SADC of an ad
hoc committee is proposed in this regard. In

 

recommendation 10 the Panel recommends that a DNA-type
analysis be conducted for the purpose of determining the
origin of fuel obtained or captured from UNITA.

By recommendation 11 the Panel also calls for the
implementation of tighter internal controls within Angola,
as well as, by recommendation 12, for the stricter
application and enforcement by Governments of air safety
regulations regarding the transport of fuel and other
hazardous commodities by air.

With reference to diamonds, under recommendation 13
the Panel proposes forfeiture where the legal origin of
rough diamonds cannot be established by the possessor and,
by recommendation 14, for the imposition by Governments
of restrictions - including blacklisting and criminal
action - on individuals and enterprises found to be
intentionally breaking relevant United Nations sanctions. In
particular, in recommendation 16 the Panel recommends
that dealing in undeclared rough diamonds be made a
criminal offence in countries hosting important diamond-
marketing centres. In addition, in recommendation 17 the
Panel recommends that a conference of experts be
convened to establish a system of controls that would allow
for increased transparency and accountability in the control
of diamonds from the source of origin to the bourses -
including the development of mechanisms for identifying,
within diamond markets, those stones that may have
reached diamond centres without a customs declaration, and
the establishment of a comprehensive database on diamond
characteristics and trends. The Panel also calls upon the
diamond industry itself to develop and implement more
effective arrangements to ensure that its members
worldwide abide by the relevant sanctions against UNITA.
That is recommendation 18.

With regard to finances and assets, the Panel
recommends that Member States make provision for the
forfeiture of UNITA-controlled assets the provenance of
which cannot be traced to a lawful source. By
recommendation 19 the seized and forfeited assets should,
in the main, be used to benefit the people of Angola.
However, under recommendation 20, as an incentive, a
substantial bounty should be offered to any institution,
non-governmental organization or individual that traces,
tracks down and identifies UN ITA assets that are subject to
sanction. Further, in recommendation 21 the Panel
recommends that banking procedures be developed to
facilitate the identification of individuals covered by
sanctions and the freezing of assets.

With reference to travel and representation,
Governments that have issued passports to UNITA
officials and members of their families are called upon
now to revoke them and to report to the Committee in
this regard. That is recommendation 23. Governments are
also called upon to review carefully the status of senior
UNITA officials and representatives residing in the
countries concerned. That is recommendation 25. In
recommendation 26 the Panel also calls for the updating
of the list of UNITA members subject to Council-imposed
sanctions, for the expansion of the information contained
therein, and for the addition to that list of known official
or unofficial UNITA representatives abroad.

More generally, in recommendation 28 the Panel
recommends that SADC consider introducing mobile
radar systems that can be rapidly deployed in the
subregion for the purpose of detecting illegal supply
flights across national borders, and in recommendation 29
that SADC give consideration to the establishment of an
air traffic regime for the control of regional airspace. The
Panel calls on the international community to provide
assistance to SADC to implement these recommendations.

The Panel calls on Member States geographically
close to Angola to take immediate steps to enforce,
strengthen or enact legislation making it a criminal
offence under domestic law for their citizens or other
individuals operating on their territory to violate
Council-imposed sanctions against UNITA. In addition, in
recommendation 31 the Panel recommends that Member
States involved in the supply of arms to African countries
more generally also take steps, where they have not
already done so, and that the enforcement of such
measures be made a high law-enforcement priority. The
report specifies that pilots prosecuted for sanctions
busting should face permanent loss of certification, as
well as incarceration. In addition, the Panel's
recommendation 24 calls for a warrant to be issued for
the arrest of a particular UNITA officer central -
extremely central - to UNITA's supply operations and
urges that this be a top international law-enforcement
priority.

The report offers guidance on the management of
sanctions more generally - for instance, calling for the
establishment of formal links and regular collaboration
between the United Nations and regional and other
organizations involved in sanctions-monitoring and
enforcement activities, including Interpol. That is
recommendation 32. In recommendation 33 the Panel
recommends that a "Sanctions Information Package",

 

including a Web site, be developed to increase awareness
of the scope and purpose of particular packages of
sanctions and to facilitate access to relevant information on
the part of national and international bodies.

It is clear that these sanctions are beginning to be
taken more seriously and, more important, that they are
beginning to work. The credible testimony of a number of
former senior UNITA officers - notwithstanding the views
of some former comrades-in-arms of Mr. Savimbi -
suggest that, beginning last summer, UNITA was finding it
harder to locate suppliers who would risk exposure, and
more expensive to deal with those who were willing to
assume such risks. They were equally clear, however, about
the fact that Savimbi believes that he can still buy the
products and the people he needs - that, in other words,
it remains only a matter of money. Many witnesses stressed
that continued vigilance would be required to ensure that
the world's attention remained focused on the matter of the
effective application of sanctions; for, if we revert to past
practice, Mr. Savimbi will soon find willing, cut-rate
suppliers who will re-emerge from under the rocks once the
spotlight has shifted elsewhere.

There are welcome developments across the spectrum
of the sanctions regime. I might cite, in this regard, very
recent information from Brussels regarding measures
undertaken by the Belgian Government designed to respond
to many of the concerns reflected in this report. These steps
are, I believe, consistent with what the Panel is calling for
and include initiating research on techniques to identify the
origin of rough diamonds and engaging the Government of
Angola in improving the reconciliation of information
contained in improved certificates of origin - which can
still be improved.

Additional information from a variety of sources will,
we think and hope, continue to become available. I would
note, in this regard, that the Government of Belarus has
now provided the substantive reply to the Panel's questions
to which the report refers. In addition, several Governments
are investigating suspected sanctions busters with the
objective of criminal prosecution. I know the Committee
looks forward to learning of the results of these
investigations. In referring to information available to the
Panel, I should also note the steadfast support and
encouragement that the Angola sanctions Committee and
the Panel have received from United Kingdom Minister of
State, Peter Hain, and I am delighted that he could be with
us today.

The release of this report clearly does not suggest
that our collective efforts to deny UNITA the wherewithal
to make war are at an end. The fundamental lesson the
Panel has drawn is that continued vigilance is required if
UNITA is to be deprived of its military capability. This
will remain true until peace is at last firmly and
irretrievably anchored within Angola. More than once, we
have seen how Mr. Savimbi's UNITA used every second
of what we took to be peace to prepare for the next phase
of the war, to which he would return as soon as he had
been able to reconstitute his forces and restore his
military supplies.

In my discussions with the diplomatic community in
Luanda a couple of months ago, I was struck by the utter
absence of any enthusiasm for further periods of phony
peace or for yet another round of sham negotiations.
Instead, there seemed to be a widespread belief that, until
UNITA was denied the ability to pursue its objectives
through military means, the people of Angola would
never know peace. This, of course, is the mission
assigned to me as Chairman of the Committee and the
one the Council assigned to the Expert Panel: show us
how we can deny UNITA the military option. The Panel
has admirably acquitted this task. Its report has provided
us with comprehensive and far-reaching recommendations
detailing how this mission might be accomplished more
effectively. Now it is up to us, as members of the
Security Council, to implement it.

The Panel was, of course, not able to bring all
investigative leads to a conclusion within its six-month
mandate. Members of the Panel rightly look to the
Sanctions Committee and to this Council to follow
through. Specifically, the Panel recommends in its final
recommendation - recommendation 39 - that, as
Chairman of the Sanctions Committee, I be required to
report to the Council on actions taken to follow up on the
conclusions and recommendations contained in this report.
It further recommends that the Council ensure that it is
able to monitor closely the further implementation of
sanctions as well as follow up on information collected by
the Panel where the Panel itself was unable to complete
its investigations - possibly, by establishing a monitoring
mechanism in addition to the Sanctions Committee. In
other words, now that the sanctions are beginning to have
real impact, we must not make the mistake of letting up
the pressure on UNITA.

Allow me to reiterate my thanks to Panel members
for acquitting their task with such commendable
professionalism and skill and for producing so lucid and

 

compelling a report. Allow me also to thank colleagues in
the Secretariat and in the field who made it possible to
overcome the administrative difficulties associated with
launching a demanding initiative unprecedented in its
design and objectives.

The Member States that contributed to the Trust Fund
established in association with the Panel also deserve
particular recognition. They are Brazil, Canada, France, the
Netherlands, Sweden and the United Kingdom. Other
Governments, including that of Switzerland, also provided
support.

I am speaking here today as the Chairman of a
subsidiary body of the Council. To underscore this point,
our President and the members of the Council have
permitted some innovative seating arrangements this
morning which allow me to honour the Chairman, the
Vice-Chairman and the Rapporteur of the Panel, who have
joined us here today.

It would, however, be remiss of me if I did not
acknowledge the support that my own Government has
provided. The time and attention I have been allowed to
accord to my chairmanship of the Sanctions Committee and
the cost and extent of the travels that I and my colleagues
in the Canadian mission have undertaken are reflections of
the real and deep commitment that the Canadian Minister
of Foreign Affairs, Lloyd Axworthy, accords to addressing
persistent threats to human security - threats which,
tragically, are as acute in Angola as anywhere else in the
world. I should note, however, that Mr. Axworthy and the
Government of Canada have been scrupulous in respecting
the independent nature of the initiative of the Expert Panel
and have neither sought nor were offered an opportunity to
influence the content of the Panel's report.

Mr. Axworthy has, however, on numerous occasions
urged me to make these sanctions work better - that is, to
do our bit to restore the Council's credibility in the matter
of the effective application of appropriate sanctions, a
theme to which he intends to return next month during
Canada's presidency. With the consent of the members of
the Council, he hopes to convene a meeting of the Council
in mid-April to allow member States to address the broader
issue of making sanctions more generally effective and to
act decisively on the recommendations contained in the
report before us.

Finally - and this time Dick Holbrooke is really
going to score some points on my attempt at Oscar
presentations - I must personally thank David Angell,
who, appropriately, sits today in the Canadian seat.
Without David's remarkable diplomatic skills, none of us
would have achieved nearly as much.

Many members of the Council will be aware that I
had intended this morning to screen some further
videotaped testimony from UNITA defectors. I have
chosen not to do that, at least at this time, for two
reasons. First, given the not always accurate press stories
at the end of last week and the earlier than foreseen
distribution of the Panel's report, Members of the
Organization have less of a need to be assisted in a quick
appreciation of the import and value of this report.
Secondly, and more importantly, I do not want to divert
attention from the report itself or to distract in any way
from its main messages. The video was intended to
support and buttress some of the findings of the Panel,
which, as the report indicates, drew on the interviews I
conducted in Luanda a couple of months ago as well as
on many other sources of information. This excellent
report needs no embellishment to assist in driving home
its conclusions and recommendations. They speak
forcefully and effectively for themselves and I heartily
commend them to you, Sir.

