Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): As this is the
first time that I take the floor, Sir, since your country's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council, I
would like to warmly congratulate you and to wish you
every success. Rest assured of the full support of the
Senegalese delegation. I would also like to commend
the skill, efficiency and the transparent manner in
which the Swedish delegation guided the work of the
Council last month.

I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today's briefing with Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman,
Ambassador Apakan and Under-Secretary-
General Stephen O'Brien, whose updates are key to
our discussions.

Two years after the signing of the Minsk agreement
and the adoption of resolution 2202 (2015) by the
Security Council, by which the former was endorsed,
the situation in eastern Ukraine is still tense and has
suddenly worsened now that armed clashes have
resumed. The resurgence in hostilities has resulted in
a heavy death toll, left many wounded and exacerbated
the region's dire humanitarian situation. As others have
mentioned, the fighting has disrupted electricity, water
and heating for thousands, at this time of year when
temperatures drop to as low as -20°C during the night.
This alarming picture leads me to urge the protagonists
to think about the civilians and immediately cease
hostilities, respect the ceasefire and withdraw
heavy weapons.

I would like to commend the reiterated call by
the Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine, which
met yesterday in an emergency meeting, for an
immediate cessation of hostilities. The withdrawal
of heavy weapons from the front lines and access for
the observers of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and for humanitarian assistance
to affected areas are all crucial.

In conclusion, I want to call for an intensification of
diplomatic efforts, in particular through the Normandy
format, by which France and Germany seek to support
Russia and Ukraine in fully implementing the Minsk
agreements for the good of the civilian population.

