Mr. Mammadyarov (Azerbaijan): First of all,
I would like to express our thanks to the Australian
presidency for convening the meeting. We are also
grateful to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Yemen,
my good friend Mr. Abubaker A. Al-Qirbi; the
Secretary General of the Gulf Cooperation Council,
my good friend Mr. Abdul Latif bin Rashid Al Zayani;
and the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
Yemen, Mr. Jamal Benomar, for their participation in
this meeting and insightful briefings.

Over the past few years, Yemen has undergone
remarkable political and societal changes. Its
achievements in forging national reconciliation and
dialogue are exemplary in the context of the recent
transformational developments in the broader Middle
East region. The country and its people deserve the
highest credit for the determination and perseverance
they have so far demonstrated towards fulfilling the
tasks of the transition process. The commencement
and conduct of the National Dialogue Conference, in
accordance with the defined timetable by the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative, have been indispensable
for the Yemeni transition process. Despite the
reoccurring controversies and the contentious issues,
keeping up with the established schedule of the National
Dialogue and its objectives is imperative for achieving
the expected results.

Irrespective of the pitfalls, it is essential that all
political forces and groups continue their participation
in the Dialogue and contribute to its important work.
No attempts to interfere with the transition should be
tolerated, and the relevant actors must be aware of
their responsibilities. Among the other tasks of the
transition process, drafting a new constitution and
conducting general elections in 2014, as stipulated by
the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative, are the most
important ones that are contingent upon the outcome of
the National Dialogue.

Domestic security is a high priority. Unfortunately,
the threat of terrorism in the country remains acute. We
are concerned over the new reports on terrorist acts that
have taken the lives of dozens of people. Such instances
should not be allowed to recur, and the perpetrators must
be brought to account. The humanitarian and economic
situation is also a serious challenge that requires
continued support by the international community and
donors to the Government's efforts.

Azerbaijan attaches great importance to the
maintenance of peace and political stability in Yemen,
which might be possible through concerted and stalwart
efforts aimed at fulfilling the aforementioned transition
objectives and achieving national reconciliation.

We once again reiterate our full support for
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Yemen. The country is now at a critical
juncture in solidifying its achievements and furthering
the greater political objective of building a democratic
and all-inclusive State. Continued international support
is, therefore, absolutely necessary to help Yemen
through this responsible phase in its history.

