The President (spoke in French): I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the representative
of Nepal to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Acharya
(Nepal) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): I propose, with
the consent of the Council and in accordance with the
provisions of article 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure, to extend an invitation to Mr. Ian
Martin, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in Nepal and head of the United Nations
Mission in Nepal.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Martin to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the request of Nepal
for United Nations assistance in support of its peace
process, document S/2009/1.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Ian Martin, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Nepal and head of the United
Nations Mission in Nepal. This will be the last briefing
that Mr. Martin will give to the Council in his capacity
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General. On
2

behalf of the members of the Council, I should
therefore like to express our gratitude to him and tell
him how much we have appreciated, year after year,
the effectiveness of his efforts at the helm of the
United Nations Mission in Nepal, his honest and direct
interaction with the Council and the sincerity of his
commitment to the peace process in Nepal. We shall
remember him fondly and wish him every success in
his future endeavours. I am sure the members of the
Council associate themselves with those sentiments.

I now give the floor to the Special
Representative.


