Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my sincere appreciation to the Permanent
Representatives of Kenya and Sweden - current
and former Chairs of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) - as well as Ambassador Rosenthal, for sharing
their insightful views with us.

(spoke in Spanish)

It is a great pleasure to see Ambassador Rosenthal
here today.

(spoke in English)

I am also pleased to see the Permanent
Representative of Brazil, also a former Chair of the
PBC, in the Chamber today. I thank the Permanent
Representative of Angola, who spoke earlier, and the
Permanent Representative of Australia in moving the
review process forward.

Thanks to the initiative of the Venezuelan
presidency, we are meeting in an open format where
both Security Council members and non-Council
members are expressing their views. I find that most
fitting, given the nature oftoday's topic. The long list of
speakers and the large attendance in the Chamber today
also demonstrate the high interest. Having chaired
the PBC Working Group on Lessons Learned for the
past two years and having now served in the Security
Council for two months, I would like to make a few
points on coordination between the Security Council
and the PBC.

The PBC was establishsed jointly by the Security
Council and the General Assembly out of the recognition
that the three pillars of the United Nations - namely,
peace and security, development and human rights - are
interlinked and mutually reinforcing. The PBC was
established to complement the peacebuilding efforts
of United Nations institutions. Ten years have now
passed since the PBC's establishment. Now is the time
for us to make the Commission a body that can better
perform its intended function as an advisory body to
the Security Council.

In peacebuilding, the roles of the Security Council
and the PBC are differentiated but complementary. The
Security Council discharges its responsibility mainly
in conflict resolution. The strength of the PBC, on the
other hand, lies in its long-term endeavours to lay the
groundwork for peace. During my chairmanship of the
Working Group on Lessons-Learned, that is exactly what
we intended to do by highlighting the PBC's strengths.
The Group discussed challenges faced by post-conflict
countries during and after United Nations mission
draw-down and the importance of institution-building
as a key priority in conflict-affected countries.

The Group was firmly convinced that strengthening
core State institutions that provide security, justice,
public administration and basic social services was
fundamental to a successful transition from post-
conflict situations to lasting peace. Such lessons learned
and the remaining challenges are summarized in the
two final reports of the Working Group on Lessons
Learned. The reports are an embodiment of the PBC's
mandated advisory role, and I hope they will be fully
utilized in future discussions of the Security Council
and the PBC, and in the ongoing review and beyond.

The PBC can be better employed for the prevention of
lapses and relapses into conflicts as well. The PBC Chair
and the Chairs of the country-specific configurations
of the PBC can provide timely information and early
warning to the Security Council. In that context, let me
recall that inviting the PBC Chairs to Security Council
meetings is something that has already been agreed
in the past presidential notes in 2010 and 2013. The
PBC Chairs should therefore be invited to participate
in Security Council debates, in accordance with those
notes, for greater coherence in peacebuilding efforts. I
promise to do so during Japan's presidency.

Ifa conflict occurs, more resources and energy will
be required. Securing sustained attention and resources
for peacebuilding and conflict prevention is very
important. There is no denying that the Peacebuilding
Fund has proved itself to be an important financial tool
for supporting critical peacebuilding processes in many
post-conflict countries. Japan appreciates the Fund's
active performance. Recognizing both the usefulness
and the current difficulties faced by the Fund, Japan
will contribute an additional $3.5 million to the Fund by
the end of March. That will make our total contribution
to the Fund $46 million. I wish to join the Chair of the
PBC, Ambassador Kamau, in encouraging Member
States, including non-traditional donors, to consider
making voluntary contributions to the Peacebuilding
Fund. That said, Japan does not believe in the "assessed
contribution" option. We are concerned that the Fund's
comparative advantage in being able to respond rapidly
and flexibly would be greatly undermined if we were to
choose that option.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
share with the Council what we wish to do during our
Council presidency in the month of July. Our Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Fumio Kishida, announced
earlier today that Japan wishes to hold an open debate
on the theme ofpeacebuilding in Africa in the month of
July, and the Minister looks forward to presiding over
the meeting himself. That will demonstrate Japan's
dedication and determination to further contribute to
greater coherence in United Nations peacebuilding
efforts, both at the policy level and on the ground.

