Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me also at the
outset thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing.

The ICC is, and remains, a crucial pillar ofa strong
rules-based international order. We fully support the
ICC. its impartial work and the values enshrined in the
Rome Statute. In 2011, the Council referred the situation
in Libya to the ICC so as to ensure accountability for
the most serious crimes. We commend the Prosecutor
for her commitment to ensure justice for the victims of
atrocities in Libya. However, as we again heard in her
briefing this morning, the security and human rights
situation in Libya is extremely worrisome and her
work is far from done. More needs to happen to fully
implement the mandate of the ICC as well as her own
mandate. We therefore encourage the ICC to step up its
activities with regard to Libya and urge Member States
to execute the arrest warrants.

The full cooperation and assistance of Member
States remain essential for the Office of the Prosecutor
to fulfil its mandate. The fact that arrest warrants for
Libyan nationals have not yet been executed is deeply
worrisome. It is important to execute them in order to
provide justice to the victims as well as to prevent such
crimes from being perpetrated again.

We are also highly concerned about the systematic
use of sexual violence against refugees and migrants in
Libya, as reported by the Prosecutor. Let me therefore
again recall the sanctions listing criteria introduced
by the Council on sexual and gender-based violence,
which clearly recognize the devastating effects of such
heinous crimes on peace and reconciliation in Libya.

We welcome Libya's commitment to justice and
call for the further strengthening of its cooperation
with the Court. The competent authorities must ensure
accountability for all crimes. Until such time as the
Libyan authorities can prosecute all international
crimes, the ICC must be there to ensure accountability.
Let me also speak very briefly about the violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
to which the Prosecutor referred in her briefing this
morning. As the fighting in Libya persists, the human
cost continues to rise. We have heard about that many
times. To take just one example, the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) reports that there
have been 57 attacks on health-care facilities in 2019.
Attacks on civilians constitute a breach of international
humanitarian law. Accountability for crimes under the
Rome Statute and full respect for international law
are prerequisites to sustainable peace in Libya. It is
the duty of the international community to ensure that
there will be consequences for the perpetrators. The
absence of accountability encourages the repetition of
crimes and impunity.

Let me also say that the enormous influx of arms,
despite the United Nations arms embargo, is one of
the core causes of the humanitarian disaster in Libya.
We have discussed this many times. Nevertheless,
the flow of weapons and the fighting continue, all of
which must stop immediately. Observing and actually
implementing the arms embargo require the support of
a unified international community that rallies behind
the efforts of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Salame and UNSMIL and a Council that unites
behind its own decisions.

In conclusion, let me express once again our full,
continued and steadfast support for the ICC and the
efforts of the Prosecutor in establishing accountability
to enforce urgently needed respect for the rule of law.
We call on the members of the Council and, indeed, on
all United Nations Member States to support the Court
in order to end impunity and ensure accountability. Let
me also again call on those that have not yetjoined the
Rome Statute to consider doing so.

