Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me also thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing. Like others, I would like to begin by offering my condolences and those of the British people for the loss of life we have seen in recent attacks in Mali and the wider Sahel. I am thinking particularly of last Thursday's terrible attack in the Niger, which was an especially shocking reminder of the cost of instability in the region, but also of attacks against the personnel of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), which we condemn, including the 9 January attack on MINUSMA forces in Tessalit. I join the German Ambassador in offering condolences for the lives lost by Malian forces, as well as civilians, of course. Those developments are a testament to the urgent need for the international community and the Government of Mali to work together to help achieve long-term peace and stability in the country and the region. It is worth reflecting on where we stand with the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which was signed in 2015 and is now reaching its fifth year. Over those five years, we have yet to see its full implementation. Meanwhile, MINUSMA is_ losing troops and the situation in the region continues to worsen. It is extremely concerning that we have seen only limited progress towards the implementation of the peace agreement. The Ambassador of the Niger said that the parties needed to speed up. I unequivocally echo that call, which a number of us have been making for some time. We welcome recent developments, including the inclusive national dialogue and the deployment of reconstituted forces by the Government of Mali to the north. We also welcome the announcement of a high- level workshop to increase the participation of women in the peace process. Overall, however, I agree with my American colleague that benchmarks set by the Council must be met and that failure by the political actors to act for peace will have to lead to consequences, including sanctions. In particular, we need to see the transfer of key services and competencies to regional leaders, as well as the operationalization of the northern development zone.I agree with all of those who have talked about the importance of the meaningful participation of women in the peace process. The dynamics in the centre of the country are a cause of significant concern. I would like to welcome the Prime Minister's appointment of a High Representative to better coordinate efforts there but we now need to see action. As the Ambassador of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reminded us, we cannot have security without development and services - just as we cannot have development without security. We therefore need a comprehensive, politically- led strategy, coordinated across all sectors, to protect civilians, reduce intercommunal violence, re-establish basic social services and allow for effective justice and reconciliation. We know that those things are easier said than done. It is a complicated and difficult undertaking, but the implementation of the peace agreement must happen and it must happen more quickly. Turning to MINUSMA, I want to echo the tributes paid by others to MINUSMA and its troops and the hard and difficult work they do. I would also like to say that we very much commend MINUSMA's plans and efforts to adopt a more mobile, flexible and agile posture, with high-end capabilities, to enable them to more effectively carry out their mandated tasks. We look forward to discussing those issues in more detail. I would just say as well that the United Kingdom's planned deployment of 250 troops to the Mission is testament to the important role that we believe MINUSMA and the region play. In that context, I would like to echo Under-Secretary-General Lacroix's call for a swift resolution of the land issues that are hampering deployment. We should not have to underline again around the table the urgency of action to address the drivers of conflict in Mali and the broader Sahel. The United Kingdom is ready to play its part alongside others, through diplomacy, security support, humanitarian aid and development assistance. However, it is only with inclusive, effective Malian political leadership that those international efforts can deliver stability.
