Mrs. Chassoul (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour of addressing the Security Council on
behalf of the 19 member countries of the Rio Group:
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, the
Dominion Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Uruguay, Venezuela and, of course, that of my
own delegation, Costa Rica.

Mr. President, we are pleased that you have
convened this open debate to respond to a grave
problem that brings into conflict the system of
peacekeeping operations and the international
community's resolve to create a permanent mechanism
of criminal law.

The Rio Group welcomes the creation, and
supports the prompt establishment of, the International
Criminal Court (ICC) as an effective, independent and
impartial judicial entity with the authority to judge
crimes that violate the dignity of human beings. This
past 12 April, our heads of State - gathered in San
Jose, Costa Rica, where they took note of the entry into
force of the Rome Statute - underlined the historic
importance of the creation of the ICC and urged
countries that had not acceded to or ratified the Statute
to do so promptly.

Similarly, on 4 June, the General Assembly of the
Organization of American States urged its member
States

"to participate in the meetings of the Preparatory
Committee of the International Criminal Court,
with a view to ensuring optimal Operating
conditions for the Court once it is established, in
the context of unwavering protection of the
integrity of the Statute of Rome." (AG/RES. 1770 (MFG/01) para. 2).

In this context, the member States of the Rio
Group cannot fail to express their concern at the
Security Council's consideration of the proposal to
grant absolute immunity to the personnel of
peacekeeping operations, in violation of the letter and
the spirit of the Rome Statute. In our opinion, the
proposal is completely without legal foundation
because article 16 of the Rome Statute, invoked by the
proposal's advocates, refers to an entirely different
situation. We believe that the Rome Statute already
provides the necessary safeguards for preventing a
politicized or inappropriate use of the ICC. In this
context, we support the Secretary-General's assessment

of the proposal, as set out in his letter of 3 July of this
year

The States Members of the Rio Group cannot
accept any erosion of the Rome Statute. We consider it
essential to maintain the integrity of its provisions, and
we note that any proposal for its modification must
respect the established norms and procedures of
general international law, of the law of treaties and of
the Rome Statute itself. We are therefore concerned at
any initiative attempting to substantially modify the
provisions of the Statute by means of a Council
resolution. To adopt this kind of proposal would exceed
the competence of the Security Council and would
have a serious impact on the Council's credibility and
legitimacy.

As well, the States members of the Rio Group
cannot fail to express our great concern at the fact that
the entire peacekeeping system might be jeopardized
by an erroneous interpretation of the provisions of the
Rome Statute. We are concerned at the fact that on 30
June the resolution to extend the mandate of the
peacekeeping mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina was
vetoed. We believe that it is essential to preserve and to
consolidate the achievements of that mission, in the
fulfilment of the Security Council's own
responsibilities towards international peace and
security.

The Rio Group vehemently calls on the Security
Council to find a solution to the present impasse that
respects the letter and the spirit of the Rome Statute
and that ensures the effectiveness and the legitimacy of
that body. We therefore call on the Security Council to
bear in mind the desire of the entire international
community to possess an effective and impartial
instrument ensuring the punishment of the authors of
the most serious crimes committed against humanity.

