Mr. Koroma (Sierra Leone): I believe the
situation in Sierra Leone is not one in which you can
easily single out mistakes, because it was a very fluid
situation, a situation that was evolving as time went on.
We are all aware of the teething problems that the
United Nations encountered. One would say that this
was probably one of the mistakes: it underestimated the
extent of the combatants, their ability to cause havoc
and their disregard for international protocols and
regulations, except if they were forced to comply. One
would say that if there was a mistake, that was the first.
But we consider that to be a teething problem for the
United Nations.

Afterwards, I think that the United Nations
evolved a very comprehensive framework. It looked at
the issue not only as an isolated security issue but also
as a governance issue. There is the fact that diamonds
were extensively considered by the United Nations; the
fact that the travel ban was imposed on many people
who were involved in the conflict in Sierra Leone; and
the fact that the arms situation in the subregion was
looked at: perhaps that is another area that needs
careful consideration. Sierra Leone should not be
treated as an island in these circumstances. We should
look a little beyond Sierra Leone and try to see what
we can do, using the lessons we have learned in Sierra
Leone, to ensure that there is stability in the region. We
all know that the boundaries that separate African
countries are to a large extent artificial. So, apart from
the boundaries being porous, the people are virtually
the same in most of those countries. Therefore,
containing conflict in one country alone might not be
the answer.

That leads me to the second question: what can
we do to ameliorate the refugee situation? First of all,
Sierra Leone lost all its infrastructure. It does not have
the money to contain the situation right now. Apart
from the fact that we did not bring all our refugees
back to Sierra Leone after the conflict, the fact remains
that our infrastructure is completely down. The flow of
Liberians into Sierra Leone is putting a heavy burden
on the little that we have left and will compound the
situation even further. There remains a need for a
continued United Nations humanitarian presence in
Sierra Leone to ensure that the refugee situation can be
handled. But the refugee situation is not only a
humanitarian situation; it is a security situation. It is a
fact that there is conflict in Liberia and that there was
conflict in Guinea at one point. That is why the
situation exists. Therefore, the more we look at it in a
very comprehensive manner, the better it is for the
Council and for the United Nations system in general.

