Mr. Ni'lfiez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba supports the statement made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
11-30799
The situation in the region, in particular in
occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem,
remains deplorable. The situation in the Gaza Strip is
unsustainable. Cuba is deeply concerned by the
increasing deterioration of conditions there due to the
escalation of the military offensive carried out by Israel
over the past few months. A ceasefire is urgently
needed.

Israel's flagrant and deliberate violations of the
provisions of international humanitarian law against
the civilian population in Gaza are unacceptable. The
international community must take all possible
practical measures to put an end to this state of affairs
and prevent Israel's indiscriminate bombing of the
Palestinian people. Cuba reiterates its demand that
Israel immediately, unconditionally and fully lift the
cruel and illegal blockade of Gaza and allow the free
movement of supplies to and from the Gaza Strip and
permanent humanitarian access.

Cuba condemns the settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. We demand the immediate cessation of the
demolition of Palestinian houses, the construction of
the wall and the eviction of Palestinian families in East
Jerusalem, as well as other illegal incitements,
provocations and attacks carried out by extremist
settlers against the Palestinian people and holy sites.
These measures and policies implemented by Israel are
serious and flagrant violations of international law, the
United Nations Charter, many General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions and the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice of 9 July 2004.

The Security Council cannot remain passive in
the face of these facts. Cuba regrets that the recent
exercise of the veto by a Council member prevented
the adoption of a resolution condemning settlements
and demanding an end to these policies. Israel has
exploited the Council's silence on this issue in recent
years to continue to pursue these illegal policies. The
widespread physical, economic and social devastation
caused by the illegal and destructive settlement
practices is the main obstacle to reaching a peace
agreement. The settlement policy prevents, in practical
terms, the establishment of a Palestinian State on the
basis of the 1967 borders and thus the possibility of a
just resolution of the Israel-Palestine conflict.

Cuba reaffirms that any measure or action that
Israel has taken or shall take to alter the legal, physical

and demographic status or institutional structure of the
occupied Syrian Golan, as well as Israeli measures to
exercise its jurisdiction and administration in this
territory, are legally null and void. We state once again
that these measures and actions, including the illegal
construction and expansion of Israeli settlements in the
Syrian Golan since 1967, are violations of international
law, international agreements, the United Nations
Charter and resolutions, including resolution 497
(1981), and the Fourth Geneva Convention, and
constitute a challenge to the international community.
Cuba demands Israel's full withdrawal from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of4 June 1967.

A peace agreement must be achieved this year, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions, the Madrid
principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. We have
witnessed increasing international recognition of a
Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967 borders. We
trust that September 2011 will prove the right time to
achieve this goal at last.

Cuba once again reiterates its position in favour
of a just and lasting peace for all the peoples of the
Middle East that would put an end to the occupation of
the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967 and
ensure the Palestinian people's exercise of their right to
self-determination through the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

