Mr. Belle (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having organized this open
debate, which is providing the Security Council with
an opportunity to revisit the question of the
proliferation of and illicit trade in small arms, a matter
of great concern. I thank Ms. Hannelore Hoppe for her

introduction of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/258).

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made by the representative of Slovenia on behalf
of the presidency of the European Union, and I shall
simply make a few additional comments that I believe
to be essential.

In 2006, former Secretary-General Kofi Annan
made the alarming observation that "The death toll
from small arms dwarfs that of all other weapons
systems" (A/54/2000, para. 238). Worse still, those
victims are primarily civilians: men, women and
children who are most often in the most vulnerable
sectors of the population. In the report before us today,
unfortunately, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon notes
no positive developments.

There has been no easing of the gravity of the
consequences of proliferation of and illicit trade in
small arms, and the need for action is obvious. The
international community already has some tools at its
disposal. For instance, the embargoes imposed by the
Security Council are legally binding and must be
strictly applied. The Secretary-General's
recommendations regarding cooperation among all
actors - the Security Council, peacekeeping missions,
Member States and INTERPOL - should also be fully
implemented. Belgium welcomes in particular the
emphasis placed on the situation of children in armed
conflict.

More generally, the illicit trade in small arms can
be stemmed only if systematic measures are taken to
provide a framework for the legal trade, through
mandatory marking and tracing, regulation of the status
of brokers and other intermediaries and strengthening
export controls. In that spirit, Belgium supports the
adoption of an arms trade treaty that would put in place
common international norms for the import, export and
transfer of conventional weapons.

Belgian law already includes provisions based
directly on these concerns. A law adopted on 9 June
2006 imposes strict controls on the possession of
weapons by private individuals on Belgian territory.
Moreover, the brokerage profession is regulated by a
law adopted on 25 March 2003. Belgium's law of 26
March 2003 incorporates the criteria of the European
Union Code of Conduct on Arms Exports, thereby
making them binding. It is important to note that this
law prohibits the exportation of weapons to countries
where children are a part of armed forces.

The regional dimension is of equal importance in
addressing places of both origin and destination of the
illegal trade. Here, Belgium welcomes the follow-up
given to the Decision of the Ministerial Council of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
on combating the illicit trafficking of small arms and
light weapons by air, adopted in late 2006.

Belgium is also shouldering its responsibility
with respect to cooperation and assistance. Since 2001,
we have made more than €7 million in bilateral
contributions towards implementing the objectives of
the United Nations Programme of Action on Small
Arms. That sum is in addition to the contribution of the
European Union. In this way, Belgium has supported
the formulation of national plans of action in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Burundi, with a view to promoting cooperation among
those three countries, including in the area of border
control.

Belgium considers that the third Biennial Meeting
of States to Consider the Implementation of the
Programme of Action, to be held in July 2008, should
aim at achieving concrete results and should focus on a
limited number of topics, with a view to strengthening
the implementation of the Programme of Action.

Belgium thanks the Secretary-General for the
recommendations set out in his report. Their
implementation could help us to better meet the
challenge still posed by the illicit trade in small arms.
Beyond that challenge itself, development, peace and
security in many regions are at stake.

