Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I thank Under- Secretary-General Nakamitsu and Mr. Spleeters for their informative and insightful contributions. Their briefings reaffirm that the Council should maintain its focus on this matter and that there is a need for concerted action. As theSecretary-General's latest report (S/2019/1011) regretfully confirms, the illicit trade, diversion and unauthorized use of small arms and light weapons continue to impede peace, security and sustainable development. Small arms are relatively cheap. They are easy to construct, maintain, operate and conceal. For those reasons, small arms are often the weapons of first resort in civil wars, terrorist attacks, organized crime and gang warfare. The widespread availability of such weapons continues to cause loss of life, violate human rights, fuel conflict and hamper humanitarian assistance and peacekeeping efforts. Just last month, UNICEF published a report on the situation in central Sahel. The report shows that the recent surge in armed violence and attacks in the region against communities, schools, health centres and other public institutions have had devastating impacts on civilians, especially children. Thousands of children have been forced to flee their homes and cannot go to school or receive basic social services. It is not possible to sustain or build peace and increase development in the Sahel, as well as in other parts of the world, if we do not address the misuse of and illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and their ammunition. It is clear that the threats posed by the illicit transfer, excessive accumulation and misuse of small arms and light weapons touch upon many country-specific and thematic topics on the Council's agenda. For that reason, Estonia supports the further mainstreaming of the issue in all relevant discussions in the Council's work. There are already some good practices in place. We note an example in the report of the Secretary-General, with reference to resolution 2454 (2019), in which he links the assessment of weapons and ammunition management to the review of arms embargo measures. We also support the inclusion, in the mandates of United Nations peace support missions, of assistance for monitoring arms embargoes and supporting Government actions on small arms management. Estonia welcomes the focus on gender in the Secretary-General's report. It is important to increase awareness that armed violence affects women and men differently. As the Secretary-General's report notes, sexual and gender-based violence is often abetted by armed intimidation. We welcome the report's recommendation to consider including the small arms issue in the women and peace and security agenda. It is equally important to improve the role of women as participants and decision makers in addressing the proliferation and misuse of small arms in disarmament and arms control programmes and policies. Adherence to, and ratification of, key international instruments in this area is of crucial importance. We call on all States to implement the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the International Tracing Instrument. Estonia also continues to champion the universalization and implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty. We believe that, when the Treaty is effectively and widely implemented, it has great potential to contribute to more responsible and more transparent international arms transfers.Finally, regional efforts and initiatives are essential and should be encouraged. In 2018, the European Union adopted its new strategy against illicit firearms, small arms and light weapons and their ammunition. A number of new capacity-building projects have launched since then in support of small arms control in the Western Balkans, the Middle East, Latin America and the Caribbean, among other regions, in cooperation with United Nations agencies and regional organizations. Estonia is committed to preventing and curbing the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. We welcome today's discussion and urge all countries to join in strengthening the implementation of existing commitments and obligations in the field.
