Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): At the outset, I would
like to express my delegation's great appreciation for the
unique opportunity afforded by the participation of His
Royal Highness Crown Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah
II as he shared his perspective on the important and
timely topic of today's open debate. We also wish to
thank Mr. Peter Neumann and Mr. Scott Atran for their
comprehensive and illuminating briefings.

The international community is witnessing an
increasingly dramatic trend towards radicalization
and Violent extremism among youth, perpetrated by
terrorist groups that are manipulating grievances and
religion to achieve their political aims. Unfortunately,
these groups' calls for violent extremism have attracted
supporters and sympathizers worldwide, in developing
and developed countries alike, particularly among the
young. The youth are our future, and we therefore cannot
afford to stand aside and watch as they are increasingly
affected by extremism and Violence, whether as victims
or as perpetrators.

Based on various studies conducted in Malaysia
and other parts of the South-East Asian region on
the factors that contribute to radicalizing youth,
socioeconomic aspects such as poverty, deprivation,
unemployment and a lack of education are not the only
factors contributing to the rise of extremism among
youth. This is evident from the fact that large numbers
of the militants in the South-East Asian region who
have joined such terrorist groups in the Middle East as
Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
are professionals and from the middle class, including
academicians, engineers and students.

The main motivation seems to be political in nature,
be it a reaction to prolonged or grievous injustice,
gross Violations of human rights, foreign occupation
or systematic discrimination. Their despair and anger
are effectively exploited by terrorist groups, which
instil a sense of purpose and identity in impressionable
young people. While these youth may not suffer
personal trauma and sufferings from grievous injustice
or Violation of human rights first hand, they strongly
identify with others who do, especially those sharing
the same religion, ethnicity or ideology. This is the
so-called secondary trauma symptom.

In that context, religion or ideology becomes
a convenient tool to justify and legitimize Violent
actions. Meanwhile, the advent of information and
communication technology and the Internet brings
sufferings from far-flung regions of the world to youth
as never before, and makes it easier for the extremists
to reach out globally to promote their cause, gain
sympathizers and spread terror.

We must acknowledge that terrorists groups and
extremists wield not only hard power - that is, the
ability to use force to pursue their agendas - but
also considerable soft power in terms of ideology or
narrative that is attractive to impressionable youth.
In addressing youth radicalization, the international
community has developed comprehensive counter-
terrorism strategies that largely focus on the military,
strategic and financial aspects of countering terrorism.
However, unless we address the appeal of extremists'
soft power, we will not be able to effectively stem the
tide of youth radicalization in the long run.

Malaysia strongly believes that the international
community needs to develop a comprehensive counter-
narrative that would address extremist ideologies,
counter violent propaganda and win the hearts and minds
of the people. The counter-narrative must be able to set
forth a substantive, convincing and feasible concept
that could be used by youth when they are confronted
with the perception of injustice, discrimination and
suffering in the world today.

We have to create awareness among youth that
violence is not the answer in addressing injustice and
sufferings and is contrary to the basic tenet of every
religion. Instead ofresorting to aggression, the counter-
narrative should focus on non-violent yet powerful
means to effect change, such as peaceful protest,
persuasion, diplomatic and political pressure, boycotts
and sanctions.

As part of Malaysia's efforts to provide a counter-
narrative for challenging the soft power of extremists,
five years ago, here at the United Nations, the Malaysian
Prime Minister initiated the Global Movement of
Moderates. The idea was to provide a platform for the
silent majority to counter extremism in all its forms.
Central to the initiative is the value of moderation
as an approach and a guide for action that strongly
emphasizes tolerance, understanding, dialogue, mutual
respect and inclusiveness. With those key values and
objectives, moderation is undoubtedly an important
tool and approach to bridging differences and resolving
disputes.

We also believe in rehabilitation, and not just
punitive action, in dealing with youths who, whether
due to their sense of adventure, idealism or frustration,
have fallen for the narrative of extremists. For instance,
as part of the efforts to win the hearts and minds of
misled youth, the Royal Malaysian Police plays a
critical role in engaging with detained terrorists, with
the aim of rehabilitating and returning them as useful
members of society.

Malaysia has also implemented enabling policies,
including the National Youth Development Policy,
since young people are assets that should be nurtured
and empowered to realize their full potential and
contribute to nation-building. Through the Policy, our
country aims to produce a holistic and harmonious
Malaysia youth force imbued with strong spiritual and
moral values. It is our hope that the Policy will mould a
generation of youth who are educated, progressive and
competitive, as well as tolerant and with a deep sense of
responsibility, drive and vision.

In that regard, there is an urgent need to conduct
research into the drivers and the trigger factors that
lead young people to extremism and terrorism. Unless
solid baseline data is obtained, there is a danger that
we will craft policy based on anecdotal evidence
that will subsequently be the basis of designing and
implementing intervention programmes that do not
address the root problems. Therefore, Malaysia has
conducted qualitative studies in the region with regard
to reaching out to youth and countering the terrorists'
narrative, which we have published and disseminated.

We are also in the process of looking into
undergraduate radicalization in our region, with the
aim of understanding the pathway that university
undergraduates take before they are indoctrinated and
radicalized. On another level, realizing the tremendous
potential and creative energy of youth, we are also
designing a peer-to-peer module that will be used by
young people to reach out to other young people. The
purpose of the module will be to encourage young
people to critically analyse the rhetoric and propaganda
spread by the extremists and terrorists. Subsequently,
that would serve to build a mental fire wall that negates
and nullifies the claim that indiscriminate violence
practiced by terrorists is an effective method of
resolving conflict.

Last but not least, in order for the counter-narrative
to work, it has to be based on facts on the ground.
Therefore, in the long run, the international community
must strive to remove the grievances and injustice
that constitute great motivations for young people to
become radicalized. We should also focus on building
sustainable and inclusive economies that provide
opportunities for young people. We must give them
hope for their futures. We need to promote the right
path in a relentless manner. Youth must understand
that violence and brutality committed in the name of
religion are abhorrent and unacceptable in any civilized
society.

While addressing such grievances might not resolve
the problem ofextremism overnight, it will go a long way
in removing the motive manipulated by the terrorists
to gain sympathy among impressionable youths and
to recruit foreign terrorist fighters worldwide. Let
us all not forget that, while young people make up
approximately 25 per cent of the world's population,
they make up 100 per cent of our future.

