I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for the briefing. China appreciates the efforts of the United Nations and its humanitarian partners to improve the humanitarian situation in Syria. Regarding the humanitarian issue in Syria, I would like to emphasize three points. First, there is a need to take a comprehensive and integrated approach to revitalizing the Syrian economy and improving the humanitarian situation on the ground. The current economic situation in Syria is extremely fragile. The Syrian Government has launched many initiatives to alleviate the difficult situation, which deserve recognition. The international community should take concrete actions to increase financial and material assistance to Syria to support its economic development, improve people's livelihoods and rebuild infrastructure. The international community should also fulfil its promise of humanitarian assistance to Syria as soon as possible, without attaching preconditions, and not use such assistance as a tool to pressure the Syrian Government. The top priority is to immediately lift unilateral sanctions. Unilateral sanctions are severely undermining the ability of countries such as Syria to mobilize resources, rehabilitate their economies and respond to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Secretary-General Guterres and his Special Envoy have repeatedly appealed for a waiver of unilateral sanctions. China strongly urges relevant countries to earnestly respond to these appeals by immediately lifting unilateral sanctions against Syria and other countries. China welcomes the recent positive progress in cross-line humanitarian operations. We note that the United Nations plans to cooperate with the Syrian Government to deliver two batches of supplies to the north-west, and the World Health Organization continues to deliver medical supplies to the north-east. It is hoped that all parties will continue to improve the efficiency of cross-line humanitarian operations, simplify the procedures for cross-border delivery to meet the humanitarian needs of the Syrian people. China is paying close attention to the issue of Allouk water station and Rukban camp and hopes that the relevant parties can find a lasting solution through dialogue. Secondly, we should attach great importance to the threat of COVID-19 and support the efforts of Syria and the United Nations to combat the pandemic and save lives. The pandemic situation in Syria is worrying. The number of confirmed cases has increased rapidly, detection capabilities are insufficient, many medical workers have been infected, and women, children and refugee camp populations face additional risks. China encourages the Syrian Government to continue to take active response measures, and appreciates and supports the work of the World Health Organization in leading and coordinating countrywide COVID-19 response efforts. China calls on the international community to increase multilateral and bilateral support for the Syrian Government and people in their fight against the pandemic. China will continue to provide assistance to Syria through the bilateral channel to help the Syrian people prevail over the scourge as soon as possible. Thirdly, there is a need to respond positively to the Secretary-General's global ceasefire initiative, strengthen political dialogue and maintain regional peace and stability. The political and security situation directly affects the humanitarian situation. Since March this year, the overall situation on the ground in Syria has been relatively calm, creating better conditions for the protection of civilians. We appreciate the efforts of all parties to maintain the ceasefire arrangements and encourage the Astana process to continue playing its constructive role. All parties in Syria should seize the opportunity to strengthen political dialogue and advance the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process. China welcomes the recent successful convening of the third round of meetings of the Syrian Constitutional Committee in Geneva. Many countries, including China, are deeply concerned about terrorist activities in Syria. According to the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/813), more than 10,000 Islamic State terrorists are active in Syria and Iraq, threatening the security and stability of Syria and the entire region. The ceasefire arrangement does not and must not mean give free rein to terrorists. The international community should adopt uniform standards and strengthen counter-terrorism cooperation in accordance with international law and Security Council resolutions.
