Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): Consideration of the Secretary-General's report
on the United Nations Support Mission in Haiti
(UNSMIH) has enabled members of the Security Council
to engage in an in-depth analysis of the situation
prevailing in that country.

Our delegation greatly appreciates the efforts of the
United Nations, and of the international community in
general, to provide all necessary assistance to the Haitian
people. We cannot overstate the full political, economic
and even psychological importance of the presence of the
international community on this island, whose inhabitants
are attempting, against all odds, to take control of their
own destiny and to create conditions for a decent and
peaceful life.

 

The Haitian people, who for decades languished in the
throes of a brutal and bloody dictatorship, deserves both the
attention we are devoting to it and the assistance it needs to
establish the foundation of a democracy based on the
primacy of law and on respect for the human person.

We are gratified to note that the other speakers also
acknowledge this important axiom, which must motivate
our actions to promote and establish peace and security in
the country. We are indeed speaking of peace and security
when we refer to the situation in Haiti. The Government of
President Preval is making every effort to guarantee the
Haitian people the right to live without fear of the future by
creating the necessary conditions of stability and security.
But we know that, unfortunately, the means available to the
Haitian authorities are very limited.

At this critical stage, the presence of UNSMIH
remains indispensable in strengthening the pillars of the
democratic process while ensuring respect for constitutional
order.

Haiti is a poor country, but it is also a country whose
aspirations to democracy are deeply rooted in the culture of
its people, a people very close and dear to those of us on
the African continent. The democratic experience in Haiti
serves as a symbol, endowing the concept of international
solidarity with true meaning. In helping the Haitian people
throw off the yoke of dictatorship, the international
community has unquestionably contributed to the
emergence of democracy and of political pluralism in this
part of the world.

The genuine progress made in Haiti testifies to the
irreplaceable role of the United Nations in building
democracy in that country. The presence of the United
Nations is still required to enhance the possibility for
success of a freely chosen Government, one whose actions
are based on legitimate aspirations of the Haitian people, a
people to which it is fitting here and now to pay a richly
deserved tribute for its courage, its spirit of self-sacrifice
and its determination. We must recall the history of Haiti
to understand and appreciate the comments made here
today.

On behalf of my delegation, I should like to note our
gratification at the fact that Haiti remains a concern and an
example of a continuing commitment on the part of the
international community. Indeed, it could not be otherwise,
for we are aware of the financial and other implications of
UNSMIH's presence in Haiti. However, solidarity towards
the people of Haiti requires that the actions of the United

 

Nations not be viewed solely through the distorting lens
of financial considerations. Without a well-organized and
effective National Police, there can be no security in
Haiti. Without assistance from the international
community, the democratic process in Haiti is likely to
become bogged down. Without immediate and adequate
financial assistance, the Haitian Government will not be
able to feed all of its people, much less satisfy the claims
or keep a lid on the discontent of demobilized military
personnel, who represent a genuine threat because they
still have weapons and receive assistance from foreign
countries.

It is for all these reasons that our delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution extending the
mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in Haiti
on the terms agreed to by all the Council members. We
are pleased to say that this draft resolution is a product of
the renewed efforts of the "Friends of the Secretary-
General for Haiti" within this Council and also of all the
friends of Haiti outside the Security Council.
