Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the efforts of
the Security Council to improve its working methods,
which have been particularly intensified in recent
years. The first open debate in 1994 had historical
significance and launched a true evolution, resulting in
the adoption of the presidential note contained in
document S/2006/507. The measures contained in the
note and their implementation reaffirm the principles
of efficiency, transparency, interaction and dialogue
with non-members, which are recognized not only by
States members of the Security Council itself, but also
by the broader United Nations membership. In today's
debate, together with non-member States, we have the
opportunity to exchange views and assess the
implementation of the measures set out in the annex of
13
note S/2006/507, with the aim of improving their
implementation.

Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches high importance
to the implementation of the measures identified in
document S/2006/507, for we are confident that it
could help to promote the Security Council's
transparency, interaction with the United Nations
membership and efficiency.

We are grateful to the presidency for the concept
paper (S/2010/165) on the implementation of document
S/2006/507. We would also agree with the analysis
provided in it. Indeed, the Security Council has made
progress in implementing the measures set out in
document S/2006/507 and, by doing so, has achieved
better efficiency and transparency, as well as
interaction and dialogue with non-members.

Furthermore, we share the same views when it
comes to the challenges in implementing the measures.
Some of these challenges could be addressed through
additional efforts by the Security Council, including in
the field of information-sharing, where there is room
for improvement.

The general approach of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to issues related to working methods is based on the
need to find a proper and adequate balance among
generally accepted principles or guidelines on
efficiency, transparency and interaction and dialogue
with non-members. These principles are compatible,
but in practice they very often contradict each other.

Bearing in mind the primary responsibility of the
Security Council in maintaining international peace
and security, we would like to express the position of
Bosnia and Herzegovina on the following issues
related to the working methods.

First, on consultations, the Security Council
needs enough flexibility to allow it to choose the best
format for a meeting depending on the issue being
considered. While recognizing the importance of
informal consultations to the decision-making process,
we underline the need to balance informal
consultations with public meetings. It is indicative that
rule 48 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council states that "Unless it decides
otherwise, the Security Council shall meet in public".
Therefore, in the spirit of this rule, the Security
Council should hold public meetings as often as
possible. We also believe that it is particularly
important to strengthen the interactive nature of public
meetings.

Secondly, with respect to strengthening
interactions with troop- and police-contributing
countries, regional organizations, the Peacebuilding
Commission, parties that have direct interests in an
issue, and the broader United Nations membership, we
welcome the progress and development of new
practices, including informal interactive dialogues. We
believe such interaction has the potential to enhance
the quality of the Security Council's decisions and to
generate a sense of common ownership, strengthening
in that way the prospects for effective implementation.
Of particular significance is the interaction between the
Security Council and troop-contributing countries, both
in drawing up and in implementing mandates. We also
urge the Secretariat to ensure the timely circulation of
the reports prepared by the Secretary-General to the
Security Council members, as well as to troop-
contributing countries, thus contributing to the
efficiency of their work.

We welcome increased interaction with regional
and subregional organizations as important partners of
the Security Council. The Security Council should also
increase exchanges and the sharing of information with
other United Nations bodies, especially the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.

Thirdly, on the way forward, the presidential note
was designed to improve the efficiency of the work of
the Security Council. We believe that, through its
practical implementation, this goal will be largely
achieved. We also believe that the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions should continue to work in order to agree on
new measures in a reasonable time frame. Furthermore,
we prefer the option of creating a new, consolidated
text that could include the measures contained in notes
S/2006/507, S/2007/784 and S/2008/847.

Finally, we are convinced that this open debate
will significantly contribute to the future work of the
Informal Working Group.

