Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Pakistani presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today's debate focused on the fight against
terrorism.

I align my delegation with the statement to be made
by the Head of the Delegation of the European Union.

As Pakistan was the victim last week of several
terrorist attacks, particularly in Quetta, which resulted
in more than 100 deaths, I very much want to express
France's solidarity with Pakistan in the fight against
terrorism. Those recent attacks are a sad reminder of
the brutality and fanaticism of terrorists.

Terrorism has evolved, but it continues more than
ever to be a serious threat to international peace and
security. The international community must today
confront a loose conglomeration of local organizations
that claim to follow Al-Qaida and whose presence
endangers the security and development of entire
regions, especially in the Sahel and in the Horn of
Africa. We know that terrorist groups take advantage
of regional weaknesses to create safe havens for
themselves, which can become base camps from which
to target neighbouring States or can become hotbeds
of international terrorism. The emergence of such
zones, where trafficking of all kinds fuels terrorism,
represents a very concrete threat and can lead to putting
the very existence of a State in danger.

In resolution 2085 (2012), the Council underlined
the urgency of the situation in northern Mali, which is
a threat to the Malian population and to the stability
of the Sahel, of Africa and of the entire international
community. As members know, since that resolution's
adoption the threat has become clear, and France
responded to the call from the Malian authorities for
assistance in facing it.

The Council has not ceased to reaffirm that
terrorism constitutes a serious threat to international
peace and security. Resolution 1368 (2001), of
12 September 2001, already affirmed that. It is affirmed
again in the draft presidential statement to be adopted
later today. In confronting the threat, the international
community must display unity and solidarity.

To fight terrorism in a comprehensive manner and
to avoid the emergence of lawless areas conducive
to the development of terrorism, it is essential that
the international community commit to effectively
implementing existing mechanisms and adopt long-
term strategies.

First, the effective implementation of international
instruments and the strengthening of international
cooperation are essential to fight terrorism
comprehensively. The United Nations has made possible
the establishment of a legal framework in this area.
The body of United Nations conventions and protocols
define the universal obligations to fight terrorism, and
we must continue to insist on their full implementation.
The relevant Council resolutions have also established
obligations in the matter, covering a wide range of
issues that range from combating incitement to commit
terrorist acts, and against financing such acts, to the
use of sanctions.

Beyond the establishment of that legal framework,
the United Nations has made possible stronger
international cooperation, especially through the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which aims to coordinate existing mechanisms and to
strengthen cooperation among States and organizations.
That strengthened cooperation applies in several types
of measures that enable the United Nations to take a
comprehensive approach in the fight against terrorism,
by addressing the causes - eliminating the conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism - by helping
States fight terrorism through building their capacity,
and by putting in place measures to ensure respect for
human rights in the anti-terrorist fight. Such efforts
must be pursued.

Lastly, the fight against terrorism must be
integrated into more comprehensive, long-term
strategies. From that perspective, it is essential to put in
place security policies to combat the fragility of States,
which is often a factor in creating conditions conducive
to the spread of terrorism. But those security policies
must be accompanied by programmes to encourage
development and good governance. It is therefore
necessary for the international community to provide
assistance designed to strengthen State governance and
institutional capacity - for example, by establishing
regional strategies. That is the approach employed
by the European Union, whose strategy for the Sahel
includes a security component and a development
component.

Strengthening capacities and promoting the
rule of law are two essential components for a long-
term approach in the fight against terrorism. States
threatened by the activity of terrorist groups should
be able to benefit from political and operational
cooperation among States, especially at the regional
level. For instance, France is participating in the setting
up of judicial anti-terrorism hubs in Mauritania and
the Niger and encouraging training for judges, for it
is essential that those States have the means to judge
and sentence terrorists, while respecting human rights.
While a comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism
can sometimes require exceptional measures, it must
also be part of a long-term strategy.

