Sir Jeremy Greenstock: May I begin by warmly
echoing your words of farewell and gratitude to
Ambassador Jorge Navarrete, because we already know
that he personally will be very much missed in the
Council.

The month of your presidency, Sir, has focused
very much on Africa, and I would like to take
advantage of my position here today by saying two
things in the African context. First, we need to note
that in Sierra Leone, the civil war has been declared
ended, and the Council should recognize the enormous
amount of work done by the United Nations to bring
that about. I would like the Secretary-General to know
how much we appreciate the work of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone and others in this
effort. Secondly, we express words of sympathy and
condolence to the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, particularly of Goma, in their further
sufferings as a result of the volcano that has erupted.

We warmly thank you, Mr. President, for bringing

this debate together. It is very important that we should
have an open debate on this subject, and I very much
appreciate the presence of the Secretary-General here. I
hope that participants will focus not on their own
national counter-terrorism programmes or on their
individual reports, but on the generic and political
issues which we are addressing on this subject.

The attacks of 11 September 2001 horrified the
world. We at the United Nations watched the events at
close quarters. We lived side by side with the people of
this city as they grappled with the task of overcoming
the unprecedented scale of the attack. By any criterion,
they have succeeded. New York has shown that
terrorism, on whatever scale, does not damage a
vibrant, democratic society.

The Security Council reacted strongly and
quickly to the threat which international terrorism in its
latest form poses to international peace and security.
The Council recognized that global action was needed
to prevent the spread of terrorist networks and cut off
all support for them. Its response was ambitious but
right.

Governments were already familiar with what
needed to be done, but few had done it. Resolution
1373 (2001) drew on the language negotiated by all
United Nations Members in the 12 conventions against
terrorism, but also delivered a strong operational
message: get going on effective measures now. The
General Assembly continued its work throughout the
autumn in the form of negotiations on an overarching
Comprehensive Convention on Terrorism and a
convention on nuclear terrorism. These efforts must be
brought to completion.

Resolution 1373 (2001) imposes binding
obligations on all States to suppress and prevent
terrorism, and the Counter-Terrorism Committee's
function is to monitor the implementation of the
measures imposed. The members of the Committee
have decided to be proactive, cooperative and even-
handed in this task. Our aim is to raise the average
level of Government performance against terrorism
around the globe. This means upgrading the capacity of
each nation's legislation and executive machinery to
fight terrorism. Every Government holds a
responsibility for ensuring that there is no weak part of
the chain. This is a cardinal element of the process that
resolution 1373 (2001) has instituted. We must do this
together, and everyone has a contribution to make.

I welcome the constructive cooperation which
Governments and colleagues have shown with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and their respect for this
common goal. A critical part of the effort will be
building cooperation, internationally and at the
regional level; exchanging information about terrorism;
and sharing as widely as possible expertise and
assistance on counter-terrorism.

Here I should also mention, as the Secretary-
General has done, resolution 1377 (2001), adopted at
last November's ministerial-level Council meeting.
That declaration instructed the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to explore assistance programmes and best
practices to help States fulfil their obligations. The
Committee has begun to do so. We have invited States
and international and regional organizations to
contribute to a directory of available assistance - a
"one-stop shop" for those looking for expertise and
help. I have also written to the Secretary-General to ask
him to consider establishing a United Nations trust
fund, because the Committee believes that new
contributions are needed to finance this essential work.

Our programme for the first 90-day period set out
our activities for getting going in the first three months.
The second 90-day work programme, released this
week, outlines our plans for the next three months.
Council members will find the documents before them.

In its first 90 days, the Committee issued
guidance to States on the submission of reports. It
published a directory of contact points to promote
international cooperation. A pool of independent
experts was selected to advise the Committee, and I
welcome their arrival here in New York. We made
contact with a range of organizations active in the areas
of counter-terrorism, including potential providers of
assistance.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee has
established the practice of acting with maximum
transparency. I have briefed the membership of the
United Nations on nine occasions since the Committee
began operations, and I have met several times with
regional groups. As far as possible, given the sensitive
nature of counter-terrorism work, we have made our
documents publicly available. We have maintained an
up-to-date and comprehensive web site.

To date, 123 States have submitted reports to the
Committee. This is a welcome response which
demonstrates the excellent cooperation we have
received. However, there remain some that have not
submitted a report. I ask Council members to
encourage their Governments to do so soon, because
their action will be of direct benefit to the international
community as well as to themselves as we pursue our
shared goal.

As we enter the second period, the Committee's
focus is turning to processing the first set of reports.
We have set up three subcommittees to expedite our
work. We anticipate that by 28 February, one third of
the reports will have been reviewed; by the end of the
second 90-day period, at the end of March, two thirds.
We will have completed the task by the end of April.
This is a huge burden, not just on the Committee but
also on our excellent independent experts and on our
hard-pressed Secretariat. I thank them all for their
willingness to throw themselves into this exceptional
task.

Furthermore, in the light of what the Secretary-
General has just said, I would like to say a special word
of thanks and praise to our Translation Service, which
has taken on a huge extra burden given the voluminous
material that Member States have presented. I hope that
the Council will forgive me ifI also say a special word
of commendation to my own expert, Anna Clunes, who
has been at the heart of establishing the work of the
Committee and to whom we all owe a great deal.

What can Governments expect from the review
process? In response to each report, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee will write, in confidence, to the
Government concerned offering its comments. This
may be a request for more information or for
clarification. It may outline areas in which the
Committee believes that legislation or further executive
measures are needed to upgrade that State's capacity
against terrorism in line with resolution 1373 (2001).
We will also, if appropriate, identify for the State
concerned possible sources of expertise or assistance in
programmes of relevance. Do not expect us to declare
any Member State compliant. Our exchanges with
virtually all Member States will stretch out into the
future.

I have said what the Counter-Terrorism
Committee is and what our aims are for the next
period. I should also set out what the Counter-
Terrorism Committee is not. It is not a tribunal for
judging States. It will not trespass onto areas of
competence of other parts of the United Nations
system. It is not going to define terrorism in a legal
sense, although we will have a fair idea of what is
blatant terrorism; where necessary, we will decide by
consensus whether an act is terrorism. The Committee
has no plans to issue lists of terrorist organizations. If it
cannot settle issues of political controversy, it will
submit them back to the Security Council.

Let me here say a word in my national capacity
about these political aspects. In taking a consensual
approach, the Counter-Terrorism Committee is not
ducking its responsibilities. Our job is to work with
Member States, to make the counter-terrorism effort a
truly global one and to clarify how best they can meet
the obligations that rest on their shoulders. But the
Counter-Terrorism Committee's processes will put
pressure on Governments to ensure, in the decisions
they take - both political and administrative - that
they do not condone acts of indiscriminate violence
against civilians in any political context. We have to
develop an international collective conscience in this
respect in which every Government, without exception,
is a participant.

Speaking again as Chairman, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee is mandated to monitor the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). Monitoring
performance against other international conventions,
including human rights law, is outside the scope of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee's mandate. But we will
remain aware of the interaction with human rights
concerns, and we will keep ourselves briefed as
appropriate. It is, of course, open to other organizations
to study States" reports and take up their content in
other forums. Speaking for the United Kingdom, and
recalling what the Secretary-General has just said to us,
I would encourage them to do so.

May I thank the Council for placing confidence in
me to establish the Committee as a working organism. I
should like to conclude by paying a warm tribute to my
Vice-Chairmen, the Permanent Representatives of
Colombia, Mauritius and the Russian Federation, and
to all members of the Committee for their support and
for their hard work. We could not otherwise have
achieved what we have done since 4 October.

