Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I, too, should like to
welcome you back to the Security Council, Madame.
The fact that you have left the warm climes of Santiago
for the frigid weather in New York is testimony to the
priority which you and your country attach to the
important item on children that we are considering
today. This item and our debate are ultimately linked to
a central purpose of the United Nations Charter: to
save succeeding generations - that is, our children -
from the scourge of war.

I should also like to thank Mr. Olara Otunnu, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Ms. Carol Bellamy, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), for their
comprehensive presentations to us, which will enrich
the Council's deliberations and decisions on this item.

As the Council reviews the progress made so far,
we would like to thank the Secretary-General for once
again presenting a report which is concise and yet
comprehensive. The recommendations contained
therein merit careful consideration by the Council, and
we hope that this will soon be translated into a
consensus resolution. We also appreciate unyielding
commitment and efforts of the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, as well as the role which
UNICEF is playing as the lead United Nations agency,
to protect children from the disastrous impact of
conflicts. I must add that the community of non-
governmental organizations, too, has made invaluable
contributions. For a sustained and meaningful
engagement, particularly with non-State actors, it is
important that non-governmental organizations
maintain objectivity and pursue a purely humanitarian
agenda.

The Secretary-General's report this year covers
new ground. Besides listing parties to conflicts on the
Council's active agenda that continued to recruit
children, it also lists parties to other conflicts not on
the Council's agenda. We endorse this approach of
what is popularly called "naming and shaming" as a
useful tool for securing compliance by the parties. To
this end, both the conflicts and the parties to the
conflicts should be identified.

The issue of child soldiers has deservedly been
addressed extensively in previous reports. There is also
a need to highlight other egregious violations and
abuses perpetrated against children in conflict
situations. The Secretary-General's report this year has
devoted a section to an assessment of such violations
and abuses.

The central challenge now, as rightly pointed out
by the Secretary-General, is to ensure the application
of the comprehensive body of international standards
which have been adopted. In this context, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes
are now an integral part of peacekeeping operations.
Yet, because they are vulnerable to economic and
psychological pressures, children are at risk of
re-recruitment. Projects providing economic
opportunities and educational facilities for demobilized
children and their social integration can be useful ways
to prevent re-recruitment.

We favour the Secretary-General's proposal to
strengthen the monitoring and reporting mechanism.
However, rather than create new mechanisms, it would
be more effective to enforce the existing operating
mechanisms. Moreover, the intergovernmental nature
of such mechanisms should be preserved.

Reliable and accurate information is essential for
the monitoring and implementation of commitments.
The Council may consider the compilation - and
regular updating - of a general compendium of
statistical data on children affected by armed conflict,
including an assessment of violations and abuse of
children, and, if possible, those responsible for such
violations. This could then be appended to the
Secretary-General's annual report.

The collection of such data should be entrusted,
where possible, to United Nations country offices,
humanitarian teams or peacekeeping missions. A focal
point could be created in the Department of Political
Affairs to work in close consultations with the
Secretary-General's Special Representative so as to
coordinate the mainstreaming of child protection into
all aspects of peace operations, including DDR.

Tragically, the international community usually
becomes engaged with the plight of children at the end
of conflicts. There are, by then, fewer children to save,
and most have already endured the worst suffering. Our
principal endeavour in the Security Council must
therefore be to ensure that the protection of children in
armed conflict begins before conflicts break out -
before wars are fought and the killing and maiming
begins. The international community must address the
root causes of conflict, which in most cases are socio-
economic inequities, systematic ethnic discrimination,
denial of human rights and the illegal exploitation of
natural resources. The Security Council has a special
responsibility in this regard. It has the authority and the
capability to create the mechanisms and modalities that
can help it to discharge its fundamental and central role
of preventing conflict and promoting the pacific
settlement of disputes.

