Mr. Yauvoli (Fiji): It is my honour to address the
Security Council on behalf of the members of the
Pacific Islands Forum group of countries which are
members of the United Nations, namely Australia, the
Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands,
Kiribati, Nauru, New Zealand, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu,
Vanuatu and my own country, Fiji.

This meeting provides a useful opportunity to
reflect on the efforts made to combat terrorism and
associated transnational crime since the Security
Council adopted the now-landmark resolution 1373
(2001) 16 months ago. That resolution brought a new
element to the existing multilateral counter-terrorism
framework and reflected a recognition of terrorism as a
global problem which, if it is to be eliminated, requires
cooperative action at the national, regional and
international levels.

The declaration adopted by Security Council
Ministers of Foreign Affairs on 20 January 2003, under
resolution 1456 (2003), further highlights the steps to
be taken by States and organizations to strengthen
international efforts to combat terrorism. It helpfully
highlights those areas which require particular focus
since the commencement of the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC). We welcome also the way
in which the declaration recognizes the many threads
that will contribute to effective action against
international terrorism - including the implementation
of Security Council resolutions and other legal
obligations; cooperation with the CTC; mutual
assistance and capacity- building; and the role of
international and regional organizations. We also
support the recognition given to ensuring that measures
to combat terrorism comply with international law, in
particular international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law.

Member States, including the members of the
Pacific Islands Forum, have worked - despite many
constraints - to give effect to the obligations of
resolution 1373 (2001). The Counter-Terrorism
Committee has played an important part in those
efforts. The role of the CTC in monitoring
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) has
undoubtedly assisted in prompting and focusing
Government action. It has assisted States in identifying
and defining the standards for action. The CTC's
efforts in placing States in contact with available
sources of assistance have contributed to the critical
task of enhancing the capacity of States to take such
action.

We commend the Chairman of the CTC, Sir
Jeremy Greenstock, for his continuing leadership in the
establishment of an open dialogue between Member
States and the CTC. We also strongly support the
CTC's initiative to meet with relevant regional and
international organizations as a constructive way of
establishing the dialogue necessary to "connect the
dots". Our region will be contributing to that special
session.

We are grateful also to the team of experts
assisting the CTC, and we appreciate in particular the
CTC's decision to appoint Ambassador Ward as a
special expert to facilitate the provision of assistance as
required. As the work of the CTC continues to evolve,
we look forward to its continuing efforts to engage
directly with States on the basis of their identified
needs.

Much work has also been done at the regional
level to give effect to the objectives of resolution 1373
(2001). The leaders of the Pacific expressed their
political commitment to global counter-terrorism
efforts through the adoption of the Nasonini
Declaration on Regional Security in August last year.
The Nasonini Declaration was not simply an
expression of political intent. It also recognized the
need for the Group to take concrete, practical measures
to give effect to that intent, through law-enforcement
cooperation and national strategies, to combat serious
transnational crime, backed by a strong legislative
base.

In the six months since the Nasonini Declaration
was issued, our members have continued to work to
ensure that those practical measures are put in place.
Using the resolution 1373 (2001) reporting
requirements as a starting point, the Forum secretariat
has now completed a regional review of national
counter-terrorism, transnational crime and law-
enforcement legislation and institutional frameworks.
Model laws will now be prepared with the assistance of
a regional expert working group, which will hold its
first meeting next week, from 24 to 28 February, at the
Forum secretariat in Suva, Fiji. Teams of expert
drafters will make in-country visits to assist with
adapting those model laws as required. Once
completed, this project will see a robust and consistent
framework of anti-terrorism legislation in place across
the region.

The Pacific Islands Forum is part of the Pacific
Financial Intelligence Unit project. In that connection,
the Forum secretariat, assisted by the International
Monetary Fund and the secretariat of the Asia-Pacific
Group on Money Laundering, hosted a seminar on
"Legislative Drafting for Anti-Money Laundering and
Combating the Financing of Terrorism Measures" in
Fiji last month, from 27 to 31 January. Representatives
from the 13 participating countries that attended the
seminar included legislative drafters, prosecutors,
financial intelligence unit officials, police officers and
financial regulators. The seminar covered international
standards and legislative drafting issues in the
following areas: confiscation and provisional measures
such as freezing and seizing property; international
cooperation and mutual assistance; customer due
diligence; financial intelligence units; suspicious-
transactions reporting; and combating the financing of
terrorism.

Such regional cooperation is critical in regions
such as ours, where capacity limitations present a
major challenge to many of our members. The reality
experienced by small island developing States,
particularly those scattered across such a large
geographic expanse as ours, is something that we must
work around. Several of our members are in dialogue
with the CTC, and with Ambassador Ward in
particular, but we are also looking at what more can be
done regionally and bilaterally. We are conscious that
there are some areas, such as vulnerability of banking
and financial systems and transport infrastructure,
particularly international airports, which require more
work. Forum Island countries with a capacity to assist
others recognize their special responsibilities in this
regard.

We in the Pacific recognize that there can be no
standing still in the fight against terrorism. As recent
events all too sadly show, no region is truly pacific
when it comes to the threat of terrorism.

As we face the evolving challenge of terrorism,
and as we work to implement the letter and the spirit of
resolution 1373 (2001), the Security Council can be
assured of the fullest support of the members of the
Pacific Islands Forum group.

