Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East. The issue under discussion is of
paramount importance, and this meeting is all the more
important in the light of new developments taking
place in the region.

The Israeli regime continues to defy international
law by continuing its unlawful and inhuman blockade
against Palestinians, in particular in the Gaza strip,
while the damages inflicted on Gaza as a result of the
occupying regime's 2009 onslaught are yet to be
remedied. The report of the United Nations Fact-
Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48)
constitutes an important step in remedying the
violations of the Israeli regime in Gaza. When it was
issued, the report raised hopes that action would be
taken by the relevant bodies of the United Nations,
including the Security Council, to put an end to the
culture of impunity for Israeli war crimes.

However, no credible action has been taken to that
end. Attempts are still being made to whitewash the
atrocities committed by the Israeli war machine. What
would remain of the credibility of the United Nations if
no action were taken on the report? United Nations
bodies, including the Council, should ensure the full and
immediate implementation of the recommendations
contained in the Goldstone report. Impunity for
perpetrators of crimes of a grave nature is in itself a
cause and incentive for further atrocities. In that regard,
we welcome the efforts by the Government of
Switzerland, in its capacity as depositary of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, to reconvene the Conference of High
Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention to
consider measures to enforce the Convention in the
occupied Palestinian territory. We hope that the
Conference can be held before September.

We also look forward to a comprehensive report
by the Secretary-General on the progress made in the
implementation of the recommendations of the Fact-
Finding Mission by all concerned parties, including
United Nations bodies and, in particular, the Security
Council.

It is regrettable to witness that inaction by
relevant United Nations organs in dealing with the
Israeli regime's unlawful and inhuman policies and
oppressive practices against the populations of the
occupied territories has emboldened this dangerous
regime to continue its crimes against the defenceless
Palestinian people. The generous support by certain
Powers for the Israeli regime has been some of the
most consequential support in contemporary history.
That support has been provided to the detriment of
regional peace and stability, as well as Palestinians'
basic human rights. Last February, the Council again
failed to take action on a draft resolution (S/2011/24)
that simply underlined the urgency of putting an end to
the Israeli apartheid regime's unlawful campaign to
destroy Palestinian homes and build new settlement
units (see S/PV.6484).

The draft resolution was doomed to failure
simply because just one permanent member resorted to
its privileged veto right and obstructed the Security
Council from action. That was of course not the first
time, as the United States has a long recorded history
of covering up the atrocities committed by the Israeli
regime, and hence sharing the regime's crimes as an
accomplice. Blocking actions by the Council will only
embolden the Israeli regime to continue its inhuman
and war-mongering policies with impunity and to
violate internationally recognized human rights and
humanitarian law without any consequences.
28

The Israeli regime has persisted in its aggressive
policies towards Lebanon by constantly violating its
land, sea and air space and refusing to withdraw from
Lebanese occupied territory. It also refuses to withdraw
from the Golan Heights. This regime is continuing its
hostile and provocative policy of spying against
Lebanon. Recently, sophisticated spying equipment was
detected and confiscated - the second such incident in
less than a year. This is a blatant violation of Lebanese
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Achieving a peaceful and just settlement of the
question of Palestine is imperative for the realization
of comprehensive and lasting peace and stability in the
Middle East and beyond. In our view, lasting peace in
Palestine and the region will be possible only through
justice and putting an end to discriminatory and racist
policies and ending the occupation of Palestine and
other occupied territories. Today, we see more and
more States joining the ranks of those that have already
recognized Palestine as an independent State. This is a
very clear indication that the cause of Palestine is
taking on new momentum. Let us hope that oppression
and occupation will end and justice and freedom will
prevail in the Palestinian occupied territory.

Before I conclude, I would like to react to the
reference made to my country by the representatives of
the United States and the Israeli regime. I would like to
place on record that my delegation rejects the baseless
allegations and distortions made in the Chamber, which
are intended to distract the attention of the
international community from the facts concerning the
criminal policies and abhorrent atrocities in the region
committed by the Israeli regime, in particular the
heinous crimes committed against the people of
Palestine.

