The United States is concerned about crimes and human rights abuses in Libya, including the atrocities and violence against civilians in Tarhouna that we have just heard described in the briefing. But there are also long-standing crimes that must be accounted for expeditiously. Accountability for the architects of Libya's darkest days would bring justice to the victims of those atrocities and their families, and help ensure that they are not forgotten. It would also strengthen the durability of the inclusive, negotiated political agreement we hope is in the future, because it would deliver a powerful deterrent message to potential abusers and to those involved in the current conflict who may have committed abuses and atrocities - that there is no place in Libya's future for the commission of atrocities and other human rights abuses. For that reason, the United States supported the European Union's recent announcement of economic sanctions against Mahmoud Al-Werfalli for the human rights abuses he has committed against Libyans. The United States Government continues to receive reports of ongoing atrocities and other human rights abuses in Libya. These accounts include arbitrary killings, forced disappearances, unlawful detentions, torture and sexual and gender- based violence. The conflict in Libya is destabilizing to the region and has displaced many. A culture of impunity has prolonged the conflict by enabling human rights abuses against Libyans. The United States is furthermore concerned about reports of violence against peaceful protesters in August in Zawiyah, Tripoli and Houn. We support the call of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya for an investigation into the reports of the use of excessive force against protesters. The Libyan people must be allowed to exercise their right to peaceful assembly. We also express concern about the mines and booby traps in the outskirts of Tripoli and the reports of a massacre of migrants in Mizda. The United States shares the horror of Libyans and the international community at the discovery of mass graves and of bodies showing signs of torture near Tarhouna. We support the immediate efforts of the Libyan Government and international bodies to investigate those abuses and bring the perpetrators to justice. Specifically, Mohammed Al-Kani and his Al-Kaniyat militia is one of the most egregious abusers of human rights in Libya and has carried out enforced disappearances, torture and killings in Tarhouna. The United States will nominate Al-Kani and the Al-Kaniyat militia shortly to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya, for designation, which would be a strong message from the Security Council for Libyan authorities and the international community to take meaningful enforcement action against human rights violators and to end the culture of impunity in Libya that is fuelling the conflict. Libyan armed groups and security forces on all sides, as well as their international backers, stand accused of perpetrating and enabling human rights abuses. Those actions are unacceptable. The United States welcomes the creation of an international fact-finding mission to document atrocities and other human rights abuses in Libya, and we strongly urge that it be granted full access throughout Libya. We join our colleagues on the Council in welcoming the 23 October announcement of the nationwide Libyan ceasefire, facilitated by Acting Special Representative Stephanie Williams, and we will press to ensure that it leads to an end to those abuses, facilitates efforts to bring the perpetrators to justice and enable the Libyan people to find a lasting political solution to this conflict. The United States continues to oppose all foreign military intervention in Libya and supports the Organization's efforts to convene the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum this week in Tunis for in-person discussions aimed at determining a new executive authority to prepare for national elections. We thank Acting Special Representative Williams and her team for their ongoing efforts in that regard. The United States will continue to be a strong supporter of meaningful accountability and justice for victims of atrocities through appropriate mechanisms. Perpetrators of atrocity crimes must face justice, but we must also be careful to use the right tools for each situation. I have heard my colleagues mention the view and position of the United States on the International Criminal Court (ICC), so let me conclude by reiterating our long-standing and principled objection to any assertion of ICC jurisdiction over nationals of States that are not party to the Rome Statute, absent a Security Council referral or the consent of such States. International justice is not built on violating the founding agreements that created the tools of international justice. Our concerns regarding the ICC and the situation in Afghanistan are well-known. Our position on the ICC in no way diminishes the commitment of the United States to supporting accountability for crimes, atrocities and violations of international humanitarian law, and we will continue to be an advocate for justice.
