Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I have
the honour to speak also on behalf of the European
Union and those countries that have aligned themselves
with this statement.

We welcome the Foreign Minister's participation
this morning and thank you, Sir, for convening this
debate on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, a subject in which the European
Union takes an intense interest. For that reason, the
United Nations and the European Union signed a joint
declaration on cooperation in crisis management in
September 2003. We also see this debate as part of the
implementation process of the world summit outcome.
I should like to thank all those representatives of
regional organizations and entities who have joined us
today.

Over the past few years, we have seen
cooperation in peace and security between regional
organizations and the United Nations expand,
strengthen and develop in unprecedented ways. In
many senses, that reflects the changing nature of
conflict. Most conflicts of the last 15 years have been
internal conflicts - civil wars that may have erupted
owing to failures of governance, abuse of human
rights, religious or ethnic persecution, and economic
exclusion. Those internal conflicts have invariably
spilled over, causing regional problems.

For countries torn apart by civil war, peace is
hard won and recovery a long and complex process.
And for the international community, support for a
peace agreement following civil war is not just about
observing violations of a ceasefire. It is now a
multidimensional task. It extends beyond observation
to robust peacekeeping, where necessary, but also
encompasses the full range of civilian and civilian
police tasks, from the provision of immediate
humanitarian assistance, to support for long-term
development plans; from the demobilization of ex-
combatants to reintegration programmes for those
returning to their communities; from meeting
immediate need for police on the ground to long-term
institutional reform of the police force and the
monitoring and promotion of human rights. Both the
United Nations and regional organizations have been
involved in all those tasks in conflict situations, in
many cases in partnership with each other. They have
had to adapt their capabilities and modes of
cooperation to meet those new needs.

Let me give just a few examples of how the
United Nations and regional organizations have
cooperated in recent times. In Liberia, Sierra Leone
and C6te d'Ivoire, it was the Economic Community of
West African States that provided the first troops on
the ground and therefore the initial capability for
stabilization in advance of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. In Darfur, as my Tanzanian
colleague has pointed out, the African Union's
peacekeeping force, the African Union Mission in
Sudan, is carrying the burden on the ground and
functions with the financial support of the European
Union through the African Peace Facility. In Bosnia,
there have been a number of linked interventions by
the United Nations and its partners. The United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina has now
been succeeded by the European Union's Police
Mission in Bosnia, and the European Union has
replaced the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) in the main stabilization role, with support
from NATO. Another example is Kosovo, where NATO
troops have provided the main stabilization force, the
Kosovo Force, which has operated under a United
Nations mandate and in tandem with the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). Furthermore, UNMIK itself provides an
example of United Nations cooperation with others,
through the European Union's leadership of UNMIK's
pillar IV and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe's leadership of pillar II.

From the development perspective, there are
several instances of useful cooperation. One such
example is the strategic partnerships and agreements
concluded between the European Commission and
several United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes.

The European Union believes that the case for
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations has been emphasized by those examples
and many more, as well as by the interventions we
heard this morning. Cooperation matters because
regional organizations may have a more profound
understanding of the situation in those countries; they
may have leverage where the United Nations or other
international partners do not; and, like good
neighbours, regional organizations care more about
what is happening in their own backyard and may be
prepared to do something about it more quickly than
others.

No one country or organization - not even the
United Nations - can be expected to have all the
capabilities to assist a country in conflict. Partnership
is essential if we are to get the tasks of conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding done. In
doing so, we must, however, keep in mind the overall
responsibility for international peace and security
vested in this Security Council.

Let me turn to some of the opportunities and
challenges of strengthening cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations.

First, the European Union believes that more can
be done to improve cooperation in conflict prevention
and to help regional organizations prevent conflict in
their own regions. The United Nations and regional
organizations should, as a matter of course, share early
warning information and, where possible, take forward
joint work to prevent the outbreak of conflict. For that
reason, the European Union and the United Nations
Secretariat conduct regular desk-to-desk dialogue, and
that needs to be strengthened.

Secondly, in his report "In larger freedom",
Secretary-General Annan urged us to establish

4c

an interlocking system of peacekeeping
capacities that will enable the United Nations to
work with relevant regional organizations in
predictable and reliable partnerships" (A/59/2005, para. 112).

We need to build an understanding of the comparative
capabilities of different organizations and the know-
how to work together in a range of different
circumstances and at short notice. That is not to say
that there should be a strict division of labour. Rather,
in order to be effective, the international community
needs to know which organization can do what, and in
what time frame. The summit outcome built on "In
larger freedom" by encouraging the efforts of the
European Union and other regional entities to develop
capacities for rapid deployment, standby and bridging
arrangements. We should take forward work on these
areas now, including issues of interoperability and of
how to effect a successful transition from an operation
led by the United Nations to one led by a regional
entity, and vice versa.

Thirdly, the relationship between regional
organizations and the Peacebuilding Commission will
be crucial. The place of such organizations in the
Commission's country-specific work is assured in the
summit outcome. Regional organizations will have a
key role to play in providing information from the field
and in helping to formulate peacebuilding strategies
during discussions within the Commission. This will
also be the means to build greater coherence between
actions of the United Nations and those of regional
organizations on peacebuilding issues.

Fourthly, building the capacity of regional
organizations needs to be given serious long-term
support. In particular, the European Union welcomes
the reference in the summit outcome document to the
development and implementation of a 10-year plan for
capacity-building with the African Union. Direct
contact and cooperation among regional organizations
should be encouraged. The United Nations also has
role to play in this, given its wide experience, its
network of expertise and its potential to play a
coordinating role.

Fifthly, developments relating to regional
organizations should become a regular part of the
Secretary-General's reporting to the Security Council,
and, as appropriate, the Council should meet regularly
with the heads of regional and subregional
organizations. In this way the Council will be better
informed about the situation on the ground and about
the options available for a given country. In this
respect, the European Union welcomes the provisions
of the draft resolution that has been agreed for this
meeting.

Finally, let me say a word about cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in combating terrorism. Pursuing terrorists or
proliferators requires a cross-border response. Regional
organizations may often be ideally placed to help
countries make that successful response. But at the
same time, to be able to tackle these threats with really
effective international cooperation, we as individual
States need to have some common ground. We need a
common vision and a common language. We need
common standards in what we do, in the form of new
legal or political norms. This is where the
intergovernmental bodies of the United Nations have a
major role to play. The European Union would
welcome the opportunity to further enhance counter-
terrorism cooperation with the United Nations.

In conclusion, regional organizations now play a
major role in assisting the Security Council, and the
United Nations as a whole, in the maintenance of
international peace and security. This is a fact that is
being borne out today in conflict and post-conflict
situations all around the world. The European Union
looks forward to strengthened cooperation with the
United Nations and regional organizations in all
capacities.

Like other members of the Council, the United
Kingdom welcomes and will support the proposed draft
resolution on this item.

