Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan) (spoke in Russian):
Allow me to express our sincere condolences to our
colleagues at the Russian Federation's Mission to the
United Nations and to the family of Mr.Churkin, who
passed away.
(spoke in English)

My delegation thanks the Ukrainian presidency
for having organized this open debate on the very
important and pressing topic of conflicts in Europe.
We are also grateful to the Secretary-General for his
remarks. I would like to take this opportunity to express
once again my country's full support for his appeal of
1 January for peace and our determination to genuinely
contribute to joint efforts towards making this year,
2017, a year for peace.

Strict compliance with the general accepted norms
and principles of international law guiding inter-State
relations and the fulfilment in good faith of obligations
assumed by States are imperatives to that end. However,
that objective is hardly accomplishable if those norms
and principles are misinterpreted, conditioned or
implemented with reservations, if not altogether
neglected, while some of them are referred to in order
to cover up aggressions, atrocities and ethnic cleansing.

At the end of 1991 and the beginning of 1992, both
Armenia and Azerbaijan obtained their independence
and were accorded international recognition. The
groundless Armenian territorial claim against my
country escalated into a full-fledged inter-State war.
As a result, a significant part of my country's territory,
including the Nagorno Karabakh region of the Republic
ofAzerbaijan - a region ofthe Republic ofAzerbaijan,
not of the South Caucasus, not of Transcaucasus or
of anywhere else - and the seven adjacent districts
of Lachin, Kalbajar, Zangilan, Qubadli, Jabrayil,
Fizuli and Agdam, and other exclaves were occupied
by Armenia. Serous violations of international
humanitarian law amounting to war crimes, crimes
against humanity and acts of genocide were committed
in the course of the aggression. The war claimed the
lives of tens of thousands of people, ruined cities and
livelihoods and resulted in the forcible expulsion of
more than 1 million Azerbaijanis from their homes and
properties, while thousands of people went missing in
connection with the conflict.

This month marks the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the atrocious crime committed by the Armenian
forces against the civilians and defenders of the town
of Khojaly, situated in the Nagorno Karabakh region
of Azerbaijan. What happened in Khojaly on the night
of 25-26 February 1992 was the largest massacre
in the nearly 30-year-old conflict. As a result of the
massive artillery bombardment of Khojaly and the
subsequent attack on and capture of the town, hundreds
of Azerbaijanis, including women, children and the
elderly were killed, wounded or taken hostage, while
the town was razed to the ground. That mass killing
was committed less than a month after the Security
Council recommended to the General Assembly the
admission of the Republic of Armenia for membership
to the United Nations and, in that regard, recalled in a
note by the President "Armenia's solemn commitment
to uphold the Purposes and Principles of the Charter,
which include the principles relating to the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the non-use of force". This is
in document S/23496, of 29 January 1992.

Later in 1993, in this very Chamber, the
Security Council unanimously adopted four
resolutions - resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874
(1993) and 884 (1993) - condemning the occupation of
the territories of Azerbaijan and reaffirming respect for
its sovereignty and territorial integrity, the inviolability
of international borders and the inadmissibility of the
use of force for the acquisition of territory. In response
to Armenia's territorial claims and actions, the Council
reconfirmed that the Nagorno Karabakh region is
an integral part of Azerbaijan and demanded the
immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal of
the occupying forces from all the occupied territories.
A series of Security Council presidential statements
adopted between 1992 and 1995 and documents of other
authoritative international organizations are framed
along the same lines.

Obviously, the Security Council resolutions
acknowledge the fact that acts of military force were
committed against Azerbaijan; that such acts are
unlawful and incompatible with the prohibition of
the use of armed force in international relations in
contradiction with the Charter of the United Nations
and its purposes; and that they constitute an obvious
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Azerbaijan, specifically as pertains to Article 2,
paragraph 4 of the Charter.

The Security Council also tasked the
Organization - known at that time as the
Conference - for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) to ensure, in performing its mediation
efforts towards the settlement of the conflict, the
implementation of those resolutions. In that context,
the Chairman of the Minsk Conference, Mr. Mario
Raffaelli of Italy, stated that the immediate withdrawal
from the seized territories is "the key factor in ensuring
that peaceful negotiations can move forward". This is
found in the appendix in document S/26184 of 28 July
1993.
It is also pertinent to recall the positions expressed
at that time by the three permanent members of the
Security Council .who are currently the co-Chairs of
the Minsk Group. At the Council's 3258th meeting, on
29 July 1993, in his statement following the adoption of
resolution 853 (1993), the representative of the Russian
Federation particularly noted that the Azerbaijani town
of Agdam had been seized despite assurances to the
Russian side by official Armenian representatives that
no ground offensive operations would be undertaken
and that they did not intend to attack the town. At the
same meeting, the representative of the United States
of America stated that the seizure of Agdam could
not be justified by any claim of self-defence and that
that action had disrupted the peace process. Following
the adoption of resolution 884 (1993) on 12 November
1993, which condemned the occupation of the Zangelan
district and the city of Goradiz and attacks on civilians
and bombardments of the territory of Azerbaijan, the
representative of France stated, inter alia, that the
acquisition of territory by force was inadmissible and
doing so for the purposes of negotiations could not be
countenanced (see S/PV.3313).

For his part, in 1994 the Secretary-General made it
crystal clear that

"The position of the United Nations is based on
four principles which have been mentioned in
the different resolutions of the Security Council.
The first principle is the territorial integrity of
Azerbaijan. The second principle is the inviolability
of the international boundaries; the third principle
is the inadmissibility of the use of force for the
acquisition of territory; and the fourth principle
is the immediate and unconditional withdrawal
of all foreign troops from occupied territories of
Azerbaijan."

This is from document SG/SM/5460, 31 October 1994.

Unfortunately, the Security Council's key demands
have still not been implemented, and the mediation
efforts conducted for more than 20 years within the
framework of the OSCE have yet to yield results. There is
no doubt that Armenia's continued military occupation
of the territories of Azerbaijan could not be possible
without the sense of impunity that it enjoys despite
persistent contempt for international law. As a direct
consequence, Armenia has consistently obstructed
the conflict-settlement process and, in the meantime
refuses to start result-oriented negotiations, while it
regularly resorts to various provocations to escalate
the situation on the front line and tries to consolidate
the status quo by strengthening its military build-up in
the seized territories and changing their demographic,
cultural and physical character.

Armenia's further provocative attempt yesterday
to hold a so-called constitutional referendum in the
occupied Nagorno Karabakh region of Azerbaijan and
change the geographic name of a part of my country's
internationally recognized territory in violation of
international law, the Constitution and the legislation
of Azerbaijan and the principles and procedures for
international standardization of geographical names
established within the United Nations, clearly testifies
to its policy of annexation of the territories of Azerbaij an
and unwillingnessto engage in a constructive search
for peace. The international community once again
united with Azerbaijan in rejecting this action and its
outcomes as null and void.

The presence of the armed forces of Armenia in
the occupied territories of my country is the main
cause of tensions and incidents on the front line and
the major impediment to the political settlement of the
conflict. The escalation provoked by Armenia in April
2016 demonstrated that the status quo is unsustainable.
It should be particularly noted that, since the very
first day of the conflict, combat operations have
been conducted exclusively inside the territory of my
country, almost in the middle of Azerbaijan, affecting
its civilian population and infrastructure.

In their declaration of 9 November 1993, made in
response to the seizure of Azerbaijani territories, the
nine countries of the OSCE Minsk Group

"condemn the looting, burning and destruction of
villages and towns, which cannot be justified under
any standards of civilized behaviour" (S/26718, 
p. 3).

The same policy has been continued up to now. As a
result of Armenia's attacks last April, 39 towns and
villages in Azerbaijan along the front line were shelled,
causing casualties among civilians and servicemen, and
either destroying or substantially damaging private and
public property, including residential houses, schools
and kindergartens.

In its assessment report submitted following a
visit in May 2016 to the affected areas in Azerbaijan,
a mission of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees found that Azerbaijani
villages along the line of contact had been coping with
the regular ceasefire violations for the past 20 years and
that, since the beginning of April 2016, the situation
had changed fundamentally due to the use of new and
heavier types of military hardware, inflicting worse
damage on Azerbaijani settlements situated behind the
front lines.

The leadership of Armenia must realize that the
military occupation of a territory of another State
Member of the United Nations does not represent a
solution, and that its reliance on the status quo is a grave
miscalculation. Evidently, this policy does not serve
and is detrimental to the real interests, aspirations and
well-being of the Armenian people. Azerbaijan will
never compromise its territorial integrity or the rights
and freedoms of its citizens that are grossly violated as
a result of the aggression.

The achievement of peace, security and stability
will be possible, first and foremost, only if the
consequences of Armenia's occupation are removed,
thereby ensuring that its armed forces are immediately,
unconditionally and completely withdrawn from the
territories of Azerbaijan, the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of my country are restored, and the right of
internally displaced Azerbaijanis to return to their
homes is guaranteed and implemented. That is what
international law and the Security Council demand, and
can in no way be substituted with semi-measures, made
under any pretext, introduced as a compromise or used
as a bargaining chip in the conflict-settlement process.

As a country suffering from the occupation of its
territories and the forcible displacement of hundreds
of thousands of its citizens, Azerbaijan is the party
most interested in the earliest political settlement of
the conflict, which would ensure peace, justice and
development in the region.

