Mr. Geoana (Romania) (spoke in French): I and
the Romanian delegation are pleased that the Spanish
presidency convened this meeting. When Mr.
Moratinos visited Bucharest, I had the privilege of
discussing this issue and the common steps taken in
this regard by Romania and Spain.

I would also like to welcome the presence of
Mr. Javier Solana and his colleagues, our friend Mr.
Amre Moussa, and our friends from the African Union.

(spoke in English)

In the last couple of years, our debate has shifted
from what we call costly contemplation to engagement.
On this topic, we are now at the stage of defining the
degree and the quality of our engagement. The breadth
and diversity of that engagement can be addressed only
once we adopt a broad concept of security and conflict
management. We should not only look at the symptoms
and the challenges but also establish benchmarks for
the viability and durability of our effort. The time has
indeed come for the Security Council, the United
Nations family and all of us to deal with these issues.

The recent Mexican initiative and others,
including our own in July, signal a new trend in
Security Council activities and decisions on this issue.
We acknowledge not only the multifaceted nature of
security but also the need for a multifaceted response
to security threats. The topic proposed by our Spanish
friends also indicates a major challenge in avoiding
placing dividing lines between the military and the
civilian components, which are still too rigidly kept
apart. We are aware of the major role of each
component, but we should try to make the synergy
between the two components real.

We find it only logical to start thinking of all
operations as having two phases of deployment and
two categories of staff in a mutually reinforcing
relationship. We have learned from our experience in
the Balkans and in other places where Romania has
been engaged that another key to success in all post-
conflict operations is to rapidly build up local capacity
and ownership.

Interagency cooperation still needs to be
improved. We have seen some progress, especially in
cooperation among the United Nations, the European
Union and the African Union. But more remains to be
done in that respect.

Rapid reaction national units are a must, and my
country is working on a national registry for experts
and professionals that can be deployed at any time.

The expected outcome of the synergy between the
military and the civilian components in conflict
management and peace-building is our ability to
prevent future armed conflicts. We are also looking at
an aspect that is important to us and is important to the
success of our endeavour - the functioning of the
basic elements of good governance.

In that regard, the capacity of post-conflict
societies to assimilate democratic values, especially
competitive electoral politics, is of decisive
importance. Here again, we should have a realistic
approach, including with respect to the right balance
between military and civilian instruments.
Unfortunately, there continue to exist situations, such
as the prolonged deadlock in the peace and transition
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which make the case for more substantial military
resources from the international community.

I would urge all of us to look at and try to review
the United Nations electoral assistance practices,
whose understanding of the criteria for fair and free
elections needs to be substantially broadened. We must
also give more support to independent national
electoral commissions; the concepts of freedom of
organization, movement, assembly and expression by
political parties; accurate electoral rolls; and freedom
of access for election monitors from international
organizations and non-governmental organizations.

Economics should not be missing from any
toolbox of civilian instruments for conflict
management and peace-building. We also look with
great interest to the way in which the European Union
has addressed some of these issues in a successful way.

Dealing with the challenges of conflict
management and peace-building at the beginning of the
twenty-first century requires, indeed, a multilayered
and multi-institutional approach. The Security Council,
including on the occasion of the thematic debate
initiated by my country during our presidency in the
month of July, acknowledged the important role played
by regional organizations in this field and encouraged
them to continue the development of their crisis
management capabilities, including at the civilian
level.

The African Union and the European Union are
just two examples of organizations that play a truly
effective role in conflict management and peace-
building.

In conclusion, the tasks for civilians and the
military in post-conflict situations are no longer
simple, as they involve good coordination in the field
and clearly stated goals. The role of the Security
Council is decisive in this respect because, in most
cases, it is the Council that lays down the framework
for good civil-military interaction. Significant added
value in this regard will undoubtedly be brought by
today's open debate of the Council, and, again, we
welcome the Spanish initiative in this regard.

