Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I congratulate you, Sir,
on your leadership of the Security Council this
month. I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2016/218) and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Haysom, for his briefing and the
very valuable work being done by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

Sweden fully aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union, and
would like to make a few additional, brief remarks.

The year 2015 was seen as critical for Afghanistan;
2016 will be no less important. The Afghan National
Unity Government has an important task at hand to
move ahead with the self-reliance reform agenda. At
the same time, Afghanistan is pursuing a potential
peace process, enacting critically needed economic
and political reforms, and preparing for elections while
facing a challenging security situation. We all need to
give full support to those efforts.

UNAMA will also play an important role in
supporting the endeavours of the Afghan National
Unity Government. The Mission has been essential
in the efforts for peace, stability and development
and will continue to be a cornerstone of international
engagement. We believe that there is room to allow
UNAMA to play an even more active role in facilitating
humanitarian access, promoting human rights and
providing good offices in support of a peace process.

Furthermore, the upcoming Nato Warsaw Summit
and the donor conference in Brussels later this year will
be important to determining future international support
to Afghanistan. In that context, we urge all parties to
remain committed and to deliver on their pledges. This
is about doing our part to instil hope and opportunities,
especially for the young Afghan population, to rebuild
their country. We all know that building peace takes
time and that many other urgent situations require our
attention and resources, but we must remain committed
and take a long-term perspective on Afghanistan.

The escalation of violence has led to an appalling
increase in civilian casualties and a worsened
humanitarian situation. As in many other instances,
women and children are particularly affected. We are
also worried by the recent and increasing number of
attacks against health clinics across the country. All
sides in the conflict need to make sure that civilians are
afforded protection in accordance with international
humanitarian law.

A peace agreement is the only viable option for
long-term stability and development in Afghanistan.
We welcome the progress made so far by the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan Peace
and Reconciliation Process, and are encouraged by
signs of confidence between Afghanistan and Pakistan.
We support the work ahead in realizing the road map.
In these and future talks, women should be included
and able to participate fully and on equal terms. Their
empowerment and organization is to the benefit of any
society. It is crucial to the legitimacy and strength of
any agreement, and a means to reach the uniting peace
that the Ambassador of Afghanistan rightly spoke of
earlier today.

Sweden's commitment to Afghanistan is substantial
and long-term, with the ambition of contributing
approximately $1.2 billion during the transformation
decade. We hope that other key partners in the region
and the wider international community will join in this
long-term approach. We will also continue to assist in
developing the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces through participation in the Resolute Support
Mission in 2016.

The Afghan National Unity Government has made
commendable progress on a number of issues, despite
a multitude of challenges. It and the Afghan people
deserve our continued support as they seek to build a
self-reliant and peaceful future.

