Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors
Brammertz and J allow for their reports and, as always,
for their steadfast dedication to advancing global justice.
At this time, I would like to express particular gratitude
and thanks to President Meron in his last briefing
before the Council as President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). We greatly
appreciate his dedicated service as President of both the
ICTY and the Residual Mechanism. He has tirelessly
dedicated much of his professional life to international
justice and contributed immensely to the jurisprudence
of international criminal law. International justice has
been well served and continues to be well served by his
leadership.

The seeds of international criminal justice were
planted 70 years ago with the drafting of the Charter
of the International Military Tribunal. The Nuremberg
Charter provided for a fair judicial process for leaders
of the Nazi regime who would face trial in Nuremberg.
The Charter and the ensuing trials ensured that those
accused of war crimes and crimes against humanity
would face justice before the world. Indeed, while the
world faces the continued horrors of mass atrocities
in Syria, South Sudan, the Sudan, the Central African
Republic and elsewhere, the ICTY, the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the
Mechanism for International Criminal Tribunals stand
as examples and important reminders that where there
is will, perpetrators of mass atrocities can indeed be
brought to justice.

As always, the United States supports the ongoing
efforts of the ICTY to complete its remaining trials and
appeals expeditiously, efficiently and thoroughly, while
pressing international justice forward and ensuring
that the accused are given a fair trial. We note that
appeals judgements have been rendered in the Popovic'
and Tolomir cases, and we await judgement this year
in the trial of Radovan Karadzic'. Together with Ratko
Mladic', Karadzie stands accused of crimes that include
responsibly for the Srebrenica massacre, the twentieth
anniversary of which falls on 11 July. Srebrenica, of
course, was the single worst crime committed in Europe
since the Second World War. It is hoped that the victims
and survivors of Srebrenica will have an outcome that
can help bring closure to that most disturbing and
painful chapter in the history of the former Yugoslavia.

We also await judgement in the trial of Vojislav
Seselj for crimes against humanity and violations ofthe
laws and customs of war. The United States once again
condemns his incendiary public rhetoric - rhetoric
that challenges regional reconciliation and threatens to
open tragic wounds of the past, since his provisional
release by the Court on humanitarian grounds last
November. We continue to urge all Governments and
leaders of the region to cooperate with the Court's
orders, to continue working towards reconciliation and
to avoid inflammatory statements.

Last year, the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda completed all of its trials of first instance
as the world marked two decades since the Rwandan
genocide. We recognize and appreciate the ICTR's
continuing efforts to finish appeals in a timely manner.
We also continue to commend the ongoing efforts of
the Presidents and Prosecutors to efficiently transfer
the remaining functions to the Residual Mechanism,
while at the same time preserving the fairness and
impartiality of the judicial process.

The effort to ensure that those accused by the
ICTY - all 161 out of 161 - were brought tojustice was
unprecedented in the history of international justice. It
required the international community to use the full
range of resources and tools at our disposal: legal,
financial and political. This included the conditioning
ofbilateral economic assistance on a State's compliance
with its obligations under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations to enforce arrest warrants issued
by judges of the ICTY. Most significant in terms of its
impact, as implemented by the European Union (EU),
with the steadfast support of EU member States, was
the requirement of full and complete cooperation with
the ICTY before a country could be considered for
accession to the EU.

United Nations peacekeeping missions and
multinational NATO forces worked with the Tribunals,
international law enforcement and national authorities
to assist in apprehending fugitives. INTERPOL shared
information, and training programmes strengthened
the capacity for national police authorities to locate and

arrest war crimes fugitives. The United States offered
rewards of up to $5 million for information leading to
their arrest and, following those arrests, paid significant
rewards in a number of cases.

To achieve the same success for the ICTR and
ensure that the nine remaining ICTR fugitives, who
are mass murderers, are brought to justice, we have
been working closely with the same organizations:
the United Nations, national authorities, international
law enforcement and, most importantly, the ICTR and
the Residual Mechanism. As with the ICTY fugitives,
the United States continues to offer up to $5 million
in rewards for information leading to the arrest of the
nine ICTR fugitives, whether they will be prosecuted
in the Residual Mechanism or in Rwandan courts. We
call for full international cooperation in tracking and
arresting these men. We remain deeply committed to
apprehending those nine fugitives, who include three
leaders believed to have carried out key roles in the
Rwandan genocide: Felicien Kabuga, alleged to have
financed atrocities; Augustin Bizimana, the Minister
of Defence, alleged to have ordered his subordinates
to carry out horrific crimes; Protais Mpiranya, the
Commander of the Presidential Guard, alleged to have
carried out targeted assassinations from the moment
the genocide began. These men have not escaped our
continued attention and our steadfast determination to
see each of them face justice. If we forget them, we fail
their victims and the survivors, and we will not and
cannot fail them.

Justice and accountability for the victims and
survivors of mass atrocities and accountability for the
perpetrators remain a critical requirement of any real
peace. The ICTY and ICTR have ensured justice for
the victims of some of the worst mass murderers and
criminals in the history of the world. They have made
immeasurable contributions to ensuring accountability,
advancing peace and reconciliation and promoting
truth and justice. Their work and legacy should serve
as a reminder of what is possible when the world is
committed to responding to crimes that shock the
conscience, and they should serve as a cold rebuke to
those who continue to commit such crimes under the
mistaken belief that somehow we will just give up on
accountability and move on from the push for justice.
At the very least, the ICTY and ICTR are a reminder
that we will not do so, and a reminder that we will fulfil
our commitment to the victims of these atrocities and
their survivors because we cannot and will not forget.

