Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for calling this meeting today. I also
thank the Under-Secretary-General and the Assistant
Secretary-General for their briefings. The Secretariat,
the United Nations and the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) are doing a difficult
job in very difficult circumstances.

Before beginning my remarks, I would like to
reject the allegation by the Russian ambassador that the
Secretariat, and the Under-Secretary-General in
particular, are biased. We have a convention in this
Council that we rely on the information given to us by
the Secretariat. An attack on the Secretariat is an attack
on the institutions of the United Nations. And Russia,
which is fast becoming a party to the conflict, is ill-
placed to make such a claim, and it does it no credit.

As others have said, we are witnessing a grave
escalation of the situation in Georgia. Further fighting
has happened over night, and there has been further
Russian bombing of Georgian territory. Russian naval
vessels have moved closer, and there are media reports
that they are tasked with preventing supplies to
Georgia; there are concerns that supplies may not get
through to other countries in the Caucasus.

Overnight, Russian bombing included an attack
on the military airfield near the civilian airport outside
Tbilisi. In a meeting on 10 August with delegations
from the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
United States, the Georgian Foreign Minister
confirmed that the Georgian side has pulled back from
most of South Ossetia and that Georgia has disengaged
from Russian forces. She also said that Russian forces
have told Georgia to negotiate a ceasefire with the
proper person. Saakashvili has tried to contact Putin,
but we understand that there has been no reply for
several hours, and we heard from Ambassador Churkin
why that is the case. I will merely make the obvious
point that if leaders are not prepared to talk to each
other, it is rather hard to see how peace efforts can
move forward.

We have heard disturbing reports that there will
only be a ceasefire once the Georgians have committed
to a non-use-of-force agreement and have withdrawn
completely from South Ossetia. Meanwhile, there are
reports that other speakers have referred to of Russian
forces striking Zugdidi in Georgia proper and of
Abkhaz armed personnel movements.

We appreciate that it is difficult to get
authoritative accounts of what is happening on the
ground, as UNOMIG has been forced to pull back and
Russian forces throughout Georgia have, through their
actions on the ground, caused international monitors to
have to leave. Our embassy is having trouble getting
access to its own premises in Tbilisi because of the
Russian actions, and we understand that there are
foreign nationals, including British nationals, who may
be trapped in parts of the conflict zone. We look to all
the combatants to protect foreign nationals and other
civilians. We will need corridors so that they can be
safely evacuated, and we hold all the combatants
responsible for the safety of our citizens.

Ambassador Churkin says there is no military
solution, but we heard this morning from Russian
Deputy Foreign Minister Karasin that the situation
requires - and he used the present tense - a military
intervention. We also heard from Prime Minister Putin
about a "fatal blow" being delivered to the territorial
integrity of Georgia.

We are witnessing, it appears, a grave violation of
Georgia's sovereignty and territorial integrity. Russian
forces have certainly violated respect for the
international norms of peacekeeping, and it is a gross
distortion by Russia to claim peacekeeping duties as
the reason for their actions. Those actions have gone
beyond any reasonable, proportionate response.

Instead of cold war rhetoric, we need the Russian
representative to give us answers to the following
questions: Why can Russia not support a cessation of
hostilities and a withdrawal of all armed personnel,
including their own regular and irregular forces, to
positions pertaining on 6 August? What are Russia's
political and military intentions in respect of Georgia?
And what are Russia's political and military intentions
in respect of Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Georgia,
once the fighting has stopped?

What we have heard today from the Secretariat
casts doubt on Russia's claims that their actions are
humanitarian or designed to uphold peace and security
in the Caucasus.

I would like also to reject the equivalence the
Russian ambassador sought to establish between the
situation in Georgia and that in Kosovo in 1998 and
1999. The situations are very different, but if the
Russian actions are reminiscent of any party in that
conflict, it is certainly not NATO that their actions
remind us of.

As other speakers have said, we endorse the
strong statement of the Secretary-General last night. I
would like to echo what the French presidency of the
European Union said: we repeat our calls here in the
Chamber for an immediate and unconditional end by
all parties, irregular and regular forces, to hostilities.
We call on the Russian and Georgian sides and all the
other parties to engage with the international mediation
efforts, those led by the European Union, the OSCE
and the United States, and to withdraw to positions of
before 6 August. We call for all to respect the
principles of the United Nations Charter. We call for
Georgia's sovereignty and territorial integrity to be
respected. We also call for humanitarian needs to be
addressed. But that must not be used as pretext by the
Russian authorities to keep their forces on Georgian
territory or to insert further troops. We need urgently to
establish an international presence on the ground to
assist efforts at peace, monitor the ceasefire and help
protect civilians.

In respect of Abkhazia in Georgia, we express our
strong support of UNOMIG and condemn hostilities in
and around Abkhazia. These are in contravention of the
ceasefire agreement of 1994. If it is indeed the case
that Russian forces are moving on Zugdidi, then they
should leave. All parties should honour their
obligations under previous Security Council
resolutions on Abkhazia. It is extremely concerning
that there are reports of Commonwealth of Independent
States peacekeepers doing nothing to stop or inhibit
offensive movements by Abkhaz armed personnel.
That, too, vitiates the purpose of international
peacekeeping. We call on Russia to use its influence
over those in Abkhazia who are intent on broadening
the conflict.
Finally, we have heard from a couple of
delegations here this morning that they propose to
bring forward action in the Security Council to support
a cessation of hostilities. My Government will do
everything it can to support those moves.

