Mr. Mufioz (spoke in Spanish): I beg the
indulgence of the Council: I will be speaking not in my
own language, but in the language of Shakespeare
English, for practical reasons related to the preparation
of the oral report.

(spoke in English)

This is the first of the 120-day oral assessments
submitted to the Council by the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), as required by resolution 1526
(2004). As stipulated in that resolution, I will inform
the Council about the overall work of the Committee
and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team, summarize States' progress in implementing the
sanctions measures and address communications with
States regarding additional requests for information
and assistance.

Several positive developments have taken place
since my most recent oral report to the Council, in
January, including an increase in State compliance,
indicated by the submission of 33 additional reports
pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1455 (2003),
leading to a total of 126 reports submitted by Member
States. In addition, the Committee received 15 letters
from States explaining their reasons for non-reporting,
pursuant to paragraph 23 of resolution 1526 (2004).

Despite some advances, terrorism continues to be
a serious threat to international peace and security.
Given the recent occurrence of terrorist incidents
worldwide, it is necessary for the Committee to
maintain regular communication with Member States
and to regularly inform the Security Council about the
progress achieved, as well as about current challenges
and problems in sanctions implementation.

As regards the work of the Committee, on 30
January 2004 the Security Council adopted resolution
1526 (2004), which created the new, more demanding
conceptual and substantive framework for the future
activities of the Committee. On 18 February - shortly
after the adoption of the resolution - I briefed all
Member States in greater detail on the most important
aspects of the resolution. I and other members of the
Committee were very pleased that the briefing was
well attended: representatives of 70 States showed their
interest in knowing more about the new resolution and
the overall work of the Committee.

Since 12 January, the Committee has held 12
informal and two formal meetings. The Committee
continued its practice of discussing the issues in
informal settings, as that allows members of the
Committee to exchange their views more openly. At
the initiative of some members, the Committee has
started discussing a working paper containing
definitions of terms used in resolution 1526 (2004) and
other relevant resolutions, particularly the definition of
the freezing of funds or other financial assets or
economic resources, with the purpose of providing
more clarity and precision to the Committee regarding
the performance of its monitoring functions, as well as
to Member States in their implementation efforts.

Early in February, the Committee endorsed a
programme of work for 2004 and decided upon the
main issues to be discussed at its informal meetings.
The Committee also approved a very detailed annual
report (S/2004/281) containing information about the
Committee's activities in 2003.

Since 1 January 2004, the names of 19
individuals and six entities have been placed on the
Committee's list. Members of the Committee fully
realize that the list continues to play a crucial role in
the implementation of the sanctions measures. The
Committee therefore decided to approach all States -
as it did in 2002 - with a request seeking their
assistance in providing identifying information about
the names already on the list and in submitting new
names to the list.

The Committee has established a list of contact
points similar to the list used by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). Such a list will allow the
Committee secretariat to automatically inform
competent officials from Member States about
amendments to the list whenever such changes are
made.

On 26 April the Committee approved a report
containing a list of those States that by 31 March 2004
had not submitted reports pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 1455 (2003) and an analytical summary of
the reasons put forward by States for non-reporting.
The report (S/2004/349, annexes I and II) was
introduced by the Chairman of the Committee to the
Security Council at its informal consultations on 27
April.

Although no formal procedure regarding
humanitarian exceptions pursuant to resolution 1452
(2002) has been adopted, the Committee considers
States' notifications of this nature expeditiously.

The Monitoring Team began its work at the
beginning of April 2004 and has since established a
wide range of contacts, including with representatives
from 50 Member States. The Team has submitted to the
Committee an initial work plan, a short report on the
hawala system, an analysis of why certain States did
not report as requested by resolution 1455 (2003), and
an analysis of the 43 reports received by the
Committee since 30 October 2003. It has established
regular contact with the CTC and has held informal
and formal meetings to discuss visits, reports, work
priorities and programmes. The Team intends to
continue to develop its relationship with the new
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) to
ensure minimum overlap and maximum synergy.

The Team is currently preparing its first report
and an analysis of all reports submitted under
resolution 1455 (2003). It is also designing and
building a new database that will include information
on the implementation of Al Qaeda and Taliban-related
sanctions. The Team is also working to maximize the
impact of the list by correcting entries, seeking
improvements to the identifiers, encouraging States to
contribute names, analysing why States may be
reluctant to submit names, and looking at two specific
incidents of cross-border funding of Al Qaeda-
associated terrorists.

Concerning implementation of the sanctions, the
following findings represent a preliminary assessment
by the Monitoring Team of the 43 reports submitted by
Member States pursuant to paragraph 6 of Security
Council resolution 1455 (2003) between 30 October
2003 and 27 April 2004.

The quality of those reports is uneven. Most do
not provide precise details of action taken by Member
States to implement the sanctions regime. Although
some States refer to the reports they submitted to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the information
requested is often also lacking in these reports.

Regarding legislation, many Member States did
not appear to have incorporated the Al Qaeda-Taliban
sanctions measures in their domestic legislation or
administrative rules, considering their existing laws
sufficient to deal with all forms of terrorism. However,
this does not always appear to be supported by the
facts, especially with regard to the freezing of financial
assets and economic resources. Some States argued
that they had no need to adopt special laws to
implement the measures. Only a few stated their
intention to amend their laws.

On financial measures, a varied approach was
taken to implement the assets freeze. Some States
reported that previous or new money-laundering
legislation provided the legal basis for this. Others
cited banking regulation laws. In a few cases, it was
not clear which law was being applied, although often
a ministerial decree would be used.

The many references to money-laundering
legislation suggest that there may be some confusion
between money laundering and terrorist financing.
Some States indicated that the sanctions were
addressed by newly adopted laws on terrorism that
made its financing, actual or attempted, a criminal
offence.

It appeared that in most States, for the purpose of
assets freezing, the consolidated list continued to have
a limited distribution, usually being made available
only to banks. Few States notified other financial
institutions, and even fewer circulated the list to non-
financial entities or offices.

Most States reported new regulations governing
charities, including requirements for licensing or
registration, for proper records of all transactions to be
kept, and for audited accounts. Some States said that
charities were subject to inspection to ensure that
assets were being used in accordance with their
charters, while others reported that charities were
examined only for tax liability.

The majority of States did not provide any
information on efforts to regulate alternative
remittance systems. Those that did said that
requirements included licensing or registration. Some
States went further and required them to abide by the
regulations applicable for banks and other financial
institutions, such as "know your customer" and filing
suspicious-transaction reports.

On the travel ban, most States appeared to have
integrated the consolidated list into their border-control
systems. However, it seems that only a few were able
to do this electronically, or in a way which allowed
immediate research, regular and timely updating, or the
quick and efficient transmission of data.

Many reports did not elicit a complete response
on the arms embargo. Although most States appeared
to have adequate regulations to deal with the illegal
acquisition or retention of both conventional and
unconventional arms, many also reported that they had
not taken any specific measures to implement the arms
embargo or to enact legislation aimed specifically at Al
Qaeda and the Taliban. Of the States that provided
details of their legislation on arms trafficking, most
considered their domestic regimes sufficient to deal
with all forms of terrorism.

In accordance with paragraph 15 of resolution
1455 (2003), I shall prepare and circulate a
comprehensive written briefing to the Security Council
of the actions taken by all Member States to implement
the measures and an assessment of their effectiveness.

Let me refer now to my recent travel in my
capacity as Chairman. Between 1 and 8 May I
undertook a mission pursuant to paragraph 10 of
resolution 1526 (2004) and visited Algeria, Tunisia,
Spain and Senegal. The visits were conducted to
engage in a dialogue, to learn from the experiences of
the countries visited, to listen to their ideas and
problems, and to understand their preoccupations and
concerns.

In all four countries, I thanked officials for their
important contribution and for their efforts in the fight
against terrorism, and I noted the importance of
cooperation with the Committee and the need for full
implementation of the sanctions regime.

An issue that we discussed in all countries was
the need for cooperation and information-sharing
among States. It was acknowledged that progress had
been made in cooperative relations between African
and European countries, especially since the attacks of
11 September and of 11 March. In one country, it was
suggested that the Committee should be provided with
more sensitive information. In my view, there is a great
awareness in most European States that, indeed, some
Maghreb countries have very valuable information,
while the European region has more resources - a
combination which bodes well for even further
cooperation. I noted in all countries that it was the firm
belief of the Security Council that the fight against
terrorism and the protection of human rights could not
be separated; indeed, the fight against terrorism cannot
be won in the long run without respect for, and
adherence to, human rights standards.

The visits also gave an opportunity to discuss
new ways in which terrorist organizations raise funds.
Here, a new trend has been detected whereby some
terrorist organizations use legitimate or illegitimate
commercial means of raising funds and transferring
them across borders, such as owning import-export
companies. Tracing the money trail in these cases has
proved to be a difficult task. There was also a fear that
terrorists would increasingly use kidnapping as a way
of raising funds. I was informed of a continuing trend
of close connections between terrorist organizations
and other criminal enterprises such as smuggling
networks.

Ensuring that Member States can trace money is
one of the most effective tools that the Committee has
at its disposal. For that reason, during our visits one
particular focus was the financial measures of the
sanctions regime. In all the countries we visited, I
reminded the authorities that the new resolution 1526
(2004) strengthened the regime by clarifying certain
elements which had caused irregular implementation
by Member States. First, it made clear that "assets"
includes property, which would entail Member States'
seeking to freeze more than just bank accounts when
implementing the sanctions. The resolution also
stressed the need to place greater awareness on cash
couriers, which have emerged as a new way in which
funds are being transferred.

It was encouraging to note an improvement in the
control over non-governmental organizations and other
civil organizations. In one country, those organizations
are now required to account for their goals, activities
and funding. In another, it was specified that
organizations may not receive funds from suspicious or
unknown sources. In yet another country, recent
legislation obliged all such organizations to maintain
records for six years regarding the origin and the
destination of their assets.

One country has also put in place several
measures to correctly identify the sender and the
recipient of any money transfer, and the authorities are
developing better connections with business enterprises
in order to be able to get relevant information in real
time.

In the countries I visited I asked about the
submission of additional names to be included on the
Committee's list or the freezing of assets. That, I
found, was of particular importance in those States
where it is well known that individuals have been
apprehended and sometimes even convicted for their
links to Al Qaeda and the Taliban, or where associated
organizations, at least some of which must have owned
property in the form of homes or offices, had been
closed. It would appear to me that more can still be
done in terms of the assets freeze and about the fact
that the important clarification made in the recent
resolution noting that property is also to be considered
an asset has yet to be properly implemented.
I observed that all four countries have
implemented the Security Council's encouragement to
Member States in resolution 1526 (2004), paragraph 5,
to establish internal reporting requirements and
procedures on the transborder movement of currency.
In one country there were even requirements to report
the movement of a certain amount of cash within the
country. While thresholds and reporting requirements
may differ, the establishment of such requirements
should be encouraged in all countries.

I also discussed the implementation of the arms
embargo. I noted that the Committee had found that it
had received very little information from those
countries, especially considering that several of them
provided more information to private sources, such as
Jane's, than they did to the Committee. I noted that the
Committee had seen trends in the use of commercial
enterprises by terrorist organizations for financing and
transferring assets, and it is feared that such enterprises
may be involved in the arms trade as well. Some of the
countries visited provided information on how the
commercial use of explosives is regulated.

An important part of the mission was the
discussion of the use of the Committee's list of
individuals and entities. I commended a new procedure
established by some countries by which consultations
are conducted between relevant States prior to the
submission of names. I find that this is a procedure that
other States could also use, as it will increase the
likelihood of the Committee finding merit in the
request. I reminded our interlocutors of the importance
of including as much information as possible with all
submissions, including identification and background
information.

It was suggested in one country that the
Committee could do more in the field of pre-
notification, as it was feared that the time gap between
the imposition and the implementation of sanctions
would allow terrorists to move their assets.

Some States are concerned about terrorist
propaganda, which is seen by some as being an issue
even more important than terrorist financing. That
issue may be one that the Council should seek to
address.

Lastly, and importantly, the question of assistance
was raised at several of our meetings. It was made
clear to us that developing countries have many
priorities besides counter-terrorism, and that certain
measures, such as strengthening border control, are
tremendously expensive. I consistently referred our
interlocutors to the CTC, but at the same time I should
note that it was suggested that our Committee could do
more in that regard.

In sum, I found this mission to be tremendously
useful for our future work. The mission was also
important in that the countries visited were given an
opportunity to discuss their concerns, the problems
they might have in the cooperation they get from other
countries, their needs for assistance and, fortunately,
the chance to relate successes they have had and their
recommendations for improvements in the fight against
terrorism in general and for the sanctions regime in
particular. I should highlight the tremendous help that I
had from the delegates, ambassadors and members of
the Council, the Secretariat and the Monitoring Team
who accompanied me on this mission. I thank them
publicly.

The mission brought forward the following
recommendations, some of which fall outside of the
scope of the Committee. For example, a system of
consultations between Member States submitting
names for inclusion on the Committee's list should be
encouraged. It was also suggested that the Committee
should encourage wider use of pre-notifications.

Cooperation between States should be furthered
and the level of information-sharing increased. It
should also be considered whether the Committee and
its Monitoring Team could have a role in advancing
information-sharing. There should be continued
awareness of avoiding a North-South divide in the
fight against terrorism. There is a need for a dialogue
between cultures that will further tolerance and mutual
understanding. Such issues should also be part of the
educational system, and the fight against terrorism
should address questions such as poverty reduction,
employment and education.

There continues to be a need for assistance in a
number of countries, and the Security Council should
work with the new Executive Director of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate to
strengthen CTC capacities in this field. The
cooperation between our Committee and the CTC
could still improve, especially at the level of experts.
States are already working to implement reporting
requirements for transborder cash currency transfers, a
development that should be encouraged. The system
seen in one country that required non-governmental
organizations, charities and other organizations to
maintain records for six years could also be a model
for emulation.
Awareness should be raised on the impact of
terrorist financing through kidnappings, commercial
enterprises used for raising or transmitting funds and
other crimes linked to terrorism. Whether or not this
Committee can address those issues should be
considered. Finally, it was recommended that the
Committee should continue to visit selected States.

Let me now turn to the analysis of the reasons for
not reporting. As the Council will recall, I submitted a
report to the Council on 27 April 2004 (S/2004/349), in
which I reported that 68 Member States had not
submitted reports pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution
1455 (2003) as of the 31 March 2004 deadline set by
resolution 1526 (2004). However, 15 of those States
submitted a letter explaining their reasons for non-
submission. As requested in resolution 1526 (2004),
the Committee prepared an analytical summary of
those reasons, which was contained in the above-
mentioned report. It should be noted that in the period
between 12 January 2004, when I last briefed the
Council, and the 31 March deadline, the Committee
received 30 additional reports from Member States, an
increase of more than 30 per cent.

The Council will recall that at that time I made
several observations about the reasons for non-
submission but concluded that the 15 letters did not
provide sufficient basis for a proper analysis. The
Monitoring Team was therefore requested to contact a
number of the non-reporting States to seek further
clarification or to provide the Committee with a more
in-depth analysis. It should be noted that since I
submitted the report on 27 April, three other States
submitted their reports. Of the 65 non-reporting
Member States, 37 are from Africa, 15 are from
Asia/Oceania and 13 are from Latin America and the
Caribbean.

The Monitoring Team contacted most of the
States that did not report through their Missions in
New York. There is an indication, from the evidence
provided by those Member States, that the lack of a
report did not necessarily denote a lack of will to
produce one nor, more importantly, a lack of
commitment to the international effort against Al
Qaeda and the Taliban. The Monitoring Team found
much to support its assumption that many non-
reporting Member States lacked the capacity or the
resources to fulfil their reporting obligations. The
preliminary conclusions reached in my report of 27
April were also by and large confirmed and I will
therefore focus on the additional conclusions reached
by the Monitoring Team.

It is apparent that several Member States are
insufficiently aware of the distinct role of the
Committee and lack a clear understanding of the
differences between the scope of its work and that of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee. As a result, some of
them had the impression that, because they had
submitted reports as requested to the CTC, they had
also satisfied their reporting obligations in relation to
the Al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions Committee. As
members know, paragraph 15 of resolution 1526 (2004)
reiterates the need for close coordination and concrete
exchange of information between the Committee and
the CTC. I agree that greater coordination over the
timing and nature of the two sets of reporting
requirements would contribute to a more effective
response.

The Monitoring Team also found a lack of
supervisory and coordination mechanisms at the
national level, including, in some cases, between a
Member State's mission in New York and the agencies
responsible for counter-terrorism in its capital. Some
Member States also quoted delays in governmental
processes and a lack of information exchange between
ministries and departments. Other Member States took
the view that the Al Qaeda issue was not of direct
concern to their country and they saw no need to give
high priority to the reporting requirement. However,
the same member States expressed their total
commitment to the fight against Al Qaeda.

Some member States gave the impression that
they saw the reporting process as a one-way street. The
lack of understanding as to how their reports were
useful to the Committee appears to have resulted in
their having little incentive to provide further
assistance or information.

Also, it seems that the reporting culture of many
member States is not completely in tune with the
reporting needs of the Committee to assess the
implementation of the sanctions measures. In general,
the reporting style of many member States merely
records what has been done politically, rather than
offering any analysis of the practicality and
effectiveness of the measures on the ground. I want to
believe that greater dialogue between member States
and the Committee, as requested under paragraph 11 of
resolution 1526 (2004), will address this issue.

Finally, I want to echo what members of the
Committee have stressed: that the submission of
reports on implementation is not an end in itself, but a
method for enabling the Committee to determine where
and how it can assist States in their implementation
efforts, which are essential to achieving progress in the
fight against terrorism.

I would like to conclude my statement by
referring to the statement made some time ago by the
Secretary-General, in which he said that

"Terrorism is a global threat with global effects.
Its methods are murder and mayhem, but its
consequences affect every aspect of the United
Nations agenda - from development to peace, to
human rights and the rule of law". (S/PV.46]8, 
19-3)

If the United Nations wants to achieve tangible
progress in any area I have mentioned, the fight against
terrorism must remain a priority. The prevention of
terrorist attacks requires extensive and effective
international cooperation and, as such, the United
Nations is the only Organization that is equipped to
marshal the necessary level of commitment to address
this threat, which, given the global network of Al
Qaeda, reaches almost every corner of the world. The
United Nations provides a forum in which international
standards are articulated and adopted, not only by one
State or a few, but by all, and the United Nations serves
as an impartial venue within which varying
perspectives and concerns may be voiced and
considered. In addition, the United Nations is best
suited to require States to take action and can institute
measures to prevent the spread and occurrence of
terrorism through binding Security Council resolutions
and sanctions measures. Finally, the United Nations
has an indispensable role in ensuring that the vigour
with which States pursue various counter-terrorism
efforts does not infringe on human rights, the rule of
law and related tenets of democratic governance.

I want to assure the Council that, in my capacity
as Chairman of the Al Qaeda and Taliban Sanctions
Committee, I will encourage and lead the Committee to
consolidate and further enhance the achievements of
the United Nations in the fight against terrorism.
Member States should also be aware that the
Monitoring Team and its coordinator are determined to
continue their active dialogue with representatives of
States here in New York and in capitals.

I should like to take this opportunity, as Chairman
of the Al Qaeda and Taliban Sanctions Committee, to
appeal to all States to cooperate fully with the
Committee and the Monitoring Team and to assist them
in the effective discharge of their respective mandates,
which is, in the final analysis, for our common benefit
and good.

