Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I wish to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their
respective statements on the implementation of the
Tribunals' completion strategies pursuant to Security
Council resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).

I should also like to pay tribute to Ambassador
Mayr-Harting, the outgoing Chair of the Council's
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
for the skill he has shown in guiding the work of that
Group. Under his leadership, the Working Group
reached agreements that represent an important step
towards the finalization of draft resolutions and
statutes establishing the residual mechanism.

My delegation is of the view that there are three
crucial areas that require the attention of the members
of the Council so as to enable the Tribunals to best
accomplish their mandates, namely, support for the
Tribunals; cooperation between States and the
Tribunals; and the strengthening of national judicial
capacities.

With regard to support for the Tribunals, my
delegation welcomes the measures taken by the
Council with a View to supporting the efforts being
made by the Tribunals in spite of the challenges
encountered in carrying out their mandates. Indeed, the
constant support of the Security Council for the
activities of the Tribunals is indispensable for their
proper functioning.

While we appreciate the steps taken under
resolutions 1931 (2010) and 1932 (2010), my
delegation encourages the Council to continue working
in that direction in order to strengthen the effectiveness
of the Tribunals. In that regard, it is important to step
up the resources available to the Tribunals in order to
allow them to retain the qualified staff whose expertise
is indispensable to the Tribunals' optimal functioning.

The effectiveness of the Tribunals also depends
upon cooperation with Member States, in particular
when it comes to the fight against impunity. Such
cooperation could lead to the arrest of the 12 high-
ranking fugitives, including Ratko Mladic', Goran
Hadzic', Felicien Kabuga, Portais Mpiranya and
Augustin Bizimana. If they are not tried in the near
future, the credibility of the Tribunals will be
tarnished. We therefore encourage the States of Europe,
the Great Lakes region and southern Africa and
neighbouring countries to enhance their cooperation
with the Tribunals so that they may implement their
completion strategies. In that regard, the exemplary
cooperation of Bosnia and Herzegovina is to be
commended.

As we stressed at the last debate on this item (see S/PV.6342), strengthening the capacities of national
judiciary systems would also play a role in ensuring the
full success of the completion strategies. The training
of staff of national judiciary institutions, in particular
judges and auxiliary agents, should be continued and
remain a fundamental aspect of the implementation of
the completion strategies. To that end, my delegation
welcomes the special provisions that the Rwanda
Tribunal plans to implement in order to respond
effectively to the requests for mutual legal assistance
made by 11 States of the Great Lakes region in the
context of the proceedings against Rwandan fugitives.

The International Tribunals undeniably contribute
to the development of international criminal law and
the fight against impunity. They therefore constitute an
institutional and legal legacy that must be preserved.
My country supports the efforts of the Tribunals and all
actors involved to meet that noble objective.

The outreach work concerning the Tribunals'
scope of work, involving Governments, international
organizations, national courts, non-governmental
organizations and universities, shares the same
objective and deserves our fullest support. What is at
stake is the need to render justice to the victims and to
fight impunity.

