Mr. Teixeira da Silva (France) (spoke in French): I join previous speakers in welcoming
Ambassador Menkerios and the other members of the
Committee of Experts and in congratulating them on
the quality of their report, which was submitted most
promptly. I also echo their praise for the leadership of
Ambassador Valdivieso as Chairman of the sanctions
Committee on Afghanistan. I have four comments to
make on the report and on its anticipated outcomes.

The prime merit of the report is that it emphasizes
the central role of neighbouring countries in the true
implementation of the arms embargo and the closure of
terrorist training camps. We note the confirmed
commitment of Afghanistan's neighbours to implement
the embargo and to cooperate with the United Nations
to that end. The Committee of Experts itself
participated in an effort to increase awareness of this
issue. We must take the neighbouring States at their
word, and must help them overcome the obstacles
noted by the Committee of Experts.

Secondly, we support the overall structure of the
proposed monitoring mechanism. We feel that the
structure should be as light, flexible and adaptable as
possible. The first task would be to bring the national
forces of neighbouring countries up to standard. The
proposed general monitoring and disarmament
measures are of interest and should be considered in
greater depth. Similarly, it has been proposed that new
arms-control legislation be enacted and existing
legislation strengthened; that would be useful to
encourage work now under way in a number of
international bodies. That is true also of proposed
measures that are set out in the Protocol against the
Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Their Parts and Components and Ammunition,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, recently adopted by
the General Assembly. Most of the proposed measures
will be addressed at the forthcoming United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in all its Aspects. Clearly, there is a
great deal of work to be done here that lies beyond the
mandate of the Security Council but that still
complements the Council's work.

Thirdly, we fully support the recommendation
that the monitoring mechanism could serve as the
nucleus for a more general mechanism to monitor
sanctions and the illicit trade in raw materials in armed
conflict. We would observe with interest that the
Committee of Experts has noted that arms embargoes
have inherent problems, irrespective of the sanctions
regime. Resolving these problems demands the
implementation of comprehensive measures at the
international level. It would obviously be useful to be
able to take advantage of the synergy among the
various sanctions mechanisms and panels of experts
that are put in place over time. In that spirit, and to
make reference to what Ambassador Eldon said, we
feel that the monitoring mechanism for Afghanistan
would best be established in New York, precisely to
foster synergy with sanctions committees and with
other existing mechanisms.

Finally, let me say a word about financing. Here,
predictability is important to enable the monitoring
mechanism to function well and independently. That is
why we would prefer funding from the regular budget
of the United Nations; that would also have practical
advantages with respect to the day-to-day operation of
the mechanism: we must ensure that there is no
interruption in the funding, because that would be
extremely damaging to the functioning of the
mechanism. To expand on my earlier remark, the
establishment of a general monitoring mechanism for
sanctions and illicit trade would not only facilitate
synergy in its work, but would also offer significant
budgetary savings.

In general terms, we share the views of the
Committee of Experts on the need to conceive and
make use of sanctions as part of a comprehensive
strategy for a political settlement of the Afghan
conflict. We hope that in coming weeks we will be able
to discuss that more general topic.

