Mrs. Jusu (Sierra Leone): At the outset, allow me,
as I take the floor for the first time, to congratulate
the President on his assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October and to
wish him full success during his tenure. I would also
ask that he accept our thanks and appreciation for the
inclusion of a briefing on the Special Court for Sierra
Leone in the Security Council's programme of work. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
unwavering support for the work of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone and for backing the efforts undertaken
by the Court to carry out its mandate.

We commend the President of the Court and the
Prosecutor for their comprehensive briefings to the
Council on the Court's operations during the period
under review, and also for the Court's unremitting
efforts in implementing its mandate in accordance with
resolution 1315 (2000), adopted on 14 August 2000,
including the Agreement between the United Nations and
the Government of Sierra Leone on the Establishment of
a Special Court for Sierra Leone, signed on 16 January
2002. Accordingly, we welcome the new completion
strategy adopted by the Court's management committee
and wish to underscore the various challenges outlined
in the strategy, in particular the perennial funding
gap for the completion of the Court's mandate and its
residual tasks.

The Special Court represents an effective
partnership between the Government and the people of
Sierra Leone and the United Nations for the purposes
of promoting justice and fighting impunity for heinous
crimes committed in Sierra Leone during the civil war.
As the first hybrid tribunal created to assist a State in
addressing impunity for crimes against humanity, the
Special Court has made unprecedented contributions
to gender justice and has laid the foundation in
international criminal jurisprudence for designating
acts of forced marriage, sexual violence, sexual slavery
and the recruitment and use of child soldiers during the
conflict as punishable crimes. It has also successfully
established that wanton attacks on United Nations
peacekeepers are proscribed and that perpetrators
are liable to be prosecuted. Furthermore, the Special
Court's jurisprudence underscores the importance of
understanding gender-related traumas from the point
of view of those who experienced them, as well as the
importance of understanding suffering within local
cultural contexts. It has also made critical contributions
to national reconciliation efforts and to the restoration
and maintenance of international peace and security in
the subregion.

Taking into consideration what I have just said, one
cannot gainsay that the Special Court has successfully
delivered on the goals set for it by the Government
of Sierra Leone and the United Nations. Indeed, that
tribunal has proven to be equal to the task as evidenced
by its landmark judgements and contributions to the
rule of law at both the national and the international
levels and as an important adjunct to our peacebuilding
initiatives.

Despite those special and compelling accolades,
it is a matter of common knowledge that the Court
continues to face significant funding gaps that endanger
the completion of its judicial mandate and its residual
mechanism. We wish to express much appreciation
and gratitude for Member States' support for the Court
in the form of voluntary contributions and for the
life-saving subsidies from the United Nations, as well
as to underscore the need for the United Nations and
the international community to continue to support the
Special Court so that it can complete its good work.

Needless to say, the successful completion of the
Court's mandate would send a powerful message that the
international community strongly supports institutions
established to hold accountable those responsible for
war crimes and, in so doing, would deter or minimize
the incidence of the perpetration of such atrocities in
the future. We therefore count on Member States and
the international community to continue to support the
Court so that it can complete its work and help facilitate
its effective transition to the Residual Special Court
immediately upon completion.

In conclusion, Sierra Leone underscores the
importance of the Special Court in fighting impunity for
war crimes, crimes against humanity and other serious
violations of international humanitarian law, and in
contributing to peace and stability in Sierra Leone and
the subregion.

Some notable and recognizable milestones attained
by the courts so far would include victory for hundreds
of former child soldiers and adoptees, who had the letters
"R-U-F" carved or engraved with a hot iron on their
back and chest to prevent them from escaping. It would
be a victory for victims of sexual violence and a victory
for human rights and democracy. However, the victory,
so greatly acclaimed, will be incomplete if the want of
adequate resources and financial impediments deter the
tribunal from fairly and fully completing its mandate
and its residual task to their logical conclusions. We
therefore count on the Council to spare no effort to avoid
such an undesirable scenario and to launch appropriate
mechanisms to provide the much needed relief and
assistance to the Court for its continued survival.

