Mr. Balarezo (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to thank Russia for convening today's important
meeting, which is essentially a discussion about
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. Latin
American countries actively participated in developing
that Chapter at the San Francisco Conference, which
led to the establishment in 1948 of the Organization of
American States, one of the first regional organizations
with links to the United Nations through Chapter VIII.
Today's discussion is very important in that context and
we would commend it.

We would also like to thank and congratulate the
representatives of the three regional organizations for
their very useful briefings.

Today's meeting is important as I said because it
addresses the issue of terrorism, which is one of the
main threats to our States. Intensifying the fight against
that scourge is crucial. That must be accompanied
in turn by specific mechanisms that enable us to
collectively prevent and combat the scourge. As some
representatives have already said, it must be done with
full respect for international law, human rights and
fundamental freedoms.

We listened carefully to the briefings. We would
like as I said to congratulate the work conducted by
those three regional organizations. We believe that
they help uphold the international commitments of
the States in their regions. We thank and support them
in particular for their role in promoting the national
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and in ensuring adherence to
Security Council resolutions.

We believe in that regard that the cooperation
agreements that those organizations have signed with
the Executive Directorate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, as well as with the Office of Counter-
Terrorism, are a useful practice.
We would also like to commend the role of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia in coordinating those efforts in an effective
manner. We thank those organizations for their role in
diagnosing and developing a joint response to complex
threats, based on an approach that acknowledges and
is based on unique regional features, such as porous
borders and transnational organized crime, which are a
dangerous combination for the stability of Eurasia.

I would therefore like to highlight the recent adoption
of resolution 2482 (2019), under Peru's presidency
and leadership of the Council (see S/PV.8582), which
addresses in particular the phenomena of terrorism and
international organized crime and the links between
them. The resolution justifies the role that regional and
subregional organizations are called upon to play in the
face of these challenges, including in the provision of
technical assistance and helping States to strengthen
their capacities.

We also believe that every strategy must adopt
a gender perspective, as some delegations have
already mentioned, as well as focus on safeguarding
the rights of children. The addendum to the Madrid
Guiding Principles and the key principles for the
protection, repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration of women and children with links
to United Nations-listed terrorist groups are excellent
tools in that regard.

I wish to conclude by reiterating Peru's unwavering
commitment to preventing and combating terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations, in particular through
the actions able to be undertaken by the Council, which
constitutes a forum for consensus that we must take
advantage of and strengthen.

I wish to make one final remark, if I may. As is
well known, there is a particular concern in America
regarding the establishment of, or links between,
terrorist groups, transnational criminal organizations
and the illegitimate regime of Nicolas Maduro.

