Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me thank
Mr. Markram for his briefing this morning.

As other speakers before me have pointed out,
today marks the one-year anniversary of the sarin
attack in Khan Shaykhun, which the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism has attributed
to the Syrian regime. That was a repugnant attac, with
a large number of civilian casualties. Today, the failure
to agree on a new independent and impartial attributive
mechanism for chemical-weapons use in Syria casts a
particularly dark shadow over the Security Council.

Sweden condemns in the strongest terms the
continued and repeated use of chemical weapons
in Syria, which constitutes a serious violation of
international law and a threat to international peace and
security. The use of chemical weapons in armed conflict
is prohibited and is a war crime. The perpetrators of
such crimes must be held accountable. Impunity cannot
be accepted.

With regard to the implementation of resolution
2118 (2013), I reiterate our deep concern that the
OPCW is still unable to confirm whether Syria's initial
declaration on its chemical-weapons programme is
accurate and complete. A number of serious outstanding
issues remain. As a matter of fact, the Director-General
of the OPCW reported last month that the initial five
outstanding questions currently stand at 22. That
includes the case of the Syrian Scientific Studies and
Research Centre, regarding which several questions
remain unanswered. We once again call upon the
Syrian authorities to fully and proactively cooperate
with the OPCW on all outstanding issues. There
must be full disclosure and submission of all required
documentation without delay.

We share the Secretary-General's alarm about
persistent reports of the use of chemical weapons in the
conflict in Syria. Those must be followed up by timely
and impartial investigations, and we reiterate our full
support for the OPCW Fact-finding Mission. But the
perpetrators of such attacks must also be identified
and held to account. We deeply regret that the Council
failed to agree on an extension of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism last November (see S/PV.8105). An
attributive mechanism is essential to protecting the
international disarmament and non-proliferation
regime and to ensuring accountability for the repeated
use of chemical weapons in Syria. In that regard, Ijoin
the representatives of France, Ethiopia and Kazakhstan,
among others, in their urgent call for unity. We need
to come together in the Council and shoulder our
responsibility. We reiterate our call for constructive

engagement by all members, and we remain ready to
engage in and contribute to such consultations.

Sweden supports all international efforts to combat
the use and proliferation of chemical weapons - by
State and non-State actors alike - anywhere in the
world. We will continue to do our part to end impunity
for the use of chemical weapons. That is why Sweden
joined the International Partnership against Impunity
for the Use of Chemical Weapons - an initiative
taken by France designed to complement and support
our collective work in multilateral forums, as well
as existing multilateral mechanisms. That is why we
will continue to support the Human Rights Council's
Commission of Inquiry and the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. And that is why we will continue to pursue efforts
to establish a new independent and impartial attributive
mechanism for chemical-weapons use in Syria, because,
at the end of the day, there can be no sustainable or
long-term peace in Syria without accountability for the
crimes committed. We owe that to the victims of Khan
Shaykhun and elsewhere in Syria.

