Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to extend its congratulations to you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council.

Just last week, an overwhelming number of
delegations, participating in the general debate of the
fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly, identified
the situation in the Middle East as requiring urgent
attention by the international community. There had
been encouraging reports that Israel was planning to
withdraw from Gaza and the Quartet had called for
such disengagement to take place in the context of the
road map.

But there was also concern because, each time
there has been a hopeful sign in the Middle East, it has
been met by increasing violence and destruction. That
prompted many delegations once again to urge both
Israel and Palestine to honour their commitments under
the Quartet's road map and to remind them that there
can be no military solution to the crisis. The only way
to achieve progress is through dialogue and
negotiations that will lead to the creation of two States,
an Israeli State and a Palestinian State, both with
secure and internationally recognized borders.

South Africa has always been among those States
that have condemned all acts of violence, terror,
excessive and indiscriminate use of force, and the
physical destruction of property. The situation in Gaza
over the past few days has deteriorated much further
than anyone could have imagined, and the Security
Council can no longer postpone taking action. Our
concern is that, should the Security Council be unable
to act this time around, it will make the achievement of
a peaceful solution in the Middle East even more
remote. The Council must call for an immediate
cessation of all military operations in Gaza and the
withdrawal of the Israeli occupying forces from that
area.

Furthermore, the Council must call on Israel to
ensure the unfettered access and safety of United
Nations personnel and all medical and humanitarian
aid workers to provide emergency assistance to a
civilian population that finds itself caught up in yet
another conflict. That is the least that the people of
Gaza would expect from this Council.

