Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco, for his briefing on the situation in
the region, which contained precise and balanced
assessments of recent developments in the Middle East.
Priority attention should now, as in the past, be devoted
to the issue of relaunching Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations, whose path has long been obstructed by a
number of obstacles.
The moment dialogue ceases, diplomatic activity
withers and other, highly alarming factors take over
that often lead to serious upheavals in that part of the
world. We therefore advocate a new start in
consultations between the Palestinian Authority and the
Israeli Government.

However, in order to achieve this objective, the
parties must scrupulously discharge their commitments
under the Road Map, first and foremost the cessation
of Israeli settlement activity, including natural growth,
in the occupied Palestinian territory. The settlement
issue, although under the Road Map not a precondition
for the resumption of negotiations, has become a
genuine barrier to Israeli-Palestinian understanding,
given the objective development of events.

For that reason, the Secretary-General, the Russia
and a great number of our partners, including within
the Quartet, have expressed their deep concern
regarding the decision of the Jerusalem Municipal
Planning and Construction Committee to build new
settlements and facilities in the occupied part of the
city. Equally alarming is the fact that settlers are
openly modifying the status quo in the historical part
of Jerusalem near the holy sites of three world
religions, creating a source of ongoing tension. All
parties need to refrain from any step that might
prejudice the outcome of future negotiations on the
final status of the occupied territory.

Lasting peace cannot be achieved without
resolving the problem of Gaza and the complete lifting
of the blockade along its entire perimeter. Similar steps
are urgently needed to address the ongoing
humanitarian disaster under which Gaza's inhabitants
live.

The lack of progress in the settlement process and
the continuing pause in negotiations do not,
regrettably, make it possible for us to announce the
dates for the Moscow conference on the Middle East.
At the same time, the need to convene that forum has
been confirmed directly by the concerned parties, our
Quartet partners and the entire international
community. We are therefore pursuing preparations for
the conference in cooperation with a broad circle of
partners. We believe that close agreement on steps to
provide international assistance for the peace process is
important. The Russian Federation proposes to
organize, in February in Moscow, a ministerial-level
meeting of the Quartet to discuss possible opportunities
to overcome the crisis in the Israeli-Palestinian
dialogue. It will also serve as an important step on the
path to organizing the Moscow conference.

Collective efforts, including within the format of
the Quartet, are currently of fundamental importance to
extricating the regional peace process from its impasse.
The lack of unity within the Palestinian and Israeli
societies on the prospects for settlement of the Middle
East conflict complicates the international
community's diplomatic efforts in that respect. A clear
priority is restoring intra-Palestinian unity towards the
signing of an agreement on reconciliation between
leading Palestinian factions, elaborated with Cairo's
assistance. We support Egypt's efforts, which are
playing a key role towards resolving the problem.

The Russian Federation is pursuing its contacts
with Hamas, and within that framework continues to
seek to convince the leaders of that movement to
transcend any consideration not conducive to achieving
the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people. Of
course, we work with all Palestinian sides, firmly
convinced that without Palestinian unity based on
platform of the Palestinian Liberation Organization
(PLO) and the Arab Peace Initiative, under the leading
role of Mahmoud Abbas, the legitimate head of the
Palestinian Authority and the PLO, it will be very
difficult to achieve a final status for the Palestinians.
At their meeting in Sochi on 26 January, President
Medvedev of the Russian Federation held a thorough
discussion with President Abu Mazen on the entire
spectrum of issues related to the Palestinian-Israeli
negotiations.

We are devoting special attention to developing
bilateral Russian-Palestinian cooperation in the context
of important economic projects and cultural,
humanitarian and educational links. Palestinians are
regularly educated in Russia, paid for by Government
grants. Palestinian Authority security bodies are staffed
with individuals trained in Moscow. We affirm our
solidarity with the Palestinian people and their
yearning for their own State. We will leave no stone
unturned in order to assist, together with other
members of the international community, in achieving
a settlement in the Middle East, mindful, of course, of
the fact that a final settlement must be comprehensive
and include the Syrian and Lebanese fronts.

Concerning Lebanon, we welcome the existing
positive momentum of developments in its internal
domestic situation, which resulted from the patient
dialogue among all Lebanese parties aimed at seeking
consensus. This approach is in line with the objective
of strengthening the unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Lebanese State.

