Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I take
this opportunity to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
China's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We wish you every success
in the discharge of your duties during the period of
your presidency. I also congratulate your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of Bolivia, for his own
efforts at the helm of the Security Council during the
month of October. I would like to reassure you of the
full cooperation of my delegation.

I want to thank the Security Council for the spirit
of cooperation and consensus that enabled it to adopt
resolution 2445 (2018), extending the mandate of the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) for six months. I thank the delegation of the
United States of America, the penholder on this item,
for its efforts to facilitate the negotiations that led to the
adoption of that resolution.

I would like to reiterate my country's commitment
to its ongoing cooperation with UNISFA in order to
allow it to fully implement all elements of the mandate
that was conferred on it by the Security Council in
resolution 1990 (2011) and all subsequent relevant
resolutions. I also underscore our resolve to cooperate
with the Security Council and the penholder on this
issue, the United States of America, in order to achieve
our common goals of preserving and strengthening
peace in Abyei, as well as establishing the pertinent
mechanisms that would allow us to resolve and confirm
the final status of the region.

My Government reaffirms its attachment to
and respect for all conventions and agreements that
have been signed with the Republic of South Sudan,
foremost among which is the Agreement between
the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement on temporary arrangements for
the administration and security of the Abyei Area,
signed on 20 June 2011, and the 27 September 2012
Agreement on Cooperation and Security Arrangements.
I take this opportunity to emphasize the importance
of the 2011 agreement, which is the cornerstone of all
arrangements relating to the issue of Abyei, including
the deployment of UNISFA. The two parties to the
agreement - the Government of the Sudan and the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement, which became
the Government of the Republic of South Sudan in
July 2011 - agreed that the 2011 agreement would
remain in force until the final status of Abyei had been
settled. Both parties also agreed to refrain from making
any amendment to the UNISFA mandate without the
approval of the three parties, namely, the Sudan,
South Sudan and Ethiopia, the only troop-contributing
country to UNISFA.

I note that the issue of Abyei should be considered
in the overall framework of relations between the
two brotherly countries, the Sudan and the Republic
of South Sudan. Recent positive developments in our
relationship with South Sudan have brought us closer
to a comprehensive resolution of the situation in Abyei.
We hosted the peace negotiations on South Sudan that
led to the peace agreement of 12 September in order to
further cooperation between the two countries in order
to implement all provisions of June 2011 agreement,
and set up the institutions envisaged in that agreement,
including the joint administration for Abyei, the
joint legislative council and the joint police force. I
am sure that Council members will agree that those
institutions are indispensable in order to manage the
region, provide services that the people need, promote
peaceful coexistence among the various elements of
society, and ensure the proper conditions conducive
to settling the final status of Abyei in a manner that
satisfies everybody.

It goes without saying that the Abyei Protocol,
which is part of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
of 2005, is the bedrock foundation recognized by the
Security Council. The Protocol stipulates explicitly
that Abyei is an integral part of Sudanese territory.
It is therefore impossible to review the arrangements
that are based on the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
without completely recognizing this fact and the
consequences thereof. It is on this basis that the Sudan
agreed to settle the final status of Abyei by conducting
a joint referendum.

In conclusion, I would like once again to express
my appreciation and thanks to all our partners and
friends, especially those in the Council, who have
worked with both the Sudan and South Sudan in a spirit
of sincerity and determination, and supported us in our
efforts to strengthen peace. They patiently listened to
my country's views on the issues included in resolution
2445 (2018), which was just adopted.

We would also like to thank those who strive
to facilitate the work of UNISFA, in particular the
Government of the Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia, the African Union Peace and Security
Council, the African Union Commission and the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel, as
well as the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Sudan and South Sudan. We also thank all the staff
of UNISFA. We reiterate the Sudan's determination to
continue working with UNISFA in order to ensure that
it can discharge all its tasks in a smooth way.

