Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for holding this open Council
debate in connection with the question of the extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH). Bearing in mind
that this question affects the principles of United
Nations peacekeeping and the basis of the making of
international law, we believe that this meeting is wise
and very timely, especially given that the Council is
consulting with the broader membership of the United
Nations. Over the past three weeks, we, like many
other delegations, have been closely following efforts
within this Council to maintain peacekeeping missions
without undermining the integrity of the newly
established Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (ICC).

Article 24 of the Charter confers on the Security
Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Member States View
the Council as the main United Nations body that is
called upon, not only to strengthen international peace
and security, but also to safeguard their sovereignty
and independence in case of threats or crisis. It is
because of this trust and faith that Member States
agree, in Article 25 of the Charter, to accept and carry
out the decisions of the Council. Mongolia believes
that the Security Council has played a unique role in
the past, and expects it to do so in the future.

The ICC was officially established on 1 July this
year. An important step was thus taken to strengthen
peace through promoting and upholding international
law and justice. The ICC is expected to be a
permanent, independent, impartial international court.
It will not be bound by mandates that are specific in
time or place. Its provisions are consistent with the
Charter of the United Nations and are based on the
principle of respect for the sovereignty of States, which
is manifested, inter alia, in the principle of
complementarity of its jurisdiction. In other words, the
Court would take action only when national legal
systems were unable or unwilling to genuinely
investigate or prosecute. Moreover, the Court has
ratione temporis jurisdiction; that is, it has jurisdiction
only with respect to crimes committed after 1 July
2002.

Under article 16 of the Statute, the Council can
request, under chapter VII of the Charter, the deferral
of the investigation or prosecution of a case for a
period of 12 months. The request may be renewed by
the Council under the same conditions. Previous
speakers have dwelt on the importance of the Court in
strengthening international peace and security and in
preventing and putting an end to impunity for the
perpetration of such heinous crimes as genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes, and I will not
repeat their comments. I would say only that in the
short time since its adoption four years ago in Rome,
139 States have signed and 76 States have ratified the
Statute. That in itself demonstrates how much trust is
being placed in the ICC and its activities.

Logically and legally, the two bodies - the
Security Council and the ICC - are expected to work
together, not one to the detriment of the other. No State
should be placed in a situation in which it is forced to
breach its international obligations under either the
Charter or the Statute. We believe that the Security
Council and the ICC should work together to
strengthen international peace and security, the rule of
law and international justice.

Mongolia, one of the founding members of the
ICC, has, like all others, been interested in maintaining
the integrity and effectiveness of the Court since the
very first days of its existence. We have faith in the
integrity of the Court, since - as has been pointed out
by many of the preceding speakers - the Statute has
adequate safeguards against its possible abuse. We
believe that, through its activities, the Court will be
able to dispel any lingering doubts as to its impartiality
or effectiveness. When considering the Court's
jurisdiction, we should not forget that the main
objective of the ICC is the prosecution of individuals
for the most heinous of crimes, as defined in articles 5,
6, 7 and 8 of the Statute. In other words, when looking
at a tree, one should not forget the forest that lies
behind it.

Since Mongolia is not a member of the Council,
my delegation will refrain at this stage from
commenting on the content of unofficial working
documents connected with the question of extending
the Mission's mandate. Besides, many States already
expressed their views and concerns during the special
plenary of the tenth Preparatory Committee for the ICC
on 3 July 2002.

At this meeting, I wish to join all other
delegations in underlining once again the vital
importance of safeguarding not only the integrity of
peacekeeping operations but also of the Rome Statute
and thus of international law and treaty-making, the
rule of law, and the integrity of the Council itself.

Bearing in mind your personal experience, Mr.
President, that of your colleagues in the Council and
the views expressed by delegations during this open
debate, my delegation expresses the hope that the
Council will be able to find a solution that would
respect the spirit and letter of the Statute without
undermining the effective functioning of the Court, the
Council or peacekeeping operations. My delegation is
prepared to work with other delegations, if needed, to
join in the search for an effective solution to this
question of principle.

