Mr. Bessho (Japan): Let me first express my
gratitude to His Excellency Mr. Murray McCully,
Foreign Minister of New Zealand, for having convened
this meeting. My gratitude also goes to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his presence here and his
thorough briefing today.

As the Secretary-General mentioned in his briefing,
a variety of initiatives have been undertaken in pursuit
of the two-State solution. Unfortunately, we have seen
little progress. Japan expresses its strong concern over
the continued violence towards civilians, terrorist
attacks and incitements to violence. We also express
strong concern over the continuing policy of settlement
expansion. We believe that settlement activity is a
violation of international law and steadily erodes the
viability of the two-State solution.

In addition, the continued violence is fundamentally
incompatible with a peaceful solution. The international
community must take action to address the dire
humanitarian situation and recovery needs of the people
of Gaza and to encourage the resumption ofmeaningful
negotiations.

Given the difficulty of the current situation on the
ground, creating an environment conducive to a two-
State solution may seem like a roundabout approach.
However, I would like to make note of the fifth
ministerial-level meeting of the Four-Party Consultative
Unit for the Corridor for Peace and Security initiative,
which was held in Jericho, West Bank, on 7 September.
It was hosted by Japan, with ministerial-level
participation on the part of Israel, Jordan and Palestine.
Through job creation, this initiative seeks to support a
sustainable economy in Palestine, which underpins the
viability of a two-State solution. At first glance, this
project to create a conducive environment may not seem
like a short route to a two-State solution. However, the
cooperation of the four parties through this initiative
has lasted for 10 years, regardless of the highs and lows
of the political situation, and it plays a meaningful role
in rebuilding trust between the two parties through
economic and social development. Japan continues to
be committed to peace and prosperity in the region.

I would like to briefly discuss the situation in
Syria as well. Japan welcomes the agreement reached
on 9 September between Secretary Kerry and Foreign
Minister Lavrov, which has resulted in a nationwide
cessation of hostilities since 12 September. Even more
importantly, the degree of violence has decreased
markedly since the conclusion of this agreement.
The reduction in violence allows for the expansion of
humanitarian access, gives hope to Syria's people and
increases the prospect of the resumption of the political
process.

Let us recall that the cessation of hostilities,
confirmed by resolution 2268 (2016) in February,
was observed fairly faithfully for two months. In the
following months, however, we witnessed a string of
breathtakingly tragic events. We must prevent a relapse.
Japan is committed to playing its role as a member of
the Council and the International Syria Support Group
to promote the stability and recovery of Syria.

