The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kenya,
Rwanda and Serbia in which they request to be invited
to participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to the Minister of Justice and Attorney
General of Rwanda, His Excellency Mr. Tharcisse
Karugarama.

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Karugarama (Rwanda) took the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Judge Patrick
Robinson, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia; Judge Dennis
Byron, President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda; Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia; and Mr. Hassan Jallow, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

It is so decided.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
following documents: S/2008/729, containing the text
of a letter dated 21 November 2008 from the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia addressed to the President of the Security
Council; 8/2008/726, containing the text of a letter
dated 21 November 2008 from the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda addressed
to the President of the Security Council; 8/2008/515,
containing the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the fifteenth annual report of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia; and S/2008/514, containing a note by the
Secretary-General transmitting the thirteenth annual
report of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunals for
the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.
I now give the floor to Judge Patrick Robinson,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia.


