Ms. Beerli (spoke in Spanish): It is a great pleasure
for me to speak here on behalf of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
(spoke in English)

It is a particular pleasure to speak alongside
the new Secretary-General as he presents his first
report (S/2017/4l4) on this subject. The ICRC greatly
appreciates the strategic focus and energy that the
Secretary-General brings to the critical questions of
how to prevent and alleviate the suffering of civilians
in armed conflict.

My statement today shall focus on three areas: the
strategy in the Secretary-General's report; progress
in the implementation of resolution 2286 (2016);
and our particular concern for a group that is often
forgotten - missing persons and their families.

Hayat; Ahmed; Samia - these are the names of
some of the children that ICRC hospitals have treated
recently. Our doctors helped to fit them with prosthetic
aids after their limbs were blown off during attacks.
Hayat was just three-years-old when an air strike
destroyed her house, killing her sister and leaving her
severely injured. As we meet today, I ask everyone to
remember their names and the cruel hand dealt to them
in the early years of their lives.

At the ICRC, we see the daily realities of what
happens when civilian populations are not protected
during conflict and other situations of violence. There
are millions ofpeople living in desperate and terrifying
places, and there is no matter more urgent than their
protection. The Secretary-General stresses that
urgency in his report, which states that today the world
faces a protection crisis of the highest order because of
armed conflicts.

The ICRC endorses the three priorities of protection
in the report and supports the call to focus on the
particular challenges of urban warfare. The return of
armed conflict to towns and cities has been a particular
concern of the ICRC in recent years. Approximately
50 million people in urban areas now bear the brunt of
conflict. The overwhelming percentage of people killed
or injured by explosive weapons in populated areas are
civilians. They are mothers, fathers and children who

are not part of the fighting and simply wish to lead their
lives, not fear for them.

The ICRC advocates that all parties should avoid
using explosive weapons that have a wide-impact
area in populated places. In addition to the high risk
of indiscriminate civilian death and injury, heavy
explosive weapons can cause extensive damage to
critical infrastructure, such as health care, water and
electricity facilities. Critically, under international
humanitarian law, civilians must not only be protected
from attack and the impact of conflict, but also be
able to go about their daily lives, but too often we see
the fabric of communities being eroded. Children are
unable to attend school. The sick cannot reach hospitals,
and livelihoods are interrupted or cease entirely. When
people live in fear and cannot safely continue their
activities, they risk becoming marginalized, destitute
and reliant on humanitarian aid.

Returning to the report, we warmly welcome
the Secretary-General's priority of prevention as an
important part of his Office and the mandate of the
Council. We agree that strengthening respect for
international law is a prerequisite for halting the brutal
violations that are driving endless cycles of violence.
We urge the Council to continue to demand and
encourage respect for international humanitarian law
as the most immediate form of prevention. Preventing
violations can instantly protect civilians on the ground
and strengthen peacebuilding in the long-term.

The Secretary-General's report correctly aligns
respect for international law with good practices
by parties to the conflict, especially in military
partnerships. Today's armed conflicts are increasingly
fought in alliances and coalitions, which develop
partnered operations. Those partnerships may involve
States' training, equipping and advising other States or
non-State armed groups in armed conflicts. We urge
the Council to remind all parties to armed conflict that
Common Article 1 to the four Geneva Conventions
requires them "to respect and ensure respect for the
Conventions in all circumstances".

Good practices are equally important in States"
counter-terrorism activities amounting to armed
conflict. The violations committed by the enemy must
not result in the lowering of standards by States, which
are still obliged to respect international humanitarian
law. The law is vital and can help parties find practical
solutions to humanitarian problems. In this fortieth
anniversary year of the Additional Protocols to the
Geneva Convention of 1977, the ICRC urges all States to

recognize the positive impact that those particular rules
make on the conduct of hostilities and reaffirm their
very practical relevance to today's armed conflicts.

One year after the adoption of resolution 2286
(2016), the Secretary-General's report clearly shows
how the obstruction of access to, attacks and threats
against health care remain at an extremely high level. We
are not only seeing health workers killed or threatened,
hospitals destroyed and ambulances denied access, but
entire public health systems collapse. Communities are
exposed to renewed epidemics, thereby compounding
existing humanitarian catastrophes and causing
long-term setbacks in the areas of public health and
development. It happens in many places, but most
recently in Yemen we have seen a deadly cholera
outbreak, which has claimed the lives of hundreds of
people just in the past few weeks. Much more needs
to be done to stop violence against health care, which
is carried out by States as well as non-State armed
groups. Several States have nevertheless made progress
in improving their domestic legislation to protect health
care and enhance their military policy and rules of
engagement. Other States are developing diplomatic
networks to build increasing support for resolution
2286 (2016).

Further action in two areas will make a
practical difference.

First, States need to gather data on why attacks
happen. Attacks can be direct, but they can also be
the result of inadequate precautions to identify the
location of facilities or an insufficient appreciation of
the humanitarian consequences of military operations.
They also result from an ignorance about the rules
applying to health care or inadequate training. If there
is a better understanding about why attacks happen,
then authorities can take steps to stop them.

Secondly, States must focus much more on the
behaviour and attitudes of weapons-bearers, on
respecting international humanitarian law and on
increasing accountability for those who carry out attacks
against health care. We need more organized exchanges
on best practices so as to improve the passive protection
of facilities and patients and on changing knowledge,
attitudes and behaviour in weapons bearers. There is
an urgent need to implement the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General and others, including
the Health Care in Danger project, an initiative of the
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement. Debates like
this one can play a part, as well as States" voluntarily
reporting on their efforts to implement resolution 2286
(2016), but to influence behaviour on the ground, our
work also needs to continue at the national and regional
levels. We urge all parties to armed conflicts to issue
specific military procedures so that health care systems
are protected from attacks, threats and other violence,
and that those supporting other parties to armed
conflicts exert their maximum influence to ensure that
their allies do the same.

Finally, the ICRC was very pleased to see
mentioned in the report the plight of missing persons
and their families. That humanitarian challenge has
been overlooked on the global humanitarian agenda
for too long. Right now, we are seeing a new spike in
the numbers of missing persons in armed conflicts.
Last year, tens of thousands of families experienced
the profound pain of not knowing the fate of their
loved ones. Whether a person is unaccounted for after
an attack because they were abducted, displaced or
because their remains were buried in haste, their family
is left waiting. It remains an open wound, which can
last a lifetime. Under international humanitarian law,
parties to the conflict must both prevent people from
going missing and clarify the fate of those who do.

We urge the Council to encourage all States
and parties to conflict to take early action to uphold
families' right to know the fate oftheir missing relatives
as provided under international humanitarian law and
support their emotional, legal, social and economic
needs. I also call on parties to conflict to take all
possible measures to ensure the dignified and adequate
management of the dead without adverse distinction
and endeavour to facilitate the return of their remains
to the families.

Finally, I encourage parties to collaborate with
the International Committee of the Red Cross and its
Central Tracing Agency as a neutral, independent and
impartial intermediary. The ICRC is grateful for this
opportunity to reflect on this important report with the
Council, and stands ready to assist States in their efforts
to increase the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

When we meet again in a year's time, we hope that
the Secretary-General will be able to report favourably
on three points: first, that there have been fewer armed
conflicts; secondly, that improvements have been

made in reducing the humanitarian consequences of
military operations and in improving the protection of
health care, especially in urban areas and in partnered
operations; and thirdly, that measures are in place to
increase early action and support for missing persons
and their families.

I would like to finish with the words of Dr. Marco
Baldan, an ICRC war surgeon who has worked in
conflicts across the world:

"As I stand in the emergency theatre, operating
on patients riddled by bullets or torn apart by
explosions, I wish a handful of the lead politicians
in war-torn countries could join me. Would their
decisions be different if faced, on a day-to-day
basis, with the human cost of war, in its most raw
manifestation? The tragedies I have seen so far in
my career have left deep scars within me. Unlike
many ofmy patients, my scars are invisible. Twenty
years into my career, I muster up the courage to
say, it does not have to be this way."

Dr. Baldan is right. It does not have to be that way.
The people here in the Chamber today have the power to
make changes and to ensure that civilians are protected
from the worst impacts of war and violence.

