Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the current month. We are fully convinced that under
your leadership the work of the Council will be
successful. My delegation therefore pledges its full
cooperation. I also wish to congratulate the Ambassador
of Oman, as well as his entire delegation, on his
successful and brilliant guidance of the work of the
Security Council during the month of November.

The report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR),
dated 1 December of this year, indicates that there have
been improvements in the economic and social fields in

 

Rwanda, as well as in the restoration of its judicial system.
However, it is also apparent from the report that a climate
of tension still persists in that country as a result of the lack
of progress made in the field of national reconciliation and
the relative deterioration of the conditions of regional
security.

In fact, the Secretary-General points out to us in his
report that
"the main factor that prevents a return to stability,
security and harmony in Rwanda is the absence of a
process of national reconciliation. This depends on the
creation of conditions conducive to the return of the
1.6 million refugees currently outside Rwanda and for
the judgement of those accused of genocide."
(S/I995/1002, para. 9)

My delegation agrees with this statement. In fact, there
has been no major progress with respect to the number of
Rwandan refugees returning voluntarily to their country,
because an intimidation campaign still persists in the
refugee camps, because the refugees continue to fear
accusations, upon their return to Rwanda, of having
participated in the genocide perpetrated last year or because
they face uncertainty about finding their homes or their
property upon their return.

Voluntary and safe repatriation is an essential element
for national reconciliation, but the return of Rwandan
refugees must be voluntary and must take place in safe and
dignified conditions. This is why we agree with the
statement in the report that forced repatriation could give
rise to acts of violence and, consequently, to another
humanitarian disaster. Voluntary repatriation must take
place in accordance with the basic framework provided by
the Nairobi Declaration and the Bujumbura plan of action,
and an effort must be made to eliminate obstacles impeding
the achievement of that objective.

The other element that gives rise to tension in Rwanda
is the infiltration of armed forces and militias of the
previous Rwandan regime from the refugee camps found in
neighbouring countries. Those acts, in our view, contribute
to increasing tensions at the local level and to a
deterioration of the conditions of regional security. My
delegation wishes to emphasize in this regard the
importance of the Secretary-General's initiative to hold a
regional conference of the Great Lakes countries, under the
auspices of the United Nations, to deal with questions of
regional security and stability. We have taken note with
satisfaction that at the regional Conference held recently in

 

Cairo a declaration was issued in which the countries of
the region pledge to take specific measures for peace,
justice, reconciliation, stability and development.

In View of the current situation in Rwanda and in the
region as a whole, we believe that UNAMIR must remain
in that country to facilitate the voluntary return of the
refugees to their home communities; to contribute to the
security of the International Tribunal, the Human Rights
Operation and the personnel and premises of
humanitarian-assistance agencies; to lend assistance to the
rebuilding of basic infrastructure; to provide medical
attention; or to participate in monitoring activities. Given
that the presence of the Mission also contributes to giving
the refugees confidence to return to the country, we share
the Secretary-General's view that

"if UNAMIR was to be perceived as abandoning
Rwanda at this critical time, it would send a
discouraging message to the refugees, to the region
and to the international community at large",
(S/1995/1002, para. 48)

and we agree with his comment that the purpose of
restoring peace and stability has to do not only with
Rwanda but with the region as a whole, and that it
requires the achievement of reconciliation, the return of
refugees and justice.

Taking these views into account, my delegation
believes that we should spare no effort in assisting the
Government of Rwanda to promote a climate of stability
and confidence in the country. In addition, we agree that
the level of international assistance for the rehabilitation
and reconstruction of Rwanda shall be increased. We
shall therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution,
which renews the mandate of UNAMIR until 8 March
1996.

We urge the Government of Rwanda to continue to
cooperate with UNAMIR in the implementation of its
mandate.

