Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Achieving sustainable
global peace is impossible without peace and security
in Africa and the Horn of Africa in particular. Even
though we see success in the building of political
institutions by the Federal Government of Somalia,
terrorist organizations continue to perpetrate their
destructive activities. It is clear that efforts made at
peacebuilding and nation-building should be redoubled
in a coherent, coordinated and supportive manner in
order to fight these terrorist groups.

We support resolution 2385 (2017) adopted today
and believe that Somalia needs all the support of
the Sanctions Committee in order to overcome its
upcoming challenges. We welcome the progress made
by the Federal Government of Somalia in promoting
the political process and call on the international
community to continue to help Somalia in its
State-building efforts.

We should reinforce the efforts being made by the
United Nations, the international community and the
Federal Government of Somalia to avert famine and
must take all measures to condemn and halt increased
attacks against humanitarian actors and the obstruction
of delivery of humanitarian aid. We need to facilitate
full, safe and unhindered access to the timely delivery
of assistance to those in need across Somalia in order
not to repeat the 2011 famine. Kazakhstan provides
assistance to the rural areas of the country.

With regard to Eritrea, we take note that the
Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea has found no
conclusive evidence of Eritrea's support for Al-Shabaab.
We welcome the willingness of the Government of
Eritrea to facilitate a visit by the Chair and hope that
a mutually convenient date will be agreed soon. It is
obvious that great understanding of the situation on
the ground could help the Security Council be better
informed and thereby facilitate a review of measures
on Eritrea.

On the issue of prisoners of war, we welcome the
release of four prisoners of war by Eritrea in March
2016 and call on both sides to continue to engage in
resolving the issues of combatants.

With regard to the Djibouti-Eritrea border issue,
my delegation urges the two parties to maintain an
atmosphere of calm and restraint and resolve their
border dispute peacefully in the manner consistent
with international law.

Finally, Kazakhstan considers sanctions to be
a last resort and remains ready to continue to play a
constructive role in achieving piece, stability and
development in the Horn of Africa. As Chair of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, I am committed
to working in an open, transparent and objective
matter with all members of the Council towards
national reconciliation and the restoration of peace in
this critical subregion. I also call on the support of all
Member States in the implementation of the suggested
measures and to help bring security and instability,
which can then reinforce investments in development
and progress, with gains for the entire region.

