Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): A significant breakthrough was recently
achieved in the peace process in the region of the former
Yugoslavia. The Government of Croatia and the local
Serbian authorities signed a Basic Agreement. The
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro),
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia also initialled a
Peace Agreement on the settlement of the question of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We warmly welcome these
achievements.

The signing of these agreements is in the
fundamental interests of the peoples of the former
Yugoslavia region. It is also conducive to peace and
stability in Europe and the world as a whole. We hope
that the parties concerned will abide by these agreements
so that the various ethnic groups and countries of that
region can live in peace and harmony, and so that peace
and stability may soon be achieved in the former
Yugoslavia.

The United Nations peace-keeping operations in the
region of the former Yugoslavia have worked hard to
prevent the spread of conflicts. They have contributed to
relief activities and deployed preventive operations,
acquiring experience in the process. Now that progress
has been made in the peace process in the former
Yugoslavia, the Secretary-General has proposed to the
Security Council that the mandate of the three United
Nations peace-keeping operations - the United Nations
Confidence Restoration Operation in Croatia, the United
Nations Protection Force and the United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force - be extended as
appropriate so that studies may be conducted on ways and
means for the United Nations to participate in peace-
keeping operations in this region in the future. The
Chinese delegation agrees in principle with the Secretary-
General's proposal and will vote in favour of the three
draft resolutions before us.

 

I should like to point out that the United Nations
peace-keeping operations in this region have taught us
many lessons. For instance, mandatory action under Chapter
VII of the Charter involving the use of force, including air
power, is most improper and has affected the legal and
neutral status of these peace-keeping operations. The
reservations of the Chinese delegation in this regard remain
unchanged.

We have noted that the Basic Agreement and the
Peace Agreement both contain requests for the
implementation of peace in this region. The United Nations
and the Security Council will undoubtedly have to shoulder
important responsibilities, since these requests involve many
complex political, legal, military and financial questions.
The Security Council must therefore make a careful study
of these matters and discuss them thoroughly so that a
sound decision can be taken in the light of the current
situation.

People have been talking recently about the
deployment of implementation forces in the region of the
former Yugoslavia. That could be a major operation. If the
Security Council has to take decisions to prevent these
operations' departing from the principles governing United
Nations peace-keeping operations and avoid the abuse of
force and involvement in the conflict, these operations
should be placed under the control and guidance of the
United Nations and the Security Council.

The Security Council should not become a rubber
stamp with regard to matters beyond its control. No blank
cheques should be written. In addressing these questions,
the Security Council should adopt a prudent and
responsible approach rather than rush into any
commitment or decision. In this regard, the Chinese
delegation is ready to carry out a sincere and in-depth
study and discussion with other members of the Security
Council.

