Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Kuwait's initiative to convene a public
meeting on the issue of missing persons in armed
conflict and welcomes the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait to New York to
preside over the meeting.

I thank Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and
Director Ghelani for their briefings.

Many decades ago, the Geneva Conventions and
their Protocols Additional established clear rules
regarding the issue of missing persons in armed
conflict. Regrettably, for quite some time that issue
has not received sufficient attention or been effectively
addressed. In recent years, the number of missing
persons, as a result of armed conflict, has continued
to increase. Behind the alarming statistics is one
family after another subjected to endless suffering.
They have the right to know the whereabouts of their
missing relatives.

Resolution 2474 (2019), which was unanimously
adopted today, is the first thematic resolution on the
issue of missing persons in armed conflict adopted
by the Council. It fully demonstrates that the Council
places a high priority on the issue and stands firm in
upholding international humanitarian law. It also has
great significance for effectively addressing the issue
of missing persons in armed conflict. China welcomes
the resolution and is among its sponsors. I would like to
commend the Government of Kuwait and its Permanent
Mission for their considerable efforts in that regard.

Ifwe are to fully address the issue ofmissing persons
in armed conflict, we must eliminate the root causes of
armed conflict. The Security Council should earnestly
fulfil its primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security by vigorously
promoting the resolution of differences through
dialogue, consultations and political negotiations to
prevent conflict, peacefully resolve disputes and reduce
the number of armed conflicts. We must firmly reject
anachronistic ideas, such as the clash of civilizations,
the Cold War mentality and zero-sum games; forge a
constructive partnership featuring non-alliance and
non-confrontation and without the targeting of third
parties; and work to establish international relations of
a new kind, featuring mutual respect, fairness, justice
and win-win cooperation, in a joint effort to build a
community of shared future for humankind.

According to the Geneva Conventions, all parties
to conflict, including the countries concerned, should
assume responsibility for the search for missing
persons in armed conflict and are obligated to inform
their families of their whereabouts and help separated
families to reunite. The Government of the country
concerned bears the primary responsibility and plays
an irreplaceable role. If conflict is unavoidable, parties
should take effective measures, as soon as possible
and when conditions allow, to prevent and reduce the
disappearance of persons.

It is essential to register information on prisoners
and other relevant persons, make every effort to search
for missing persons and establish information-sharing
and communication channels with their families. Cases
involving a large number of people who have gone
missing in armed conflict should be investigated in
order to hold those responsible accountable, in line
with domestic law and relevant international law. In
that process, the judicial sovereignty of the countries
concerned should be fully respected.

The international community should actively
provide constructive assistance to the countries
concernedonthebasisofrespectfornationalsovereignty.
It is imperative to strengthen information and
experience-sharing, help the countries concerned with
capacity-building in areas of science and technology,
such as forensic science, ground-penetrating radar
and satellite positioning, among others, and respond
to the issue of missing persons in armed conflict
in a tailored manner. In that regard, China highly
commends the ICRC for upholding the principles of
neutrality, impartiality and independence and for
playing a positive role in resolving relevant issues over
the years. It is our hope that all humanitarian agencies
can, in a humanitarian and professional spirit, play a
constructive role in reducing the humanitarian impact
of armed conflict and in searching for missing persons.

