Mr. Field (United Kingdom): On behalf of the
Government of the United Kingdom, may I warmly
congratulate Kazakhstan on becoming the first Central
Asian nation to steer and preside over the Security
Council. As has been pointed out, its historic commitment
to nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament is
well known. We welcome this important debate because
our collective security and prosperity depend upon an
effective global non-proliferation regime.

It is sometimes easy to forget just how recently the
global community first coalesced around a common
strategy in this sphere. There were very dark predictions
made during the 1960s and the 1970s of a bleak world
in which there would be dozens of nuclear armed States
vying with each other. Yet today, thanks to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, that
number of nuclear States remains in single figures.

Together we have painstakingly constructed a
comprehensive set of rules, norms and standards that
counter the proliferation of all types of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery. If the rule book
that we have written together is to remain effective in
this century, we must all meet our responsibilities to
protect and implement our common rules, norms and
standards, and we must hold those who breach them
properly to account. The success or failure depends
upon our ability to work together, and this is illustrated
most recently by the examples of Iran, North Korea and
Syria, which I shall now briefly discuss.

The threat of a nuclear Iran brought the international

community - the Security Council - together to
defend our commonly held rules and to protect our
shared security interests. Through our painstaking joint
diplomacy and accorded pressure, Iran finally came to
the negotiating table. Collectively we agreed the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, which we in the United
Kingdom continue steadfastly to support. We should
always remember that before the deal, Iran could have
produced enough fissile material for a weapon in a few
months. Now all experts would suggest that this would
take at least a year. All of us in the Security Council
should be proud of this success that we achieved by
working together. Let us continue this work.

On North Korea, rightly, we have had successes,
not least because we have worked together. North
Korea has repeatedly and continuously flouted our
non-proliferation rules with deepening consequences
for international security. We agreed that the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's development of a nuclear
programme is illegal and cannot be accepted. In
response, the Council collectively has imposed the
strictest sanctions in a generation with a number of
Security Council resolutions. We may rest assured
that these measures are already having an impact. The
Security Council must, in my View, continue to stand
united on both North Korea and Iran.

By contrast, the Security Council has not been
as united in response to the use of chemical weapons
in Syria. Regrettably, it has been Russia that has
repeatedly wielded its veto in the Council, despite
clear conclusions from an impartial independent expert
investigation set up by the Council itself that the Syrian
regime and Da'esh have repeatedly used chemical
weapons. I fear that the Council's lack of unity and
resolve on Syria sends the most dangerous possible
signal of a confused message to would-be proliferators
of the future. The Security Council must be prepared
to hold all transgressors to account and the United
Kingdom implores those in the Council who have stood
in the way of action to join the consensus for the future.

The lesson for the Council could not be clearer.
When we work together, we can persuade and cajole
States to abandon their ambitions to obtain weapons
of mass destruction. If we do not, it is the most
vulnerable - civilians, often - who suffer and the
security of the world is put at risk.

The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons remains a cornerstone of international
security. Although the pace of non-proliferation and
disarmament is often frustratingly slow, it is Vital not
to lose sight of the ambitious vision that the Treaty
embodies. Its achievements stem from its development
over time by consensus and because it has offered
tangible benefits to each and everyone of its signatories.
By contrast, the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons would offer no solutions to the very complex
security challenges that we face, nor in my view
to the significant technical challenges of nuclear
disarmament. That is why the United Kingdom will
not become a party to the nuclear weapon-ban treaty.
We do not consider that its prohibitions represent an
emerging rule of customary international law.

The United Kingdom remains committed to a world
without nuclear weapons. We believe that the best way
to achieve this goal is through gradual multilateral
disarmament, negotiated step by step, within existing
frameworks. There is much more that we can do if
we continue to work together. We can continue the
voluntary moratoriums on nuclear weapon testing and
also work for the entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. We can prevent nuclear,
chemical and biological material from falling into the
hands of terrorists by working for full and effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), and we can
tackle the threat of ballistic missiles by encouraging
Member States to consider acceding or adhering to the
missile technology control regime and the Hague Code
of Conduct.

The Security Council has, as we know, a very
special role to play in safeguarding international
peace and security. As ever, it is the unity of the
Security Council and the United Nations beyond that
is Vital. Together, we must continue working to prevent
proliferation; together, we must hold to account those
States that breach our rules; and together, we must
persuade and cajole would-be proliferators to abandon
their ambitions to develop weapons of mass destruction.
The United Kingdom remains ready to work closely
with all members of the Security Council towards these
important goals, which I believe are essential for the
future security of humankind.

