Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
pleasure to see our friend the United Kingdom
presiding over the Security Council this month. I also
express our deep appreciation for Syria's presidency of
the Council last month.

The night before last, the Israeli Defence Force
added yet another link to the chain of the excessive use
of force against the Palestinian people, in the form of
an air raid against an apartment building, which led to
the death of its civilian inhabitants, including infants.
The attack was made by a warplane carrying a missile.
That image would paint the picture of a country in a
state of war. At this point, we must recall, as others
have, the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949. This is a matter that Israel must take into
consideration.

As we condemn violence and terrorism in all their
forms, we must express our opposition to the
disproportionate use of force, which makes it difficult
to differentiate between civilians and combatants. Such
Israeli action will not bring peace to the region, but
will rather lead to deterioration and crisis. Such acts
clearly demonstrate that the current Israeli Government
does not want the peace process to move forward and
does not want to give it a chance to succeed,
particularly as these acts come in the wake of the New
York meeting of the "quartet", which had been
preceded by the Arab initiative, which has been
welcomed by the majority of States all over the world.

The Israeli occupying forces' acts of murder and
terror against civilians run counter to the most
fundamental laws and international humanitarian
norms. They also violate international conventions and
all the relevant resolutions of the United Nations. As
we have done in the past in this Chamber, we call upon
the Security Council to live up to its mandated
responsibility. We say this because events in the
occupied Arab territories will have negative
repercussions for international peace and security. We
also call on the Council to provide protection to the
defenceless Palestinian people, who merely wish to
live in peace and tranquillity on their land.
