Mrs. Quiel Murcia (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me start by congratulating the outstanding
management and leadership shown by Japan during
its recent presidency of the Security Council. My
delegation would also like to thank the Malaysian
presidency for convening this timely debate to address
an issue of great sensitivity and concern for my country
given the number of children involved in and affected
by armed conflict.

Panama associates itself with the statement made
by the delegation of Slovenia on behalf of the Human
Security Network, but would like to make several
comments in our national capacity.

My delegation expresses its concern about the
contents of the report of the Secretary-General, as it is
indicative of the disproportionate impact that continues
to make children victims of armed conflict. We are also
troubled by what the Secretary-General calls

"our collective failure to prevent violations
[that] are directly related to the denigration of the
respect for international humanitarian and human
rights law" (S/2015/360, para. 4).

The numbers of children affected by armed
conflict are increasinly alarming. They are victims of
degrading and shameful acts of sexual exploitation and
violence - which are made the worse when staff of
the organization responsible for protecting their rights
are themselves the aggressors. Children are mutilated
and displaced. They perish in attacks on schools and
hospitals. They are victims of abduction and recruitment
in war zones. They are exposed to attacks and abuses of
their human rights.

UNICEF statistics are no more encouraging. They
indicate that up to 300,000 children worldwide are
involved in armed forces and groups with different
functions, thereby becoming the main protagonists
and victims of this scourge. UNICEF also urges that
the causes of conflict be addressed, as the report of the
Secretary General, and he himself this morning, also
do. Children have existiing rights; to ensure them we
need the participation of all segments of society under
co-responsibility. This imperative requires us to ensure
their rights and avert threats to them, or immediately
restoring their rights.

Although this would seem to be an issue that
primarily affects certains regions of the world, we
cannot ignore the importance of a coordinated and
unified response. Otherwise, judging by the dynamics
of the current population of migrants and refugees, we
will all be victims ofthe consequences of these children
affected by conflict today, who tomorrow could be
maladjusted adults.

In celebrating 20 years ofthe agenda on children and
armed conflict, we welcome and stress the resolutions
and mechanisms adopted to monitor and report on grave
violations of the rights of children, which have been
key to raising awareness of this very serious situation
and to promoting the protection of children affected,
including the possibility of sanctions.

My delegation would like to highlight the work
of Special Representative Zerrougi and the Children,
Not Soldiers campaign, which has led to momentum
on political commitments aimed at prohibiting
the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflicts. Panama attaches particular importance
to the leadership of Executive Director Lake and his
dedicated work on behalf of the neediest children. By
way of encouragement, we also commend the work of
Colombia to favour efforts aimed at protecting children
in the course of its peace process.

Panama reiterates its commitment to international
efforts to ensure full protection for children's rights
in all areas, and in particular when it comes to the
scourge of armed conflict and the challenges posed by
violent extremism.My country is prepared to cooperate
actively with intenrational initiatives, programmes and
prevention mechanisms whose main goal is to ensure
the welfare and protection of children. We therefore
welcome the call made this morning by the Secretary-
General that the Council and its member States
make every effort to back up his words with actions
that protect children from the scourge of conflicts.
Twenty-five years after Panama's ratification of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, we reiterate our
determination to work together to join efforts in defence
of the principle of guaranteeing the best interests of
children under any circumstances.

