Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Herve' Ladsous for his briefing, Mr. Yuri Fedotov for
his statement on the drug situation, and our colleague
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for sharing with the Council his national
vision with regard to the country's situation.

In his report (S/2012/426), the Secretary-General
expresses his views on the evolution of the transition
towards Afghan responsibility and leadership in the
area of security, including the fact that 75 per cent of
the Afghan population is now located in areas where
national forces have taken control.

We welcome the fact that no significant deterioration
in public order has taken place and that there has been
no marked change in security trends in the transition
areas. There are positive signs, but there remain certain
areas of vulnerability that must be overcome hence
the Secretary-General's use of the term "cautious
optimism" (S/2012/426, para. 60).

 

The capacity and professionalism of the Afghan
security and police forces must continue to be
enhanced, including through the institutionalization of
mechanisms for accountability and fighting impunity
while strengthening measures to protect civilians,
ensure respect for human rights, and secure the
command and control structure. The contribution of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the
NATO Training Mission-Afghanistan will continue to
be essential to that end.

In this respect, I would like to highlight the
declaration issued by the Heads of State and Government
of ISAF troop-contributing countries during the
Chicago Summit. In that declaration, they reiterated
their commitment to the security of Afghanistan beyond
2014 and announced that the NATO force will thereafter
cease to be a combat force and will be converted into a
new training, advice and assistance mission.

We must not minimize the potential impact of
the reduction of military personnel and development
on the economic situation in terms of job losses and
even increases in humanitarian needs. Therefore, a
national political consensus must be prioritized and
international cooperation and support in the long term
must be guaranteed. We stress the need to maintain a
broad and balanced approach during the transition that
would take into account not only the security situation,
but also socio-economic development, governance and
the rule of law.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and the Special Representative must
continue to guide international cooperation and
assistance activities and stress the empowerment and
strengthening of the role of Afghan institutions so
that they are able to shoulder their responsibilities
in priority areas, facilitating the political process
towards peace and reconciliation, security, governance,
economic development and regional cooperation. The
United Nations must continue to play a central role in
the coordination of international efforts with national
authorities in order to ensure their consistency with
the priorities identified by Afghanistan and to avoid
duplication of efforts.

Violence continues to be one of the main factors
affecting the Afghan population.

The progress in the political and reconciliation
process has been affected by numerous security
incidents, including the 48 reported last week, which
resulted in many civilian victims. It is important that
all parties show clearly that they are committed to the
process of dialogue and reconciliation being pursued
by the Afghan Government. We are confident that
the difficulties can be overcome and that the Taliban
will commit themselves to renouncing violence and
terrorism and will accept the Constitution.

Violence is also affecting the humanitarian
situation, and therefore pressure must be brought to
bear on all parties to the conflict to ensure that they
respect humanitarian principles and allow humanitarian
assistance to reach those that need it most. That should
be an essential principle of participation in the process
of reconciliation.

With regard to the global drug problem as it affects
Afghanistan and the region, we listened with interest
to what Mr. Fedotov said with regard to the increase
in financial and technical cooperation between the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Government of Afghanistan, with the primary goal of
strengthening the capacity of national authorities. Those
efforts should go hand-in-hand with the strengthening
of alternative development programmes that provide
viable and sustainable options to those who abandon
the growing and production of illicit drugs.

We would also stress the regional joint initiatives
that have been undertaken and the constructive
and ongoing cooperation of various regional and
extraregional actors in such strategies for applying
the principle of shared responsibility. Colombia once
again expresses its readiness to work bilaterally with
Afghanistan in order to address that and other aspects
of organized crime.

We have high hopes for the Tokyo conference that
will be held on 8 July. There the international community
should renew its commitment to work towards a stable,
democratic and prosperous Afghanistan. It should
also pass on the message that the country will not be
abandoned in terms of its social and development needs
after the stage of transition and that that partnership will
be maintained during the decade of its transformation.
Although the donors must avoid making unrealistic
demands and acknowledge the limits of the institutional
capacity, there must be mutual commitments that will
enable us to regularly analyse long-term commitments,
including the adoption of measures to fight crime and
corruption.

The Kabul process and the national priority
programmes should continue to be the policies that
govern the commitments and responsibilities of the
process within the framework of the principles of
Afghan ownership and leadership and with respect for
the sovereignty and unity of the country.

Consensus for deepening and expanding the
relationship between Afghanistan and the international
community should contribute to consolidating the State
and its ability to exercise its primary responsibilities
and respond to the needs of the population. There
continue to be numerous challenges to stability and that
is why a sustainable transition requires a State structure
that can guarantee governability and economic stability
at the local and national levels. That will include the
creation of jobs and economic opportunities, as well
as the provision of and access to justice. Those are
fundamental elements in order to guarantee a successful
transition in Afghanistan.

