Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
represents a threat to human security in certain regions
of the world. Switzerland expresses its satisfaction at
the success of the 2001 United Nations Conference on
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects. The biennial meeting in 2003 will
present the first opportunity to examine the progress
achieved in implementing the United Nations
Programme of Action.

Over the last few months, Switzerland's
international efforts have been concentrated on four
aspects of the problem of small arms: marking and
tracing, support for centres of competence, promotion
of innovative approaches such as dealing with non-
State actors, and in particular, national and regional
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action on small arms. In that last category, I wish to
mention Switzerland's support for the recent
conference in Pretoria on the implementation of the
Programme of Action in Africa and our financing of
seminars in Latin America. Switzerland welcomes the
Secretary-General's report (S/2002/ 1053) and
recommendations on small arms of 20 September,
presented by Under-Secretary-General Dhanapala, and
notes with satisfaction that the efforts deployed to date
by Switzerland fall within the lines of action the report
prescribes.

A certain number of the report's
recommendations, in our view, are of particular
importance. In his recommendation 1, the Secretary-
General expresses the wish that we support efforts to
elaborate an international instrument that would allow
States to identify and trace illicit small arms and light
weapons in a timely and reliable manner. The French-
Swiss initiative, previously mentioned by the French
delegation, falls into that category. In that context, I
also wish to recall the work of the United Nations
Group of Governmental Experts on Tracing Small
Arms and Light Weapons. Switzerland expects that it
will provide a useful contribution to the elaboration of
a binding international instrument in this field.

For Switzerland, the issue of small arms is an
important aspect of integrated conflict-prevention
strategies, peace-building and development cooperation.
One of the great challenges in implementing the United
Nations Programme of Action will be to make the issue
of small arms a theme cutting across other political
questions. Switzerland welcomes the Secretary-
General's insistence on the necessity of an integrated
approach, in particular in recommendation 4. In the
same vein, recommendations 7 and 8 seek to extend the
mandate of United Nations peacekeeping operations to
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants, as well as to specific measures
concerning the collection and destruction of illicit or
surplus small arms. Switzerland has already undertaken
intensive activities in this respect, for example in
Mozambique and Sierra Leone.

Finally, recommendation 5 refers to an aspect of
the problem which Switzerland considers a priority.
The Secretary-General underlines the role of
information on small arms and invites Member States
to pursue their efforts in this context. For some years
now, Switzerland has supported, together with other
States, the Small Arms Survey project in Geneva,
which led, earlier this year and for the second time, to
the publication of a yearbook which we consider very
useful: Small Arms Survey 2002: Counting the Human
Cost. Switzerland will continue in the future to support
this essential work. I have the pleasure of announcing
that, following what was done in English in
Johannesburg, the French version of the yearbook will
be presented to the public in New York on 24 October.

