Mr. Laotegguelnodji (Chad) (spoke in French):
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and African Integration is, for scheduling
reasons, unable to take part in this open debate on
Central Africa. Nonetheless, he offers his apologies
and has entrusted me with presenting the following
message to the Council.

"On behalf of my Government and in my
own name, I wish to congratulate the President of
the Security Council on assuming the presidency
of the Council and for his praiseworthy initiative
of organizing a public Council debate on Central
Africa.

"As a child of the Central African
subregion, Mr. President, you know better than
anyone all the problems of security, peace and
development that beset Central Africa, which is,
nonetheless, known as one of Africa's richest
subregions in terms of natural wealth, resources
and development potential of all kinds.

"Your initiative of strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations system
and Central Africa in the area of the maintenance
of peace and security is a matter of pride to the
whole of Africa, particularly the States within the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS).

"Mr. President, allow me to draw your
attention and that of your colleagues members of
the Security Council to the situation prevailing
between two neighbouring and fraternal

countries, the Republic of Chad and the Central
African Republic. I wish to point out that this
situation is developing in the right direction
towards peace and security.

"This fortunate development is chiefly a
dividend of the recent Summit of Heads of State
of ECCAS, held on 2 October 2002 in Libreville,
Gabon.

"The Government of Chad, for its part, has
begun to implement the commitments undertaken
at that Summit. Thus, it has engaged in contacts
with friendly countries, and in one case the talks
have reached a very advanced stage, with a view
to finding a solution to the exile of Mr. Bozize,
who is currently seeking refuge in Chad.

"Other commitments undertaken in
Libreville, including on the security and military
levels, will be respected and implemented, in
cooperation with the Central African Republic,
with respect to the commitments involving
bilateral cooperation.

"I wish to take this opportunity of the public
debate to pay a warm tribute to the senior
Gabonese authorities and to the Government and
people of Gabon for having tirelessly contributed
to bringing peace to the border between Chad and
the Central African Republic. I will just cite two
recent examples. Recently we saw the work of the
verification commission evaluating the situation
prevailing on the northern Chad-Central African
border, which Gabon sponsored until its
conclusion. And now we see the Summit of
Heads of State devoted to the same problem,
hosted by Gabon.

"I wish also to thank the authorities of the
countries of the subregion and of Mali, who
agreed to release military contingents to be part
of a force of 300 to 350 personnel, as decided at
the Libreville Summit.

"Peace will be complete and security
guaranteed on the borders of these two countries
only if all the 'Libreville Summit commitments'
become reality. Mr. President, this is why I appeal
to your institution, the Security Council, and to
the international community to assist the
Republic of Chad and the Central African
Republic to be able to draw on the necessary

means to implement the 'Libreville

commitments'.

"Granted, much has already been done, and
continues to be done, by the United Nations to
curb conflicts and build peace and security in the
Central African region. But, as long as situations
persist that imperil peace and security in the
subregion, the States concerned will continue to
turn towards you, Mr. President, and your
institution, the Security Council, for assistance in
finding lasting solutions capable of bringing hope
to the peoples of Central Africa."

Mr. President, I wish to thank you for having
given me permission to deliver this message. On behalf
of my delegation, I wish to add that I fully associate
myself with the statement made by Mr. Rodolphe
Adada, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
the Congo, who spoke on behalf of our Community.

