Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin my statement by thanking the Government
of Australia for holding this meeting on an important
issue of concern to all States, at a time when terrorist
activities are becoming more diverse, interlinked and
widespread in an unprecedented manner. No country
is immune to the threat posed by criminal groups
committing acts of terrorism. It is therefore incumbent
upon all to exert the utmost effort in the fight against
terrorism, using all available means and at all levels,
including national, regional and international.

Egypt was one of the first countries to warn about
the threat of terrorism against international peace and
security, as it had been subjected to a wave of terrorism
in the early 1980s that was brought under control.
Since 1986, Egypt has called for the convening of an
international conference on the fight against terrorism,
with a view to establishing and strengthening
international cooperation to track and fight terrorist
cells and their associates everywhere and to track their
sources of financing at the international level.

At the national level, Egypt has carried out
effective, concrete actions in the fight against terrorism,
including reforming the Egyptian penal code, which
now includes articles on the definition of terrorism and
the struggle against it, including the criminalization of
all acts related to terrorism such as incitement or the
financing of terrorist activities. Furthermore, Egypt
is committed to implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions and its relevant international
obligations.

Given our conviction that the fight against
terrorism should not be limited to security, Al-Azhar
Al-Sharif University, with its enlightened, scientific
approach, is working to refute terrorism and radical
ideas, as well as deviant edicts that are being forcibly
linked to benevolent Islam. Al-Azhar dispatches
scientists, including a high-level religious and scientific
delegation, to many countries in West Africa, to provide
relevant connotations with thorough explanations,
thereby refuting extremist ideology.

In our View, the United Nations is the appropriate
forum to coordinate and strengthen international efforts
to fight terrorism and stand up to radical extremism.
Such efforts are needed to assist countries in building
capacities to fight terrorism and provide the necessary
means and know-how, including training and best
practices and information and data exchange.

We call upon the various departments of the
Secretariat to strengthen cooperation with Member
States in this field and provide regular briefings on
its activities in the fight against terrorism. In that
respect, it is important to listen to the views of Member
States, to avoid working in isolation from the efforts
of others. With a view to the appointment of a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General against
terrorism, radicalization and extremism, Egypt believes
that intensive consultations should be conducted among
Member States on the tasks to be mandated to such a
position.

If feasible, we believe that mandate should be
confined to facing or fighting extreme radicalism,
without being linked to any religion, culture or ethnic
group. We believe that any such link is itselfa possible
mental incitement to terrorism. We also stress that
our understanding of radical extremism includes
incitement to violence against foreigners, including
Muslim minorities, which have been subjected to an
unprecedented wave of intolerance and hatred.

Daesh and Al-Nusra Front are now controlling vast
areas in Iraq and Syria. Their influence has spread
to other areas via other terrorist groups that have
supported or acceded to them. In spite of the adoption
by the Council of many resolutions, Egypt believes that
in the fight against terrorism, we must adopt a holistic
approach that addresses the root causes of terrorism.
Our efforts and those of the Council must not be
limited to fighting the threats arising from those two
organizations alone, but to strengthening our efforts to
fight terrorism wherever it may exist, since all terrorist
organizations espouse the same violent and deviant
ideology.

A quick glance at the regional scene in the Middle
East - whether in Libya, Yemen, the Sahel or the Horn
of Africa - is enough for one to realize the gravity of
the danger to the international community as a whole.

