Mr. Annabi: I am pleased to have this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on
developments in Kosovo since the previous briefing on
23 April. I assume that the choice of the date for this
briefing is not entirely fortuitous, since today is, as I
am sure you are aware, Mr. President, the fourth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1244 (1999).
Today, Kosovo is certainly very different from the way
it was four years ago. Working with our partners in

Kosovo - KFOR, the European Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
United Nations agencies, intergovernmental

organizations, non-governmental organizations and, of
course, local leaders and bodies - the United Nations
has put in place a process designed to stabilize and
normalize the situation in Kosovo.

The progress is evident: the reconstruction of
basic infrastructure; the restarting of public services
such as schools, health care and pensions; the provision
of basic documents; an increasingly professional local
police and judiciary; three successful elections; and the
establishment of municipal and central self-government
bodies. At the same time, much remains to be done in
developing provisional democratic self-governing
institutions and ensuring conditions for a peaceful and
normal life for all the inhabitants of Kosovo.

The fact that we still have some way to go was
highlighted in a particularly horrific way recently,
when three Kosovo Serb residents were brutally
murdered in Obilic municipality on 4 June. An 80-
year-old man, his 78-year-old wife and their 53-year-
old son were beaten to death with a blunt instrument,
and their house was then set on fire.

As we informed the Council on 6 June, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) has taken a number of concrete steps to find
and bring to justice the perpetrators of that horrible
crime. A nine-member UNMIK special police squad
was established to investigate the crime, working with
special advisers from both the Kosovo Serb and the
Kosovo Albanian communities. A reward for
information leading to the arrest and sentencing of
those responsible for the murders has been offered, and
a 24-hour protected telephone line has been set up to
receive information. UNMIK police and KFOR have
both put in place additional patrols and other
appropriate security measures. UNMIK and
representatives of Kosovo's Provisional Institutions -
the Assembly, the Government and the President -
and Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb political
leaders have all condemned the murders and have
called for the perpetrators to be brought to justice.

UNMIK and the Kosovo Provisional Institutions
have continued their joint efforts to transfer to the
Provisional Institutions the non-reserved
responsibilities listed in chapter 5 of the Constitutional
Framework. The Transfer Council met for the second
time on 28 May and agreed on the transfer of 19 non-
reserved competencies to the Provisional Institutions,
with a further 17 to be transferred as soon as the
Provisional Institutions have the capacity to assume
them. Eight competencies were returned to the working
groups for further consideration. Kosovo Serb
representatives did not participate in that most recent
meeting ofthe Transfer Council.

The Provisional Institutions have continued their
work, with a particular emphasis on legislative
development. Since the Council was last briefed, the
four laws - which had been returned to the Assembly
for revision, since they were not fully compliant with
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework - have been promulgated, with two of the
laws revised by the Assembly and two revised under
the authority of the Special Representative. The
Kosovo Assembly also adopted six new laws, with one
of them being deemed to be outside its area of
competence. The Assembly, in a special procedure,
also reviewed and agreed to the provisional criminal
procedure codes, which, as reserved competencies, will
be issued as UNMIK regulations. The Assembly,
however, did instruct an "appropriate body" to draft a
law on elections, although that is, of course, an area
which is outside its area of competence.

On 15 May, the Assembly endorsed a
controversial resolution on the "liberation war of the
people of Kosovo for freedom and independence".
While this resolution may have brought the Kosovo
Albanian political parties closer to a common View of
their respective roles in the past, it was clearly not
conducive to cross-ethnic dialogue and reconciliation.
The Special Representative, Mr. Michael Steiner,
issued a declaration stating that the text of the
resolution was divisive and against the spirit of
resolution 1244 (1999). In addition, the hosts of three
international meetings decided, after consulting with
the Special Representative, to withdraw the invitations
to attend that they had sent to the Provisional
Institutions.

The Kosovo Serb caucus - Coalition Return -
has participated in all Kosovo Assembly sessions since
April. Coalition Return members did, however, walk
out of a plenary session on 15 May during the
discussion of the resolution on "the liberation war of
the people of Kosovo for freedom and independence".
They, however, returned for the rest of the session after
the resolution was passed. Coalition Return also left
the 5 June Assembly session in protest of the triple
murder in Obilic municipality and have scheduled a
meeting for ll June to discuss its continued
participation in the joint structures.

Development in the municipalities has been slow
in the past months. One third of the municipalities are
still not run in accordance with democratic values due
to political boycotts, mainly by Kosovo Albanian
parties, leading to gridlock. The provision of fair-share
financing to minority communities and the use of
official languages in the documents and signs in most
municipalities remain poor. In northern Mitrovica,
UNMIK appointed an eight-member Advisory Board
consisting of six Kosovo Serbs, one Kosovo Albanian
and one Bosniac. However, during the Board's first
meeting, held on 30 May, the Kosovo Serb
representatives objected to the Board's composition.
The next meeting of the Board is scheduled for 16
June.

UNMIK reports that the crime statistics for the
first four months of 2003 show that there has been a
reduction in cases of murder, burglary and robbery in
comparison with the same period for 2002. Incidents of
what appears to be inter-ethnic violence are, however, a
cause for concern. The Kosovo Police Service (KPS)
has continued its development; there are now close to
5,500 local police officers, in comparison to just over
4,000 international police officers. An additional police
station is now under KPS management in Stimlje,
bringing the total number of stations under KPS
management to four. UNMIK Police continued to build
relations with their Serbian counterparts. Similarly,
police cooperation with the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia is expanding through regular contacts
and meetings.

Freedom of movement for the Kosovo Serb
community remains difficult. The recent triple murder
in Obilic will be a setback in this regard by
contributing to an increasingly negative perception of
security conditions allowing their free movement.
Increased freedom of movement for Kosovo Serbs has
also been hindered by the decision of the Serbian
Government authorities not to sign an agreement on the
use of Kosovo licence plates in Serbia proper and by
their public calls for Kosovo Serbs not to register their
cars with UNMIK. On 13 May, however, UNMIK and
the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia reached
agreement on the mutual recognition of vehicle
insurance, so that vehicles with Kosovo licence plates
can travel freely in the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia under a single, comprehensive insurance
policy. During the Ohrid Conference on Border
Security and Management, UNMIK and the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia also completed an
exchange of letters addressing the practical modalities
associated with the opening of two temporary local
crossing points between Kosovo and the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia for residents of the
area.

As previously reported, a comprehensive and
coordinated framework to support minority returns is in
place, with local authorities in nearly half of the
municipalities working with representatives of the
displaced community in municipal working groups.
During the first five months of 2003, a total of 437
Kosovo Serbs - 330 Roma/Ashkali/Egyptians, 133
Bosniacs, 31 Gorani and 61 Kosovo Albanians - have
returned to areas where they are a minority. The
murders in Obilic on 4 June are a serious setback for
our efforts to foster multi-ethnicity in Kosovo and
create conditions for the return of Kosovo Serbs and
others to areas where they are a minority. Returns
efforts also face a substantial shortfall in funding, with
only 55 per cent of returns projects funded and a gap of
72 per cent in funding for the United Nations
Development Programme-UNMIK Rapid Response
Returns Facility, which provides assistance to
individual returns.

On the economic side, on 9 May the Special
Representative promulgated a regulation on the
Transformation of the Right of Use to Socially-Owned
Immovable Property. This regulation - commonly
referred to as the Land Use Regulation - converts
land-use rights held by socially-owned enterprises into
99-year leaseholds, which can be freely transferred and
used as guarantee for security credits without affecting
underlying ownership title. The Kosovo Trust Agency
Board announced on 15 May tenders for the first six
enterprises earmarked for the first round of
privatization; 12 more are expected to issue shortly.
The Agency's operating procedures, adopted last
month, provide the framework for privatization through
tender procedures. Any Government, person or entity
who assert that their rights have been adversely
affected by the privatization process may submit an
appeal to the Special Chamber of the Supreme Court of
Kosovo, which has the power for final adjudication of
claims, including payment of compensation, from the
proceeds of the privatization to claimants whose rights
the Special Chamber finds have been violated by the
privatization process. UNMIK has informed us that the
Special Chamber will be operational on 16 June, when
its rules of procedure are promulgated. Claims are
already receivable by the Registrar of the Chamber.

Unfortunately, the dialogue between Belgrade and
the Kosovo Provisional Institutions has not started.
Limited, working-level contacts have, however, taken
place between representatives of the Provisional
Institutions and their Serbian counterparts in the fields
of transport and returns. Working-level contacts
between UNMIK and Belgrade have also continued in
a number of fields, although dialogue and constructive
engagement at the political level have remained
difficult. The meeting of the High Ranking Working
Group, which was scheduled to take place on 13 May
at the request of Belgrade, did not take place because
of preconditions set by the Belgrade delegation before
discussion of the topics on the official agenda could
begin. As a result, the protocol on the recognition of
Kosovo licence plates, which I mentioned earlier, was
not signed. Belgrade also continues to support parallel
structures offering services such as the issuance of civil
registration documents and the payment of pensions in
parallel to UNMIK.

As a result of the suspected involvement of
members of the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) in
terrorism and organized crime, particularly since the 12
April bombing of a railway bridge in Zvecan, a travel
ban was imposed on KPC members in order to avoid
the risk that members associated with extremist
organizations might be sent on training missions
abroad. The travel ban has since been lifted on a case-
by-case basis. The KPC was asked to disclose the
names of other KPC members who might be associated
with extremist groups. A special UNMIK-KFOR board
has been set up to coordinate action against suspected
extremist infiltration into the KPC.

The KPC did distance itself from the overtures
made by political leaders debating the "war values"
resolution of the Kosovo Assembly. A positive
achievement was the that eight Kosovo Serbs, three
Turks, two Croats and one Ashkali have joined, or are
in an advanced stage of recruitment into, the KPC. The
Kosovo Serbs are joining despite calls from Kosovo
Serb leaders for them not to do so. Over 30 per cent of
the positions set aside for minorities have been filled,
although minority community members are not yet
present in the higher ranks of the KPC.

Four years into UNMIK's mandate, we can say
that there has been significant progress, but we are still
facing challenges such as freedom of movement,
meaningful minority participation, returns, the
institutional development of local bodies and dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina. Since the emergency
phase, the focus has been on political and institutional
development. In 2000 and 2001, UNMIK established
the legal framework for Kosovo's path towards
substantial autonomy and self-government: the Law on
Local Self-Government and the Constitutional
Framework, as well as subsidiary legislation.
Following the establishment of the Provisional
Institutions, the benchmarks set out by the Special
Representative and the policy of "standards before
status" have been, and continue to be, the guiding
principles for the current phase.

Political pressure on UNMIK has significantly
increased, with attempts to challenge its role under
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework. One the one hand, the Provisional
Institutions, particularly the Kosovo Assembly, have
overstepped their competencies on a number of
occasions. On the other hand, Belgrade continues to
seek co-governance with UNMIK and, in lending
support to parallel structures, supports the boycott of
UNMIK policy and programmes. Unilateral calls from
Kosovo Albanians, Kosovo Serbs and Belgrade for
mutually exclusive solutions for Kosovo's future have
continued, and they have not contributed to
reconciliation and inter-ethnic dialogue. That has
frozen forward movement on a number of key issues.

At the same time, organized criminal groups and
extremist elements are increasing their intrusions into
political life. Outbreaks of violence serve the interests
of extremists on all sides. Such activity is undoubtedly
fuelled by political goals, but also by the current grim
economic conditions: the unemployment rate in
Kosovo is 57 per cent, with worse rates for minorities
and women. Extremists remain on the margins, and
voices of moderation exist in all communities.
However, those voices remain muted.

UNMIK has continued to do its best to ensure
that all developments in Kosovo remain within the
framework of resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Constitutional Framework. UNMIK has continued to
focus on the implementation of the mandate, in line
with the "standards before status" policy framework.
The Council's continued and active support for
UNMIK has been, and will continue to be, crucial for
the full implementation of the mandate entrusted to it
by the Council.

