Mr. Thayeb (Indonesia): Mr. President, may I first of
all associate myself with earlier speakers in expressing my
delegation' s congratulations to Ambassador Merimee on his
appointment as France's representative to Italy, and to
extend to him our best wishes.

My delegation would like to express its appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his informative report
(S/1995/781), the twelfth in the series of progress reports
on the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia. We
would also like to express appreciation to the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, Mr. Anthony
Nyakyi, as well as to the leaders of the member States of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) for their untiring efforts to bring about peace
in Liberia. In this context, we commend the meeting of
Liberian factions held in Abuja last August which
culminated in the signing of the Abuja Agreement. We also
recognize the hard work of the Liberian parties, the
Monitoring Group of ECOWAS (ECOMOG), the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), and the Liberian

National Transitional Government, in contributing to the
peace process.

My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us today, which decides to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL) until 31 January 1996. We believe
this draft resolution, initiated by the caucus, arrives at a
very critical time in the peace process in Liberia. We are
cognizant of the fact that 10 prior peace agreements have
been signed and broken since hostilities broke out
between warring factions in 1989. However, we are
confident that the circumstances that prevail in Liberia at
this time warrant an extension of the UNOMIL mandate.

We find the developments over the past several
months in Liberia very encouraging. While much progress
has been made, we feel that much more needs to be
accomplished if lasting peace is to take hold. My
delegation is confident that this proposed resolution
clearly stipulates the need for the continued integrated
international, regional and intergovernmental cooperation
that this protracted crisis requires.

My delegation is particularly supportive of the draft
resolution's call for post-conflict peace-building. Without
such efforts to encourage and provide electoral assistance
and to facilitate the reconstruction of Liberia's economic
infrastructure and institutions, a secure peace will be very
much in doubt.
The Indonesian delegation wishes urgently to
reiterate the draft resolution's call on the international
community to fulfil their respective financial obligations
without hesitation. The current efforts by ECOMOG and
other relevant United Nations agencies require
considerable financial resources to ensure an uninterrupted
implementation of the peace settlement. Without these
financial commitments, the vast work that lies ahead will
be delayed and contribute to further destabilization.

We have every confidence that the draft resolution
will be conducive to the continued cooperation and
goodwill established by the Liberian parties that is
essential to the successful outcome of this crisis. We
believe the mandates of the draft resolution foster the
objective of national reconciliation while respecting
Liberia's sovereignty and territorial integrity.

My delegation appreciates the support and resolve of
the international community, as demonstrated by the draft
resolution, in their efforts to end this terrible and tragic

 

conflict, which has inflicted so much suffering throughout
the region. We are confident that the full implementation of
the draft resolution will present the possibility for Liberia
to put this tragic war behind it and move forward into the
next century with a sense of hope, security, confidence, and
prosperity.

