Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to thank the Lithuanian
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
important open debate. It is our pleasure to see you
again, Minister Linkevieius, presiding over a meeting
of the Council, and we look forward to the participation
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the sisterly
Republic of Chile. We also thank the Secretary-General
for introducing his report (S/2013/341). Allow me to
respectfully note the presence of Deputy Secretary-
General Eliasson. Rights are, first and foremost, key to
achieving the goals underscoring this debate.

The Security Council has recognized the importance
of the rule of law in ensuring legitimate institutions and
in matters of international peace and security, as has
the Organization as a whole, particularly the General
Assembly in its adoption of the High-level Declaration
of 24 September 2012 (General Assembly resolution 67/1). Yet no clear answers have come to light, only
profound questions.

How can the Council and the Organization ensure
the rule of law in conflict or post-conflict societies or
in communities experiencing poverty and instability as
the result of massacres and violence that have wounded,
humiliated and killed people? How can we promote
and strengthen the rule of law at a time of unequal
sovereignty, as seen today? At a time of increasing
interdependence, enormous transfers of power from
State to non-State entities have led to lawless and
weakened State institutions, affecting the basic
principles of peace, security and fundamental rights.

It is therefore our challenge and responsibility to
strengthen international institutions to safeguard peace
and security. That involves the legitimate and peaceful
resolution of disputes, including regulating trade and
promoting, protecting and guaranteeing human rights
and the fundamental rights of all, as well as sovereignty
over water, air, soil, mineral and energy and agricultural
resources.

How can we ensure that efforts to establish the
rule of law and democracy also address human rights
violations in terms of current norms and that crimes
against humanity will not go unpunished? We must
ensure that social progress overcomes criminal terrorism
and the criminal authoritarian powers and terrorist and
mafia groups, and that massacres and indiscriminate
attacks against civilians, ethnic cleansing, forced
disappearances, extrajudicial executions, violence
against women, torture, illegal detentions, arms
trafficking, violations of the rights of children, drugs
and human trafficking and the so-called "gulags" of
our time will be overcome, leading to a life of dignity
and freedom for peoples and individuals.

Argentina is convinced that such atrocities
proliferate because, in the face of those atrocious
crimes, impunity remains an unwritten rule. Impunity
is the so-called other face of human rights and the rule
of law that is seen in most parts of the international
community, particularly among the most powerful. In
that context, it is exactly in conflict and post-conflict
situations that it becomes urgently necessary to ensure
that impunity is not allowed to prevail. That is why it
is important to establish an independentjudicial power
and police and prison systems that adhere to the norms
of human rights law.

Commissions of inquiry, whether national or
international, play a fundamental role. Argentina
welcomes the fact that the Council has expressed its
willingness to refer situations to the International Fact-
Finding Commission established by the first Protocol
additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949.

Some national justice systems include referral to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) by the Council or
by States members themselves. In that respect, United
Nations operations and missions play an important
role in strengthening efforts of States and the ICC.
Particularly relevant in that regard are the Secretary-
General's guidance on contacts with persons who are
the subject of arrest warrants or summonses issued by
the ICC.

Sometimes we encounter catastrophic news
headlines regarding our countries of the South.
A few days ago, there was a discussion about an
abysmal situation in my country. I am referring to a
specific matter. On Monday it was reported that in my
province, Mendoza, in 2013, certain unconstitutional
laws involving impunity were repealed based on a
noteworthy case from the province. Forty-one people
were charged with committing more than 200 crimes
against humanity. The accused were not only police,
military and prison staff, but also judges and public
prosecutors and defenders. They had refused to listen
to the victims; they had refused to carry out justice.
That is why I say that sometimes the measures of
the levels of civilization or barbarity that continue to
be used to describe or to rank countries, as mentioned
in the report, cannot be used in decisions regarding
peacekeeping operations or special political missions.

We want countries to be treated equally in matters
of human rights and democracy and in matters
involving strict respect for human rights. Argentina
has not invented anything new in that regard. We are
simply stating that which is contained the "Declaration
of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly
on the Rule of Law at the National and International
Levels", namely,

"that the rule of law and development are strongly
interrelated and mutually reinforcing, that the
advancement of the rule of law at the national
and international levels is essential for sustained
and inclusive economic growth, sustainable
development, the eradication of poverty and
hunger and the full realization of all human rights
and fundamental freedoms, including the right to
development, all of which in turn reinforce the rule
of law". (General Assembly resolution 67/1, para. 7)

In conclusion, I believe that Council members
are aware that the Organization is experiencing a
crucial moment. It is the era between the Millennium
Development Goals and the sustainable development
goals. Let us therefore set the goal of achieving the
reality of the Charter of the United Nations.

Truly, scandalous inequality must end. Although it
is not reflected in international treaties, we can ensure
peace and security only through international social
policies based on human rights, rather than relying
solely on aid. To achieve that, the commitment of the
international community is essential. Inequality in
access to rights must be eliminated. In other words,
we need to deal with the various forms ofinsecurity. If
insecurity grows, there will not be lasting peace.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the need to
free ourselves from the yoke of uniformity, the unjust
predominance of categorization and the authoritarian
trap of imposing a one-size-fits-all criterion on
countries. That is why Argentina, like the Secretary-
General in his report, feels that it would be useful to
have a method by which Member States, together with
the Organization, could assess the impact of activities
in the area of the rule of law. Those basic guidelines
should be universal with regard to human rights, but
matters should be put in context and be very specific,
so as to be able to take into account the multiplicity and
diversity of our worlds, our potentials, our differences
and our respective dignities. Therefore, the issue is not
about trying to build the rule of law so as to impose
homogeneity or to manipulate States with one single
model for a State. What we need to do is to listen,
consider, understand, feel, include and express through
our work the concerns and the life plans and social
contracts of various peoples, not just democracy. We
must also think about a rule of law that is legitimate,
realistic and effective.

We need to recognize that the strengthening of the
rule of law at the national level goes a lot further than
the mandates of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions. Together with national ownership,
Argentina firmly believes in the validity of regional
mechanisms that are democratic, such as the kind we
have seen in Latin America and the Caribbean. This
debate reaffirms something we sometimes tend to
forget, namely, that the elements that underpin the
Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the General
Assembly are all interlinked: human rights, the rule of
law and democracy.

