The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Strang for his briefing.

On behalf of all the members of the Security
Council, I would like to thank our three briefers for
their useful and informative reports.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister of Justice of Spain.

Allow me to begin my statement by expressing,
on behalf of the Government of Spain, our firm
condemnation of the recent attacks taking place in
Istanbul, Cairo, Mogadishu and Aden. These crimes
elicit our most vigorous condemnation. We share the
pain of the victims and extend our condolences to their
families. Our best tribute to them, besides solidarity
and accompaniment, is that of bringing the perpetrators
to justice.

I thank Mr. Laborde, Ms. Oduor and Mr. Strang
for their briefings. I am also grateful for the support of
the 51 sponsors of resolution 2322 (2016). I welcome
this resolution and I congratulate all the members of the
Security Council on its unanimous adoption.

On Saturday, on the occasion of Human Rights
Day, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon recalled that
those rights, together with peace and sustainable
development, are the foundations of societies that are
based on justice and the rule of law. Terrorism is one of
the greatest threats to international peace and security.
It is an affront to the fundamental pillars on which our
societies are based and to fundamental human rights.
Spain has long experience in this area because of what
it has suffered owing to terrorism, both within its
borders and in the international arena. Spanish society
and its public authorities have also fought that scourge
with efficiency and determination. It is unfortunately
an experience that many of us have shared. For that
reason, we have made combating terrorism one of the
priorities during our term as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council.

Spain's experience a testament to the fact that,
with measures based on respect for the rule of law, a
united society can confront and defeat terrorism. Such
was the case in Spain. Faced with violent extremism
and terrorism, comprehensive strategies are needed
to address all aspects of this threat. In that context,
international cooperation is an absolutely essential
instrument for effectively combating all types of
transnational organized crime. That is especially true
in the context of today's terrorism, because, as we all
know, it is a global threat. But we must also bear in mind
that terrorism is constantly evolving. We therefore need
to continuously fine-tune and update the tools available
to us to counter terrorism.

On 17 December 2015, the Council adopted
resolution 2253 (2015), which complements resolutions
1267 (1999), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015). The resolution
that we have adopted today is a milestone, another tool
in the succession of tools with which the international
community is equipping itself to confront the terrorist
threat. Globalization is such that States now have to
face the challenge of developing a comprehensive
response to a criminal scourge that transcends national
borders, because the frontiers of justice no longer
coincide with territorial borders. If we do not do so, we
will facilitate impunity.

Resolution 2322 (2016) updates the tools of
international judicial cooperation and extradition that
are available to us as an international community
and urges us to fully make use of them so as to apply
them to transnational organized crime and crimes of
terrorism. Similarly, all Member States are called upon
to designate and appoint central authorities to deal with
requests for cooperation. With that measure, we will
create a network of focal points with resources, training
and authority to take action on terrorism-related crimes.
The resolution also calls upon States to consider the
possibility of developing a system to deal electronically
with requests for cooperation in order to carry out
all such processes more quickly and effectively. It is
important, in demonstrably urgent situations, to accept
requests electronically without affecting the subsequent
transmission of such information through traditional
avenues, where appropriate.

Without a doubt, the new telecommunications
and information technologies, the Internet and social
networks provide outstanding forums for freedom,
for trade, for the economy, for the expression and
dissemination of ideas and for education. But is
certainly also true that terrorists have stepped up the
use of technologies, which, without any doubt, entails
an increasing challenge for our societies, the rule
of law and public safety. We who are fighting them
cannot be left behind. Consequently, we must devise
legal frameworks to combat the abuse of the Internet by
terrorist groups. We must also strengthen international
cooperation to respond to the threat.
Today a great part of the evidence linked to terrorist
attacks is obtained through the Internet and related
technologies. Many crimes involving recruitment,
organization and the preparation of attacks are carried
out through those means. We must make progress
in harmonizing the standards concerning the use
of electronic evidence. We also need to ensure that
the goal must be to ensure that evidence obtained in
investigations carried out in one State can be used in
another when we undertake cooperative judicial or
extradition proceedings. The coordination, for instance,
that we have afforded ourselves within the sphere of
the European Union can serve as a example for the
international community in general.

Along with international judicial cooperation, we
also need to maintain and consolidate more effective
law enforcement cooperation. Resolution 2322 (2016)
calls for consolidating and strengthening an invaluable
tool, that is, INTERPOL's I-24/7 network for secure
communication among law enforcement agencies. All
States must strengthen their capacity to participate
in that network and ensure that the their response
centres are provided with the proper training to combat
terrorism and the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters. We also acknowledge the value of the I-24/7
network, which was established under the Additional
Protocol to the Council of Europe Convention on the
Prevention of Terrorism in May 2015.

We must also reiterate the importance of
cooperation within the framework of the United
Nations and its various bodies, whom this presidency
thanks for their substantial contributions, including
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, its Executive
Directorate, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, INTERPOL and the entire Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force.

The resolution also includes a paragraph specifically
dedicated to the victims of terrorism. Their memory
must always guide our work in combating terrorism,
which is a fight aimed at achieving justice. States must
come up with measures to ensure support to the victims
in the wake of terrorist acts and throughout the entirety
of criminal proceedings.

We therefore believe that it is very relevant and
consistent with the law that, following its reaffirmation
of our solidarity with the victims and their family
members, the sixth preambular paragraph also recalls
the importance of States redoubling their efforts to
ensure that victims and family members are afforded
the necessary assistance to overcome the subsequent
loss and pain. Ensuringjustice, which means preserving
the memory of the victims of terrorism and ensuring
that they receive the support they deserve, will always
serve as a moral point of reference for the document
that we have adopted today.

In conclusion, I strongly believe that we have taken
a great step forward today towards modernizing the
network of contacts among law enforcement focal points
to make more agile our international judicial cooperation
and our existing law enforcement mechanisms. We
have strengthened existing instruments in the fight
against terrorism and transnational organized crime,
which is a critical objective that unites all of us. We all
have reason to be satisfied. However, that satisfaction
must not lead us to become complacent. The fight
against terrorism and international crime is always an
ongoing one. We must ensure that we are always taking
steps forward and that we never lag behind those who
do not wish to see peace and the peaceful coexistence
between States. This resolution will undoubtedly help
us in that endeavour.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.

