Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): Itwas notmy delegation's
intention to ask to make a further statement. But having
heard the unacceptable remarks of the representative of
Azerbaijan, it is hard to remain silent.

It is our strong belief that there is no alternative to
the peaceful resolution of any conflict. The resolution of
conflicts requires political will and determination. We
believe that people should be ready for peace, not war.
Unfortunately, until now, the Azerbaijani leadership
is doing exactly the opposite, while taking each and
every opportunity to increase its warmongering and
anti-Armenian hate speech on a daily basis.

Through that anti-Armenian history, Azerbaijan
tries to justify the constant calls for war by its highest
officials. The wounds of the last war against the
civilian population of Nagorny Karabakh have not yet
healed. Yet Azerbaijan is trying to launch a new war
by initiating an unhealthy arms race and by preaching
hatred against Armenia at the State level.

Very recently, a couple of weeks ago, the Azerbaijani
President stated,

"Present Armenia is, in fact, the historical land

of Azerbaijan. Therefore, in the future we will

return to our historical lands. Let young people and

children know it. We must live;we live and we will

live in this idea."

That militaristic rhetoric of the country's President
threatens the fragile peace in our region, engages
the future generation and nullifies the efforts of the
ongoing peace negotiation. It should be condemned. Yet
Armenia has always advocated the peaceful political
resolution of the conflict through negotiation within the
framework of the Minsk Group of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.

That alarming act by the Azerbaijan authorities
not only contradicts the humanitarian purpose of
international law and the relevant international
instruments but also calls into question the entire
human rights system.

Since last year, Azerbaijan has been vastly
increasing its military budget and acquiring more
sophisticated weapons. The continuous attacks and
subversive activities of the Azerbaijani forces in the
area bordering Nagorny Karabakh can be seen as
reconnaissance operations and a general rehearsal for
war.

Such brutal and illegal actions by the Azerbaijani
side have resulted in Armenian servicemen losing their
lives. Several soldiers and a number of civilans were
wounded in just the past few weeks.

We strongly condemn the deadly provocation by the
Azerbaijani side, which poses a real threat to regional
security. We expect the international community to
continue its call for a prompt reaction to such atrocities,
which have already undermined respect for justice,
human rights and human dignity.

In his statement, the representative of Azerbaijan
mentioned events in Khojaly, with the usual distortion
of the facts. That came as no surprise to us. The
Azerbaijani representative refers to the 1992 military
event, while, according to the then Azerbaijani
President, the responsibility for the slaughter of the
civilian population, including children of the city of
Khoj aly, falls fully on the Azerbaijani Government and a
political opposition group. The whole world has learned
from the interview with the then Azerbaijani President
that the militia of the Azerbaijani National Front
actively obstructed and actually prevented the exodus
of the local population through the mountain passages,
specifically left open by the Karabakh Armenians to
facilitate the flight of the civilian population.

The hope and intention of the Azerbaijani side was
to utilize civilian losses of such magnitude in order
to instigate a popular uprising against the country's
President and to seize the reigns of power. We strongly
advise the Azerbaijani side to conduct an internal
investigation so as to reach the obvious conclusion that
the Khojaly event and its inhabitants were deliberately
sacrificed for political ends.

We believe that the time has come for Azerbaijan
to replace hollow allegations with constructive steps
aimed at creating a more conducive environment for the
peaceful settlement of the Nagorny Karabakh conflict.

