Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): I wish at the outset to express
my delegation's sincere condolences to the Government and
the people of Morocco on the passing of King Hassan II.
King Hassan II will be remembered as a great leader and
statesman and as a man of peace.

We wish to thank you, Mr. President, for arranging
today's briefing by Mrs. Sadako Ogata, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, and we are grateful to
her for her briefing and for the wise words with which she
advanced some of the fundamental problems of refugees in
Africa and elsewhere.

The basic advantage of this briefing is that today
Mrs. Ogata has updated the Council on a number of basic
issues that are of priority importance in the Council's work.
We are increasingly aware of the extent of the problem of
refugees in Angola, the Great Lakes region and western
Africa, including Sierra Leone, Guinea and other countries,
as well as of the plight of refugees in the Sudan and
elsewhere. We appreciate the analysis provided by Mrs.
Ogata concerning the causes of the refugee flows and
especially her emphasis on the combination of armed
conflicts and poverty that characterizes the situations which
result in refugee flows in Africa. It is that combination of
those two factors that creates the most dangerous and tragic
situations, and it would be probably be wise for the United
Nations to attempt to address these two questions together.

Of course, the Security Council's priority remains in
the area of diplomatic action and of more narrowly defined
security issues. There is also a need to increase
development assistance and use the instruments of
development in order to prevent conflicts which result in
large refugee flows.
Mrs. Ogata informed us about the growing pressure
of internally displaced persons and refugees in several
areas of Africa, including Angola and Central Africa. In
this context I wish to focus for a moment on the situation
in Tanzania, which is hosting refugees from Burundi and,
more recently, from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We have noted Mrs. Ogata's analysis today of the
problem of Burundian refugees in Tanzania and of the
growing tensions on the border between Burundi and
Tanzania. They are characterized by slow repatriation and
progress in the Arusha peace process, which we
understand still leaves something to be desired.

We understood the appeal made by Mrs. Ogata to
the Security Council to encourage an early and positive
conclusion of the Arusha process, and I believe that in the
coming period the Council should devote adequate
attention to this question as a political question.

On the other hand, I should like to address a
question to the High Commissioner on Refugees: has the
current situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the new influx of refugees from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to Tanzania added to the
difficulties she described in her briefing, and, more
specifically, how is the implementation of last year's
Kampala decisions progressing, and is it relevant to the
evolving situation of refugees in that area?

I raise these questions because over the last month
the Council has been duly preoccupied with the most
acute crises which have characterized the situations in
Africa, and perhaps the kind of issues referred to today
by Mrs. Ogata were not focused on sufficiently. Perhaps
today we could shed some additional light on that issue.

The High Commissioner on Refugees has also
explained to us the importance of the implementation of
recently signed peace agreements, especially of the Lorne
agreement on the situation in Sierra Leone. We agree
with the questions that were posed in that regard earlier
on by Ambassador Dejammet and with the points made
in this connection by Ambassador Rewaka, who were
among the first speakers this morning. I believe that the
answers that Mrs. Ogata will give will be important to the
Security Council, but above all I think that her
recommendation is essential, namely on the need to
support the process of implementation of the peace
agreement, which, I believe, contains the basic answer to
a variety of questions that have been raised and which, of
course, can also be answered in more specific terms.

 

Finally, we appreciate that Mrs. Ogata has addressed
a number of general issues pertaining to the role and the
responsibility of the Security Council under the Charter.
Many of these are continuously considered by the Security
Council, not only in the context of country-specific
situations, but also as thematic issues. Let me briefly refer
to them.

The need, first, to strengthen the efforts to put an end
to military conflicts defines the basic function of the
Security Council. By fulfilling that responsibility the
Council can most effectively contribute to the solution of
refugee situations. Secondly, the need to focus on the
situation of children during periods of displacement and
during their rehabilitation after the conflict is a priority to
which the Council is giving increasing importance in its
work. We think that this is the correct approach. Thirdly,
the need to curb the arms flow is a matter that has been
addressed by the Security Council in a number of
resolutions and presidential statements, and there is much
to be done in the future. Again, Ambassador Rewaka has
spoken on this subject.

In this connection, I would like to add that we
understand that we cannot expect quick fixes for the arms-
flow problems that are destabilizing broad regions of
Africa. But there is a need for steady efforts on the part of
the international community, including the Security Council.
In that regard we welcome the idea of the Security Council
some time in the near future holding a thematic debate on
the flow of small arms and light weapons.

The consolidation of peace after a conflict is another
theme that the Council has been considering almost
continuously. And today the High Commissioner for
Refugees has been very persuasive in explaining the need
appropriately to combine efforts to ensure security in post-
conflict situations and efforts to foster development. I hope
that these points will be duly taken into account when the
Security Council discusses in more detail the situation in
Sierra Leone and other similar situations.

Finally, the High Commissioner referred to questions
of political normalization after armed conflicts. She spoke
about the need to foster in societies both reconciliation and
justice. I think that both of these values are important and
basic to normalization. I would like to add that, without the
requisite degree of justice, reconciliation in a society is
difficult. Therefore a proper combination of both would, in
our opinion at least, require a very basic understanding of
the importance of justice, which needs to be ensured in
post-conflict situations.

