Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I thank
Ambassador Gambari for what I think was a most
important and most significant report on his visit,
which I think was itself most important and most
significant. I would like to express the thanks of my
delegation to the Government of Angola for the
extremely useful and forthcoming reception it gave
Under-Secretary-General Gambari in Luanda. I
apologize to him that I had to duck out of the room for
the last few minutes of his briefing. I do not know
about others around the table, but we are certainly
finding that the approach of the holiday period is
making life busier, not more relaxed.

Others around the table, I think, have heard
enough from the United Kingdom about our general
approach to Angola and I will not repeat it now. I think
that the principles on which our policy is based are
well known and that they accord with those of other
delegations around this table. I would like, however, to
ask Mr. Gambari a number of questions arising from
his very useful and stimulating briefing.

The crux of the matter, as he said, relates to the
peace process and to how that might be restarted. That
is, after all, what we are all here to try and help bring
about and I think it deserves the utmost priority.
Professor Gambari said that he urged everyone he
spoke to that it was time to take the peace process "off
the streets". I would strongly agree with that, and it
would be very helpful to have confirmation that that
was the resonance that Professor Gambari found among
the wide range of people he spoke to in Luanda. If that
is the case, then it seems to me that we do have an
opportunity to help make a contribution to move this
forward. Again, it would be helpful to hear if that is the
case - how Under-Secretary-General Gambari would
see the process of re-establishing regular contact
between the two sides and with UNITA evolving.

I would endorse what he said about the
importance and the significance of the Government's
decision on a potential United Nations role here and a
potential role for the churches, but it would be
interesting to hear anything further Under-Secretary-
General Gambari might want to say about how that
would work out and how the current sanctions regime
might affect this, because as he rightly pointed out,
sanctions are not an end in themselves. Nor are they an
instrument of punishment. Rather, they are an
instrument of pressure and persuasion to get UNITA
back to the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol,
which we all support.

Secondly, a number of speakers around the table
have picked up on the role of civil society. Ambassador
Kuchinsky of Ukraine has just made quite an extensive
statement about it. It would be helpful to hear from
Under-Secretary-General Gambari whether there is
anything further he would want to say at this stage
about how he sees the role of civil society, how the
United Nations might be involved in that general
process and whether there is anything more the Council
could do to support it.

Finally, I should not finish without referring to
the humanitarian situation. I was sobered to hear
Under-Secretary-General Gambari's report on this
situation. Sadly, overall it must be bad news, but the
measures that the Government of Angola is taking are
good news. Nevertheless, I think that we must all be
extremely concerned about the prospect of over
4million internally displaced persons and refugees,
and I would be interested to hear whether Under-
Secretary-General Gambari has yet been able to form
an assessment on whether forced displacement is
increasing or decreasing and on what the international
community can do to help more.

In this context, it occurs to me that it has now
been well over a year since the Council was last briefed
on the humanitarian situation in Angola, and I think
that it might be helpful for us to repeat that exercise
fairly soon, also hearing, too, from the Government of
Angola. I was very impressed with the presentation that
Sergio Vieira de Mello gave the Council over a year
ago when he was still in charge of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. I think that
presentation was very helpful in sensitizing Council
members to the need. If a similar briefing would help
to sensitize the donor community further to the need to
help, I think that would be a real contribution to
mobilizing resources and funds and trying to do
something to help these poor people.

