Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like to begin by echoing the words of condolence and solidarity expressed to the delegation of the Niger. I should then like to welcome the presence today of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia and thank Special Representative Ruiz Massieu for his briefing. Over three years since the signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, Colombia can stand proud. The parties to the agreement should be congratulated for their commitment and the progress achieved. At the same time, of course, we must ensure that we keep abreast of the challenges that remain. The recent local elections testify to the positive impact of the peace process on Colombian democracy. There have been fewer reported incidents of violence and citizens were able to participate in the elections in areas of the country that had previously not been safe enough. Like the recent social demonstrations, these elections illustrate the commitment of Colombiansociety to peace, as well as to the full implementation of the peace agreement. We are also encouraged by the implementation of development programmes with a territorial focus that have benefited from increased funding, as well as by the progress in economic and social reintegration. The restart of the activities of the Gender Technical Working Group of the National Reintegration Council is also an important step. However, with regard to legal safeguards, it is worrying that no substantial progress has been made in the process of accreditation of former combatants, which creates legal uncertainty and increases the risk of recidivism. One of the cornerstones of the peace agreement is the establishment of the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition. Transitional justice is essential for reconciliation and lasting peace. We welcome the significant progress made by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and urge all those under its jurisdiction to contribute to truth- seeking efforts. Threats of violence against lawyers defending former combatants are unacceptable. We also regret the continuing violence against human rights defenders, social leaders and former combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP). The year 2019 was the most violent for former combatants since the peace agreement was signed. We are particularly concerned about the specific targeting of women human rights defenders and social leaders, as well as by the lack of protection for ex- combatants residing outside the former territorial areas, who represent approximately 70 per cent of those who have been accredited. More effective measures are needed, including the finalization of the action plan of the Intersectoral Commission on Safeguards for Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders and the reconvening of the National Commission on Security Guarantees. We have carefully read the recent report of the Secretary-General on children in armed conflict (A/73/907-S/2019/509) and are extremely concerned about the high levels of recruitment and use of children by armed groups in Colombia, in particular by the Ejercito de Liberacien Nacional and FARC- EP dissidents. I urge all armed groups to adopt and implement commitments to put an end to that grave violation and immediately release all children in their ranks. We also call for continued investment in the "A different path of life" reintegration programme and the work of the Technical Working Group on Children of the National Reintegration Council. In conclusion, it is important to build trust between the parties and to intensify cooperation and dialogue with regard to the implementation of the Final Agreement. It is in every interest of the parties to make use of the consultation, monitoring and verification institutions and mechanisms that have been created for that purpose. I would like to reiterate Belgium's firm commitment to working closely with Colombia in order to advance the full implementation of the peace agreement.
