Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): At the
heart of the process of national reconciliation often
lie - as your country, Madame, knows especially
well - serious political and moral dilemmas in terms
of justice. My delegation was very interested in the
meeting that Ambassador Mufioz organized a few days
ago with the non-governmental organizations, which
provided particularly enlightening testimony on the
subject. I pay tribute here to their work and thinking.

My delegation listened with great attention to the
outstanding statement of Mr. Kalomoh on this subject
early in this meeting.

We believe that the solution to these dilemmas
always lies in the establishment of the rule of law, with
all of the force and breadth inherent in that concept.
Your delegation, Madame, was wise in holding today's
discussion in the wake of the Security Council's debate
in September, presided over by Mr. Jack Straw, the
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom, whose initiative my
country deeply appreciated.

National reconciliation often requires a balance
between the imperatives of justice and the defence of
universal values, on the one hand, and taking into
account the circumstances inherent in a situation or a
particular culture, on the other. Wise time management
is often a condition of success. Such non-jurisdictional
instruments as truth and reconciliation commissions
may make a valuable contribution. However, that
which is inviolate must be respected. There can be no
impunity for serious crimes under international
criminal law. Likewise, victims are entitled to the truth
and reparations.

The United Nations must continue to play a role
in this area, first by including in the mandates of
peacekeeping missions - as is increasingly the case -
measures to fight impunity by, for example,
investigating human rights violations and then, when
this is appropriate or necessary, by providing support
for national tribunals. As the representative of Spain
stated, the International Criminal Court can now, of
course, make a major contribution in this respect. It is
respectful of national jurisdictions and can help to
make up for any possible shortcomings that they may
have.

Justice is not the only key to the success of any
national reconciliation process. It first requires a peace
agreement or other viable form of agreement - one
that does not contain within it the seeds of another
conflict or civil war, but that makes it possible to deal
with or resolve basic problems. Success will also
depend on the process being inclusive. It is crucial that
the positive effects of national reconciliation spread to
all segments of the population. That is why, in this
context, special importance must be accorded to
disarmament and reintegration programmes for former
combatants, to the situation of children, to the situation
of women - whose important role has been
acknowledged in resolution 1325 (2000) - and to the
full integration of communities, minority groups,

refugees and foreign or displaced populations.

Nor should we forget that if we truly want to
bring about national reconciliation in current post-
conflict situations, the fair distribution of economic
resources, as well as power-sharing, access to
education and health and development are all necessary
conditions for improved coexistence and, ultimately,
for the return of trust. The earlier comments of
Mr. Mark Malloch Brown and of Ms. Carolyn McAskie
were very interesting in this respect.

Thus it can be seen that, in dealing with these
problems, we have moved from a simple approach -
support for a top-down agreement between government
and opposition leaders - to a more complex and
comprehensive approach involving several kinds of
support from the international community. This, of
course, means greater involvement on the part not only
of the Security Council but of the entire United Nations
system - though such involvement can never be a
substitute for the will of local stakeholders.
My delegation, like others, believes that in
practice it would be beneficial for the Secretariat to
bring together in a more effective way the unique
experience and expertise of the United Nations and to
better coordinate the instruments and mechanisms that
need to be mobilized. It would also be desirable that
the Secretary-General's report - pursuant to the
discussion last September - reflect the discussion that
we are having today.

My delegation is particularly grateful to you,
Mr. President, for having organized this very important
and useful debate that will shed light on the day-to-day
activities of the Security Council. My delegation fully
aligns itself with the statement to be made later by the
representative of Ireland, speaking on behalf of the
European Union.

