The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Sweden.

Sweden welcomes the decision to be taken today to
establish a transitional United Nations Mission of civilian
police, supported by a small military element, to assist the
Haitian Government in the professionalization of its
National Police.

The Haitian Government has made important efforts
to reinforce the rule of law and improve the situation of
human rights in the country. At the same time, we share the
assessment that international support will still be needed for
some time, in order for the Haitian National Police to be
able to fulfil its role in the consolidation of justice and
democracy.

The United Nations involvement in Haiti provides
constructive examples of the multitude of essential
functions performed by United Nations civilian police, and
of their important role in contributing to the building of
confidence and a secure and stable environment.
However, security does not only entail maintaining law
and order. It also requires a fair legal system, efficient
democratic institutions, popular participation and the
promotion of sustainable economic development as
preconditions for social stability.

It should be stressed that the main responsibility for
Haiti's development lies with the Haitians themselves.
The international community can only support the country
in its endeavours to consolidate a democratic society and
achieve development for all. In order for us to succeed in
our efforts, it is essential that the combined capacity of
the United Nations system be utilized. Sweden therefore
welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to
present further recommendations on the modalities for
future international assistance to Haiti.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The President: I shall now put to the vote the draft
resolution contained in document S/1997/589.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Chile, China, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, Guinea-
Bissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Sweden, United
Kingdom and United States of America


The President: The results of the voting is as
follows. There were 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
1123 (1997).

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of

its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.40 pm.

