Ms. Liu: Last week, the world witnessed a savage
attack on a United Nations and Syrian Arab Red
Crescent humanitarian convoy and on a hospital near
Aleppo. Secretary-General Ban Ki Moon said: "Just
when we think it cannot get any worse, the bar of
depravity sinks lower". Indeed, it does.

The conduct of war today knows no limits. It
is a race to the bottom. The unrelenting assault on
Aleppo by Russian and Syrian forces over recent
days - with no evacuations possible and bodies lying
unburied - testifies to that. On 3 May, the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2286 (2016). Council
members pledged to protect civilians and the medical
services they need to survive. The adopted the resolution
in the wake of the obliteration of Al-Quds Hospital in
Aleppo by the Syrian Government and its allies. It was
just the latest in a staggering number of such attacks.

Five months later, the resolution has plainly failed
to change anything on the ground. This failure reflects
a lack of political will among Member States fighting
in coalitions and those who enable them. There can be
no more waiting. Council member should make their
pledges operational.

Since the resolution was adopted, Me'decins Sans
Frontieres (MSF) alone has experienced more horrific
attacks. In early August, our hospital in Abs, Yemen, was
destroyed in a Saudi-led coalition airstrike. Nineteen
people,including patients and health workers, were
killed. The GPS coordinates of that fully functioning
hospital had been shared with belligerents, including
the Saudi military. It did not matter. It was the fourth
such attack against MSF facilities in Yemen in less than
one year - killing 32 people and injuring 51 in total.
Our team had to withdraw from the north of Yemen,
leaving scores behind with reduced medical care,
which Saudi carpet-bombing then further reduced. The
Saudi-led coalition and its opponents are so negligent,
and their rules of engagement so loose, that this war
truly stands apart. Many attacks are brushed off as
mistakes committed in the fog of war. Let me be clear
-we reject the word "mistake".

In Syria, the attacks never stop. Doctors in Aleppo
pull their weakest patients off ventilators so that
someone else can get a chance. But ventilators are made
for the weakest cases. This is desperate, desperate
medicine. Just this morning, two more hospitals in
eastern Aleppo were struck, leading to their temporary
shutdown. In one, the intensive care unit was severely
damaged. Besieged, our Syrian colleagues are there for
the duration. When it is their turn, they will die there,
they tell us, with their patients. We deplore the lack of
control over hostilities. This free-for-all is a choice.
There is a method in the madness. In both Yemen
and Syria, four of the five permanent members of the
Council are implicated in these attacks.
In an age when counter-terrorism shapes war,
a license to kill has been issued. We call on Council
members again to revoke that license, whether or not
their enemies are receiving the medical care that is
attacked, because throwing medical impartiality to
the wind is also becoming a new norm of warfare.
Military action and humanitarian needs must be
balanced. Attacking hospitals and medical workers is a
non-negotiable red line. As such, it must be set out - in
clear and simple terms - in all military manuals, rules
of engagement and standard operating procedures.
Too often, unverified intelligence, or opaque claims
that a hospital is a command-and-control centre
is justification enough for an attack. To stop that,
there must be accountability. There must be credible
investigations - and not just by the perpetrators.

I deliver this message almost one year to the day

that United States forces destroyed the Medecins sans

Frontieres hospital in Kunduz, Afghanistan. We are
still waiting for an independent investigation into how
42 patients, hospital staff and caregivers were killed
while simply receiving and providing medical care.

We appeal to the Council to immediately
endorse and implement the Secretary-General's
recommendations - in particular the call for
independent and effective investigations. We also
urgently request that the Secretary-General appoint a
special representative mandated to document and report
attacks on medical facilities, health personnel, and
patients. Impunity must end. Only political pressure
and accountability will bring that about. In short, the
Council must make its resolution operational. Stop
bombing hospitals. Stop bombing health workers. Stop
bombing patients.

