Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): The
exhaustive report which has just been presented to us by
Mr. Petrov, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General - whom we wish to thank, along with all the
members of the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT), for their efforts - marks the last
of a series devoted to the situation in Tajikistan and the
activities of UNMOT.

I take this opportunity to associate myself with
preceding delegations in welcoming the successful
culmination of the peace process in Tajikistan. The
success of this process was the result of the will
demonstrated by the Tajik parties. We hail their resolve
to overcome the obstacles they encountered throughout
this period. Despite the repeated crises that threatened the
process, this determination allowed the conclusion of a
series of agreements, crowned by the signing of the
General Agreement of 1997.

While noting with satisfaction the highly important
role of the United Nations in the comprehensive
implementation of the main provisions of the General
Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National
Accord in Tajikistan, I should like to pay due tribute to
the various protagonists who participated, either on site or
at a distance, in the peace process in Tajikistan and its
consolidation. In particular, we wish to thank the officials
and staff of UNMOT, military and civilian alike, who
often worked in extremely difficult and dangerous
conditions with the assistance of others, such as the
Contact Group of Guarantor States and International
Organizations, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe mission and the Commonwealth of
Independent States collective peacekeeping forces. In that
context, we pay homage to the memory of those who fell
in the service of peace in Tajikistan.

 

With the withdrawal of UNMOT and the expiration of
its mandate on 15 May 2000, the support of the
international community will be extremely important and
remain indispensable if Tajikistan is to continue on the path
of peace and national reconciliation. We attach particular
importance to this post-conflict phase, for the situation in
Tajikistan remains fragile because of domestic and external
factors alike, which can be a source of instability and the
resurgence of violence. We urge all the parties to persevere
to ensure that the gains made since 1993 are consolidated
within the framework of the new United Nations office,
which will work for the consolidation of peace and the
social and economic restoration of Tajikistan.

