Mr. Lovald (Norway): The tragic events of the
past few weeks have unfortunately brought the Middle
East peace process to a virtual standstill. We are back
to the situation of a cycle of escalating violence.
Suicide bombs and targeted killings do not achieve the
objectives of ending terrorism and occupation. Norway
strongly condemns the use of violence as a means to
end the political conflict in the Middle East.

The road map is not dead. It has been endorsed by
both Israel and the Palestinians. It has broad
international support. We are now at a critical juncture
where all parties have to strengthen their efforts to
revive the peace process and ensure the implementation
of the road map.

The Palestinians must fight terrorism vigorously.
Security structures must be strengthened and reformed
under a unified line of control. Concrete measures
against the terror infrastructure must be taken. The
reform process outlined in the road map must proceed,
and the road map's focus on the parallel
implementation of measures by the two parties must be
revived.

Israel must stop the targeted killings, the
demolition of houses and the disproportionate use of
force. In order for the Palestinian Authority to
successfully combat terrorism, Israel must assist in
giving the Palestinians hope for a political solution to
the conflict. A freeze on settlements, a halt to the
construction of the security fence and a resumption of
the withdrawal of military forces are central elements
of the first phase of the road map.

Norway deplores last week's decision by the
Israeli Cabinet with regard to the elected Palestinian
President - to remove him in a manner and at a time
to be decided. Such a decision can only contribute
negatively to the peace process and will make it more
difficult for the Palestinian Authority to combat
terrorism. The international community, and the
Quartet in particular, need to strengthen their efforts in
providing a robust monitoring mechanism for the
implementation of the road map. The past two months
clearly show that without this in place the process will
derail and progress will not be made.

Norway will continue to actively support the road
map - as Chair of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
group, as a participant in the Task Force on Palestinian
Reform, as Co-Chair of the local aid coordination
group and as head of the observer mission of the
Temporary International Presence in Hebron.

We thank the United Nations for its relentless
efforts to ease the humanitarian situation in the
Palestinian territory through the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) and other agencies, as well as for its
important role in local donor coordination. We know
that the United Nations will continue this important
operational work, while contributing, through the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Special
Coordinator, to the political efforts of the Quartet.
These efforts have Norway's full support.
