Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to express my gratitude to the
presidency of the Security Council for having
organized this debate. I also thank the Secretary-
General, the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Director for International Law
and Cooperation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their statements.

11-5866]
Tunisia associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).

My delegation would first like to underscore the
importance of integrating a civilian-protection strategy
in the mandates of peacekeeping operations. In that
regard, it is essential to develop civilian protection
strategies in the context of the planning of such
operations, including the full involvement of the State
concerned and in close cooperation with regional
organizations. Such a strategy should be based on well-
defined, realistic and measurable priorities, thereby
making it possible to make genuine progress on the
ground.

As mentioned in the Secretary-General's latest
report (S/2010/579) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, issued on 11 November 2010, it is also
important that the withdrawal of peacekeeping
missions not be undertaken on the basis of an arbitrary
time frame, but rather once the core objectives have
been achieved, in particular with regard to the
protection of civilians.

Secondly, with regard to the importance of
national ownership of international instruments on
human rights and international humanitarian law, as
mentioned by the statement made on behalf of NAM, it
is crucial to raise greater awareness and promote
respect by States for their commitments emanating
from their adherence to such instruments, including the
four international conventions relating to refugees.

In that regard, we reiterate our deep concern
about the situation of the civilian population in
occupied Palestine, which has for too long been the
easy target of constant, flagrant and systematic
violations of fundamental rights and international
humanitarian law by the occupying Power, Israel. That
has prevented those people from meeting their most
elementary needs and from reclaiming their right to a
State - all in a climate of total impunity.

All parties to a conflict, States and non-State
armed groups, must not fire upon non-military targets,
particularly civilians, humanitarian personnel and
journalists. The indiscriminate use of weapons and
explosives in densely populated areas and the illegal
arms trade have adverse effects on civilian populations
in neighbouring countries, and must be banned.

Respect for fundamental rights and international
humanitarian law are inseparable from the fight against
impunity and the prosecution of those guilty of war
crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity and flagrant
violations of international humanitarian law. In the
belief that it is essential to combat that phenomenon,
Tunisia, having acceded to the Rome Statute some
months following its revolution, deems it equally
important to promote international cooperation to
support justice and national reconciliation measures,
especially through capacity building.

Thirdly, internal and external displacement of
refugees is one of the characteristics of conflict. It is
critical to encourage States to participate in protecting
refugees from conflict by keeping their borders open.
Convinced of the key role of neighbouring States in
alleviating civilian suffering in armed conflict, my
country, which hosted thousands of refugees fleeing the
conflict in Libya, has just approved opening an office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, which will certainly act as a nexus of
regional cooperation in humanitarian assistance.

In conclusion, it is absolutely essential to
concentrate particular focus on preventive action,
which is still the best means to avoid zones of tension
becoming zones of conflict. In that regard, we must
adopt a global approach that effectively addresses the
underlying causes of conflict, especially by supporting
States' efforts aimed at promoting economic growth,
eliminating poverty, security sector reform, national
reconciliation and propagating a culture of human
rights.

