Indonesia would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for her briefing. We have taken note of the Prosecutor's nineteenth report to the Security Council pursuant to its resolution 1970 (2011), on Libya. More than a year has passed since the new conflict in Libya started, and the situation on the ground remains grim. Allow me to focus on the following points. First, Indonesia calls for the immediate cessation of hostilities in Libya. We should continue the path of political dialogue, since there will never be a military solution in Libya. We join the call by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) for all parties to immediately halt all military operations and resume the 5+5 Joint Military Commission talks during the month of Ramadhan, also in line with the call of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire. Secondly, Indonesia calls for the expansion of humanitarian corridors during the month of Ramadhan and welcomes the increased efforts made by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees through a series of extra emergency distributions in Tripoli. Nevertheless, we remain concerned about the fact that, in the first quarter of 2020, the number of civilian casualties in Libya increased by 45 per cent as compared to the last quarter of last year, amounting to at least 131 civilian casualties. During the same period, attacks on schools and health-care facilities persisted. Attacks against health facilities will severely impact Libya's ability to fight the coronavirus disease pandemic. We call on all parties to fully respect international humanitarian law and to take measures to protect all civilians. That leads me to my last point. Indonesia is committed to pursuing justice in Libya as a part of the wider efforts to achieve long-lasting and sustainable peace in the country. Indeed, peace cannot be complete without justice, and justice cannot prosper in the absence of peace. The rule of law must be respected. To that end, we further extend our support to the work currently being done by UNSMIL. I fully share the view that it is Libya's obligation to ensure accountability for crimes committed on its territory. We need to empower the Libyan judicial authorities to enable them to exercise their full sovereignty. That is why the referral of the situation in Libya to the International Criminal Court should not disarm the Libyan competent authorities from invoking their jurisdiction to investigate gross violations of human rights and bring the perpetrators to justice. For Indonesia, it is clear that the priority at hand is to save lives. Actions by the international community must be made through careful decisions to avoid provoking more violence, resulting in more loss of lives and jeopardizing the quest for peace.
