Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Allow me, too, to begin
by thanking Peru for organizing today's debate. Let
me also thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix and the other briefers for their insightful
briefings this afternoon.

My country has been a consistent troop/
police-contributor (TCC/FCC) to United Nations
peacekeeping for almost six decades. More than 200,000
of our bravest have served in 46 missions around the
world in some of the most high-risk environments.
One hundred and fifty-six of them have made the
ultimate sacrifice in the cause of international peace
and security. The dedication and professionalism of
our peacekeepers are widely acknowledged. They are
well trained, well equipped and prepared to act in all
circumstances, in accordance with their mandate.

We have also been proud to contribute to United
Nations peacekeeping in the realm of ideas and norm-
building. During Pakistan's presidency of the Security
Council in 2013, the landmark resolution 2086 (2013)
was adopted (see S/PV.6903). For the first time, the
resolution recognized the multidimensional nature of
modern peacekeeping and its evolving role in facing the
complex challenges that come with it.

We believe that TCCs are the eyes and ears of the
United Nations on the ground. Their inputs are therefore
invaluable for the Secretariat as well as the Security
Council. Pakistan has therefore been a strong proponent
of proactive and robust triangular cooperation.

In that vein, in 2018, along with the United
Kingdom, Pakistan presented a non-paper to the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34)
to aid discussions and find ways to improve triangular
cooperation. We were pleased to see that initiative
referred to in the concept note (S/2019/538, annex) for
today's debate. As aresult ofour efforts, an entire chapter
was dedicated to triangular cooperation in the 2018
C-34 report (A/72/19). Let me now make five specific
points to further improve triangular cooperation.

First, Pakistan considers effective communication
and consultation among the three main
stakeholders - the Security Council, the Secretariat
and the TCCs - critical for effective and result-
oriented peacekeeping, which is a point that has also
been made by many of the speakers this afternoon.
There is therefore a real need to institutionalize
triangular cooperation as a framework to engage troop-
and police-contributing countries and the Secretariat
early in the process.

Secondly, with operating environments becoming
ever more volatile and with a chorus of demands for
doing more with less, that three-way communication
has assumed even greater importance.

Thirdly, we do not need to add another layer of
formal mechanisms to improve things. All we need
to do is to better utilize the existing avenues and a
balanced mix of formal and informal dialogue. Both, of
course, have their own merit.

Fourthly, formal meetings need to be revitalized
to maximize their benefits through the provision of
relevant information to TCCs and PCCs in a timely
manner in order to ensure substantive and meaningful
dialogue well ahead of mandate renewals.

Fifthly, the elected members of the Council
continue to play a critical bridge-building role in
facilitating discussions on triangular cooperation.
That aspect of triangular cooperation also needs to be
further strengthened.

Pakistan, along with Morocco, established an
informal group of troop- and police-contributing
countries in 2017. It includes almost all top contributors
to United Nations peacekeeping missions. Our group
co-hosted a meeting on triangular cooperation with the
participation of leading TCCs, senior representatives of
the Secretariat and members of the Security Council.
We believe that the platform can be used to further
our common objective of effective communication and
better peacekeeping.

Finally, allow me to say that the Security Council
and the Secretariat can continue to count on Pakistan
as a key partner not only in the field but in all
dimensions of peacekeeping, including norm-building
and policy formulation. However, without real and
effective triangular cooperation, we cannot expect to
successfully deal with the multiple challenges that we
face today.

