Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the Korean initiative to convene this
public debate commemorating the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1540 (2004). China also welcomes Foreign
Minister Yun to preside over today's meeting of the
Council. I also thank Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson for his briefing.

As the first Security Council resolution devoted to
non-proliferation, resolution 1540 (2004) is a milestone
in the prevention of nuclear, biological and chemical
terrorism. Over the past ten years, thanks to the joint
efforts of the international community, the international
consensus on non-proliferation has been deepened.
International mechanisms for non-proliferation based
on multilateralism have been improved. National
capacity-building for non-proliferation has been scaled
up. International cooperation and collaboration for
non-proliferation have been growing deeper.

China attaches great importance to the governance of
non-proliferation at the global level. During the Nuclear
Security Summit in the Hague in March, President Xi
J inping of China put forward China's approach to nuclear
security, which will make a significant contribution to
the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
and to combating nuclear terrorism. President Xi
Jinping also gave an important speech on the overall
national security approach in mid-April, emphasizing
that China must attach importance to both external
and internal security. China must emphasize both
development and security. China will pay attention not
only to its own security but also to collective security.
China will seek to form a community that shares a
common destiny and will advocate that all parties
involved seek mutual benefits and interests in common
security. That position reflects China's concept of
international security and is the fundamental principle
of China's participation in international security affairs
in general and in global non-proliferation governance
in particular. As a permanent member of the Council,
China has always taken a highly responsible approach
to issues of non-proliferation. Starting with the two
important links of legislation and enforcement and
taking into consideration international practices, China
has established a complete set of laws and regulations
on export controls for nuclear, biological, chemical and
missile materials and technology and has continued to
improve the export-control mechanims in that regard.

Over the past 10 years, China has actively
participated in the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). In accordance with the requirements of
resolution 1540 (2004), it has submitted three national
reports on implementation, which describe in detail the
Chinese Government's efforts to prevent and combat
proliferation by non-State actors. China has also
actively participated in non-proliferation exchanges
and cooperation under the frameworks of resolution
1540 (2004), the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Regional Forum, and has endeavoured to fully integrate
the resolution into its non-proliferation mechanism and
legal system.

At present, the international and regional security
situation is facing profound transformation. Traditional
and non-traditional security elements are interlinked.
Non-traditional factors are increasing, while terrorism
and extremism threats remain unabated. International
non-proliferation efforts have a long way to go. In order
to effectively combat and prevent nuclear, biological
and chemical terrorism, the international community
should seize the opportunity of the tenth anniversary
of resolution 1540 (2004) to take stock of experience
and lessons learned. In that regard, I wish to make the
following three points.

First, a comprehensive approach to address both
the symptoms and root causes is necessary. Only by
securing international and regional peace and security
and achieving sound economic and social development
in all nations will the hotbeds ofterrorism and extremism
be eliminated and the motivation of non-State actors in
acquiring weapons of mass destruction be discouraged.
The international community must work diligently
to improve existing non-proliferation mechanisms,
while fundamentally improving the global security
environment at the strategic level.

Secondly, multilateralism must be respected. The
proliferation issue must be addressed via political
and diplomatic means. Non-proliferation is linked to
political, security and diplomatic issues, among many
others. Disputes should be settled via diplomatic and
political means by giving full play to the role of the
United Nations and other international organizations.
Confrontation, pressure or resort to the use of force
will not lead to the settlement of an issue; but rather to
escalation and spillover of conflict, thus increasing the
risk of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

Thirdly, efforts should be intensified to promote
the full and effective implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). All parties should take effective measures
to strengthen their internal management and their
export control over sensitive materials and technology,
strengthen enforcement measures and respond actively
to proliferation risks related to globalization and the
dissemination of information.

All countries should implement resolution 1540
(2004) fairly and objectively. Discrimination must
be eliminated to avoid interference with regular
international trade activities.

Strengthening global governance in the field of
non-proliferation, promoting disarmament and the
peaceful uses of nuclear materials and strengthening
international security are in the common interests of
the international community.

China is ready to contribute its effort and wisdom
and to join other countries in promoting the cause of
non-proliferation and realizing the dream of the world's
peoples in the area of security.

