Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation would like to welcome
today's discussion and thank our Polish colleagues
for this initiative. We are also grateful to today's
briefers, Ms. Viotti and Judges Owada and Meron, for
their opinions.

There is no question that the topic of today's
meeting is important and timely. It harks back to the
origins ofthe United Nations and the League ofNations,
to their forefathers and the foundations they created for
international relations, now enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. The Preamble to the Charter
proclaims that the peoples of the United Nations are
determined

"to establish conditions under which justice
and respect for the obligations arising from
treaties and other sources of international law can
be maintained".

It also enshrines the founding principles and norms of
international relations, from the sovereign equality of
States and prohibition of interference in their domestic
affairs to the ban on the use of force in international
relations without permission from the Security Council
or beyond the purposes of self-defence.

In Russia we have always considered international
legitimacy as a fundamental aspect of stable peace
and security. As far back as 1899, Emperor Nicholas
II initiated the first Peace Conference at The Hague,
which not only instituted the codification of the rules
for the conduct of war but also the procedures for the
pacific settlement of international disputes. Our country
also made a significant contribution to the Nuremberg
principles, which became a milestone civilizational
standard. These and other rules were designed to rid the
world of the terrible legacy of the Second World War
and the errors of the past. The Charter of the United
Nations and the developing international law based
on it created a firm foundation for intergovernmental
relations. It all seemed so simple. Live and let live,
and help those who ask for help. But in spite of that, as
the Polish presidency rightly noted in the concept note
for today's meeting (S/2018/417, annex), violations of
international law continue in many parts of the world.

I would add that to this day it is not just specific
norms and rules that are violated but rather the
founding principles of international law. The principles
of good faith and cooperation among States are being
increasingly replaced by military, sanctions-based
or political pressure, taking the world back to an era
before the Charter, when all disputes between States
were resolved by force.

Some States still believe that the whole world should
live according to their model, their domestic laws and
principles, their national interests. The old notions of
exceptionalism and domination remain unchanged at
the heart of their approach to international affairs. Their
reckless, opportunistic attempts to impose their will on
the other participants in intergovernmental relations
never cease even for a moment. It appears as if that these
States have continued to cling to a colonial attitude
that divides countries into two categories - those that
possess every right and those to which the standards for
such rights do not apply. That is why we see blackmail,
threats and provocations - all the way to the unlawful
use offorce against sovereign States - raised to the level
of Government policy. Our partners from Equatorial
Guinea spoke of that blackmail today, and we share
their concerns. Such things are unacceptable. They do
serious damage to regional and global stability and lead
to the spread of extremist and terrorist ideology. All of
that keeps the world in a state of permanent tension and
makes it less and less predictable.

An analysis of recent events in Syria is extremely
revealing in that regard. First, let us ask ourselves what
was and still is the reason for the military presence
of the United States and the coalition it leads in
Syria. As we all know, they were not invited by the
country's legitimate authorities, which with the help
of friendly States are themselves fighting terrorism
quite effectively. In the early stages, the coalition
partners made awkward references to self-defence
against terrorism. Now, however, they increasingly
justify being uninvited guests with references to
the aims of so-called geopolitical stabilization. And
as for international law, the West long ago came up
with a formula for that - "illegal but legitimate".
This international legal nihilism culminated in the
aggression against Syria on 14 April. It is not just the
fact that the pretext was cooked up beforehand and was a
crude fake. Even if we imagine that a country may have
theoretically committed some violation, we all know
that armed reprisals are prohibited in international law.
We would like to point out that the use of military force
against a State is permitted only when sanctioned by
the Security Council or for self-defence, as paragraph 4
of Article 2 and Article 51 of the Charter clearly state in
one of its best known and most widely cited provisions.
Today we will be circulating the statement that our
President made on 14 April on the matter as a Security
Council document.
In the circumstances, it is not surprising that we
have not seen the United States, Britain and France
make any special efforts to come up with some sort
of justification for their actions on 14 April. Their
illegality from the point of view of international law is
so obvious that the people in those countries' capitals
are themselves clearly aware of it all. It seems that was
exactly what the President of Poland was talking about
today when he urged us not to be shy about calling
acts of aggression by their names. And that is what I
am doing now. The only country that has attempted to
explain anything is the Government of Great Britain.
London could not come up with anything better than a
reference to the concept of humanitarian intervention
as essential to preventing the suffering of the Syrian
people. But we all know that the world community has
rejected that even as an abstract theory. Attempting to
present it as some kind of rule that can permit an armed
attack on a sovereign State is all the more absurd.

Ultimately, what we have is three permanent
members of the Security Council - founders of the
United Nations and nuclear Powers, in theory obliged
to uphold the provisions of the Charter on the non-use
of force - committing an act of aggression against a
sovereign State. And many more in the Council went
along with it and shielded them. Is it really not clear
that if such antics are left unanswered, similar lawless
actions could be taken tomorrow against those who
stayed silent today? And it is in circumstances such
as these and with this kind of behaviour by external
actors that the United Nations and its Security Council
are compelled to work on a political settlement in
the Middle East generally and in Syria in particular.
What is astonishing is that those same actors take it on
themselves to lecture States on the rules of conduct in
the international arena. They long ago lost the moral
right to tell others what to do.

The internal crisis inUkraine is another consequence
of external players' gross violation of international
law, in this case the principle of non-interference in
the internal affairs of States. It is well known that
the opposition movement, which took the form of an
unconstitutional coup and the Kyiv regime's war on its
own people, was inspired from outside. The result has
been general chaos and lawlessness, economic collapse
and rampant nationalism and extremism that threaten
even Ukraine's neighbours. And, shamefully, everyone
turns a blind eye to it. Today in this Chamber our Polish
Presidents spoke about Ukraine and were embarrassed
to talk about the fact that in Kyiv today they glorify
those fighting on Hitler's side who took part in the
murders of hundreds of thousands of Poles, Jews and
Russians during the Second World War. Are they not
therefore tacitly agreeing with the propaganda about
the gravest crimes and at the same time denying the
decisions of Nuremberg?

If for political or any other reasons they can
allow themselves not to notice this, we have no such
inhibitions. Of course, it is much easier to blame
everything on Russia than to get Kyiv to launch a
dialogue with its own citizens in eastern Ukraine. We
have no intention of listening to lectures about Crimea.
The way it became part ofRussia was in full compliance
with international law and specifically the right to self-
determination. That issue is settled. In anticipation
of the Ukrainian delegation's statement, which will
certainly not be distinguished by having anything new
to say, I will just state in advance that we will not react
to such insinuations.

Today I am obliged to touch on another topic,
directly related to the work of the diplomatic corps
accredited to the United Nations. The United States
authorities, in their belief in their own impunity,
recently took their unilateral actions so far as to rewrite
even the rules of diplomatic and consular relations.
The issue of the United States authorities' abuse of
the benefits of the existence on its territory of the
Headquarters of our global Organization has now also
appeared on the agenda. This is about the undisguised
imposition of sanctions on delegations. The recent
large-scale expulsion of Russian diplomats, including
those working for the United Nations, is a blatant case
of that, but not the only one, unfortunately. This is
about the seizure ofRussian real estate on United States
territory, including parts of the Permanent Mission
to the United Nations, restrictions on the freedom of
movement for diplomats from a number of missions to
a 25-mile-radius zone and numerous delays in issuing
and extending visas. Washington's gross violations of
the conventions on diplomatic and consular relations
and the United Nations Headquarters Agreement have
become commonplace. This is a serious problem that
is hanging over the entire Organization and each of
its members. I want to stress that this is not a matter
of our bilateral relations with the United States, it is a
violation of international law.

Russia has always believed in the importance
of strengthening the rule of law at the international
level. In 2016, together with China, we developed a
joint declaration on enhancing the role of international
law. In addition to the principles of non-interference,
the sovereign equality of States, the non-use of force,
the inadmissibility of unilateral measures and the
extraterritorial application of national law by States
in violation of international law, it gives considerable
attention to the principle of the peaceful settlement of
disputes. The declaration affirms our firm commitment
to that principle and our beliefthat States are obliged to
settle disputes with the help of means and mechanisms
for resolving disputes agreed on between them. In order
to maintain the world order, it is crucial to ensure that
all such means and mechanisms are used in good faith
and that their aims are not undermined by abuses.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that we
are determined to strengthen our cooperation with all
responsible members of the international community in
order to maintain and enhance the role of international
law and to establish of a just and equitable order based
on international law.

