Mr. Kolby (Norway): I, too, would like to
welcome Foreign Minister She Okitundu to this
important meeting of the Security Council. We also
welcome Mr. Ngongi as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we wish him
every success in his very important task.

The progress made in the peace process during
the last few months gives us some reason for hope. We
note with concern, however, the lack of substantive
progress made to date in the inter-Congolese dialogue.
The political dialogue is a pivotal part of the peace
process, as stipulated in the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, and we urge the parties to show leadership
and flexibility in moving the process forward as a
matter of urgency.

The challenges at hand, as we prepare for phase
III of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), are
enormous, as illustrated in the Secretary-General's
report. In our view, it is critical that, to the greatest
extent possible, MONUC's mandate and activities be in
conformity with the relevant recommendations of the
Brahimi report.

Norway is supportive of the recommendation in
the Secretary-General's report to advance the concept
of operations, as proposed in paragraphs 59 to 87,
provided that the parties to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement come forward and display political will and
leadership. In this regard, we look forward to the
upcoming meeting between the members of the
Political Committee under the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement and the Security Council, to be held here in
New York in November.

The Secretary-General underlines in his report the
necessity of establishing a viable programme for
demobilization, disarmament and durable solutions for
armed groups, as identified in the Lusaka Agreement.
We support that proposal, and we would like to
reiterate that pressure must be maintained on the
parties so that the process can commence and,
hopefully, be implemented as soon as possible. In this
regard, firm pressure must be applied on Kinshasa and
its allies to cease any support to the negative forces and
the Mayi-Mayi rebels operating in the region. Needless
to say, the all-important process of demobilization,
disarmament and bringing about durable solutions
cannot be effectively advanced if parties at the same
time continue to re-arm the negative forces.

We agree that MONUC's role in organizing the
efforts for demobilization, disarmament and durable
solutions should be one of coordination, and that other
United Nations programmes, agencies and non-
governmental organizations are better equipped for the
more technical tasks associated with those efforts. We
support the proposal of MONUC to set up a
consultative mechanism in Kinshasa and New York for
this purpose.

Above all, we call on the Governments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to
intensify their dialogue with a view to establishing a
firm political understanding of the demobilization,
disarmament and durable solutions process and a joint
coordination mechanism. We would be ready to support
such a mechanism, if established.

We also share the view expressed by the
Secretary-General that there can be no lasting peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo without a
comprehensive settlement of the situation in Burundi.
We are thus looking forward to the establishment of the
multi-country programme for demobilization and
reintegration in the Great Lakes region being prepared
by the World Bank, in consultation with the United
Nations and Governments in the region. Norway stands
ready to consider supporting the programme as soon as
it has been presented.

Furthermore, we remain deeply concerned about
the humanitarian situation and the use of child soldiers
throughout the region. The international community
must relentlessly address these aspects.

Finally, I should like to take this opportunity to
mention that Norway has now deployed five military
observers to MONUC. We are pleased to join as a
troop-contributing country.

