Mr. Tachie-Menson (Ghana): I wish first of all
to welcome the President of Timor-Leste, His
Excellency Mr. Xanana Gusmao. We are very grateful
to him for his address to the Council. Our thanks go
also to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for his briefing.

My delegation is impressed by what has been
achieved with regard to national reconstruction in
Timor-Leste since the election of the President in 2002.
Timor-Leste was a country that lost an estimated
100,000 to 180,000 people in the brutal internal
conflict that took place between 1975 and 1999. From
the ashes of that conflict has arisen a new State with an
accountable Government, which, in partnership with
the international community, is gradually building
State institutions from the local to the national levels.
Criminal law and civil procedures are being
strengthened through the enactment of new legislation.
Various capacity-building programmes are in place to
revitalize the bureaucracy and the institutions
responsible for governance and human rights. The
police services are also being rebuilt. Those
institutional reforms and renewal programmes need to
be continued.

The present situation of calm and stability is a
manifestation of the effectiveness of the existing
partnership. What is happening in Timor-Leste is a
shining example of what can be achieved through post-
conflict peacebuilding. In that regard, we wish to
recommend an increase in assistance for the legislative
and judicial sectors in view of the critical role that
institutions in those spheres have to play in the
entrenchment and sustainability of good governance
and the rule of law. Similarly, we align ourselves with
the recommendation made by the Secretary-General in
his report (S/2006/24) regarding the request for support
from the international community for the general
elections to be held in 2007, which will be an
important milestone in the consolidation of the system
of democratic governance.

That Timor-Leste has taken its proper place and
role in the international community is a tribute not only
to the resilience and determination of the Government
and the people of Timor-Leste but also to the efforts of
the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL)
and to the international donor community, including
the financial institutions. On that point, my delegation
is of the opinion that an international presence and
international support are necessary to sustain the
process of nation-building. We therefore support the
request of the Government of Timor-Leste that the
United Nations consider establishing a political office
to continue the work of UNOTIL after the expiration of
its mandate.

While noting the achievements that have been
made so far, we cannot overlook a very sensitive issue
confronting not only the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste but also the international community at
large: the report of the Commission for Reception,
Truth and Reconciliation. My delegation condemns
violence and gross violations of human rights. We feel,
however, that, in pursuing justice, the Government of
Timor-Leste and the Government of Indonesia should
be encouraged to engage in constructive dialogue to
find a way forward on this issue.

