The Secretary-General: I pay tribute to the
delegation of Indonesia, in particular to Foreign
Minister Hassan Wirajuda, for convening this open
debate on the role of regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security. The fact that the Security Council is
holding its second open debate this year on this issue
demonstrates the importance that the Council rightly
attaches to it, as reflected in resolution 1631 (2005).

Since taking office 10 months ago, I have noted
the important contributions of a number of regional
and subregional organizations, and I have participated
in the deliberations of some of their summit meetings.
These interactions have been useful occasions to build
a common forum and agenda for cooperation. They
will also help to inform the report that the Council has
asked me to prepare on ways the United Nations can
advance coordination with regional organizations in
Chapter VIII arrangements.

Today, our partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations are stronger and more active
than ever. This year alone, we have established a joint
African Union-United Nations peacekeeping force and
political mediation in Darfur, and we are consulting on
the situation in Somalia. We have cooperated with the
European Union in the protection of civilians in Chad
and the Central African Republic. We have worked
with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations on
Myanmar. We have partnered with the Economic
Community of West African States in elections and
political situations in West Africa. We have worked
with NATO in Afghanistan and Kosovo. We have
collaborated with the Organization of American States
in support of the electoral process in Haiti. We have
held regular consultations with the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the League of Arab States on
conflict resolution in the Middle East, Africa and Asia.
And we have worked with the Organization for
Security and Co-operation in Europe and the European
07-58364
Union in addressing peace and security concerns in
Europe and elsewhere.

These policy and operational activities, spanning
conflict prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, are delivering results on the ground as
well as lessons for the future. They provide us with a
better understanding of our respective strengths and
advantages. They have made it possible to respond
more quickly at the outset of a crisis and more
effectively in post-conflict peacebuilding. We need to
build on these strengths and together find better and
more efficient ways of tackling global challenges.

The United Nations is committed to helping build
up the capacity of regional and subregional
organizations to undertake conflict-prevention,
peacemaking and peacekeeping tasks in their
respective regions. My proposals to the General
Assembly to strengthen the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations have already reinforced its
capacity to work with peacekeeping partners. Similarly,
I have presented proposals to the General Assembly for
strengthening our Department of Political Affairs. Both
illustrate my commitment to enhance the
Organization's ability to work with regional partners.
By the same token, we are enhancing mediation
capacity within the Secretariat and providing resources
for initiatives such as the 10-year capacity-building
programme for the African Union.

We are determined to work more closely and
more efficiently together for the mutual benefit of our
organizations and Member States and, above all, for
the peoples of every region of the world.

