Ms. Rice (United States of America): We are
grateful for your personal leadership, Mr. President, in
the fight against HIV/AIDS. I also thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his laudable leadership and
Executive Director Sidibe of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS and his team for
coordinating the massive global response.

I want to acknowledge that we have with us, as
part of the United States delegation, President Obama's
Global AIDS Coordinator, Ambassador Eric Goosby,
who is directing the United States global response to
the epidemic.

Just over a decade ago, thanks to the visionary
leadership of Vice-President Al Gore and of my
predecessor, the late Richard Holbrooke, the Security
Council took a monumental step. For the first time, it
addressed the threat that HIV/AIDS poses to
international peace and security. With this move, the
Council squarely joined the world's fight against
HIV/AIDS and put the epidemic on the global security
agenda.

In the twenty-first century, in our interconnected
world, threats to peace and security stem not only from
traditional armed conflicts. They also derive from more
diffuse dangers that know no borders, including the
unchecked spread of lethal disease.

We are now entering the fourth decade of our
collective struggle against this global pandemic. But
the Security Council's pledge to lessen the security
implications of HIV/AIDS must not lose any of its
urgency.

This scourge has spared no region or nation on
Earth, including my own. AIDS-related illnesses have
claimed more than 25 million lives, far more than the
death toll of any conflict during these past 30 years. In
all, more than 60 million people have been infected,
and 16 million children have been orphaned.

Two decades of often heroic international efforts
to extend the lives of those living with HIV/AIDS have
significantly alleviated the health effects of the disease,
but most people living with HIV still lack access to
treatment. For every person who starts treatment, two
more become infected.
Even beyond this unfathomable human toll, there
are very real security consequences of HIV/AIDS.
Consider first the toll on human security. It strains
communities, fractures families, reduces economic

productivity, drives people into poverty and pressures
health sectors that are often already struggling to cope.

But HIV/AIDS also has specific and complex
links to more traditional security threats. In the past 30
years, the patterns of HIV/AIDS transmission and
impact have evolved, and so has our knowledge about
the disease's impact on security. We know that when
conflicts end, societies are more vulnerable to HIV, a
particularly cruel burden on vulnerable populations and
countries struggling to rebuild after conflicts. Such
States often find it especially difficult to ensure
continuity of HIV prevention and AIDS treatment
precisely when institutions are weak, capacities are low
and displaced populations are returning to their homes.

The toll may be especially pronounced at local
levels where the reach of public services is most
limited. So we need to be vigilant about the toll that
HIV/AIDS takes on capacity at all levels of
Government and redouble our efforts to provide
support.

Ten years ago we feared that AIDS incidence in
military forces would be higher than in the civilian
population and that peacekeepers would become a
vector of transmission of AIDS. One important reason
that such transmission has not occurred is the
widespread adoption of effective HIV policies by many
national uniformed services. For example, the military
in Senegal has conducted a programme of prevention,
care and treatment that has been embraced throughout
the ranks, from senior leaders to the junior-most
troops. The United States is proud to have partnered
with more than 70 militaries worldwide to develop
similar programmes, which have allowed nearly
3 million troops and family members to be tested and
counselled, and more than 80,000 family members to
participate in programmes to prevent mother-to-child
transmission of HIV/AIDS.

We also welcome the Secretary-General's
commitment to ensure that United Nations mission
commanders lead by example on HIV/AIDS awareness
and prevention among peacekeeping personnel,
including by promoting mandatory induction training,
peer education, voluntary and confidential counselling
and testing and providing male and female condoms
and post-exposure prophylaxis kits. We urge that these
efforts be robust and consistent across United Nations
missions and mission staff.

As the Secretary-General has rightly noted, "[t]he
HIV response faces a moment of truth" (A/65/797, para. 4). On the one hand, we have witnessed
substantial progress. Global HIV/AIDS incidence has
been declining and treatment is expanding. In
sub-Saharan Africa, new anti-retroviral treatments have
saved hundreds of thousands of lives. We may also
stand at the cusp of a breakthrough, with the discovery
of a cutting-edge anti-retroviral treatment that could
help treat the disease in those living with HIV/AIDS
just as it serves to prevent them from transmitting the
virus. We can trace this progress to a surge in global
health financing and initiatives, a topic we will address
tomorrow in the General Assembly. The vast majority
of countries also explicitly acknowledge human rights
in their national AIDS strategies, and 92 per cent of
countries report that they have programmes to reduce
HIV-related stigma and discrimination.

Those are impressive achievements but far too
many people, especially the most vulnerable, still die
unnecessarily from a preventable disease. We still lack
resources globally to meet the worldwide demand for
prevention, treatment, care and support. The United
States remains a global leader in this area, through our
direct support for anti-retroviral treatments, our
increased support for mother-child health, our
capacity-building partnerships with other Member
States and our historic multi-year pledge of $4 billion
to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria. We are proud to have made the founding
pledge to the Global Fund and we remain today its
largest single donor.

In creating the President' s Emergency Plan for
AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) in 2003, the United States took
another transformative step. PEPFAR is not just the
largest component of the United States Global Health
Initiative; it is the largest international response to a
single disease that any country has ever undertaken. In
conjunction with other efforts, it has transformed the
lives of millions of people living with HIV in the
developing world. But we cannot do it alone, and we
are not doing it alone. Other donor countries must step
up and do more. Affected countries must mobilize their
own resources to fight this scourge and ensure
treatment for their people.
In this regard, let me congratulate particularly the
Government of Gabon for the good news that it will
increase funding for HIV/AIDS programming by

11-3654]
150 per cent. That generosity will help save lives, and
ultimately strengthen international peace and security.

We dare not be complacent. Our commitment to
fighting HIV is not just a moral imperative; it is also a
life-saving investment that bolsters security and
underpins prosperity. Today let us all honour the
commitments the Council made 11 years ago, not just
in our adoption today of resolution 1983 (2011) but by
redoubling our efforts to fight the global HIV/AIDS
pandemic. It is a challenge that can only be met by us
all together.

