Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I would like to thank
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his comprehensive
briefing. He identified the main challenges that lie
ahead on the political track. As his mission comes to an
end, I would like also to express our deep appreciation
to him for his tireless efforts in finding a political
solution to the Syrian crisis. Before sharing our views
on the way forward, I would like to provide an update
on the implementation of the Idlib memorandum.
The memorandum signed one month ago at the Sochi
Turkish-Russian summit a month ago stabilized the
situation in Idlib province. Thanks to the memorandum,
it was possible to preserve the de-escalation status
of Idlib.

Since my most recent statement to the Council on
the situation in Syria (see S/PV.8355), considerable
progress has been made in the implementation of the
memorandum on the following points: the cessation
of hostilities has been established; the borders of the
demilitarized zone in Idlib have been determined; the
withdrawal of heavy weapons from the demilitarized
zone has been completed ahead of the 10 October
deadline; significant progress has been achieved on the
withdrawal of radical groups from the demilitarized
zone - we are continuing our efforts to that end - and
we are working on the modalities of coordinated patrols
together with Russia as well as on other measures
aimed at strengthening the sustainability of the
ceasefire regime.

Thanks to the memorandum, further bloodshed
and a humanitarian tragedy in Idlib have been averted.
Relieved over the improvement of the situation on the
ground, tens of thousands of Syrians have started to
return to their homes in Idlib. Following months of fear
in anticipation of a full-scale assault, the memorandum
has given civilians in Idlib respite and raised their
hopes for a peaceful solution. The memorandum has

also proven that the situation in Idlib can be addressed
through effective diplomacy.

The de-escalation status of Idlib remains crucial to
prevent a humanitarian catastrophe, to pave the way for
the advancement of the political process, and to create
the necessary conditions to fight terrorism effectively
and in line with international humanitarian law. Our
priority now is to seize on this momentum to advance
the political process. With that understanding, we
strongly and actively support Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura's efforts to establish the constitutional
committee as soon as possible. We are working closely
with the other Astana guarantors and Mr. De Mistura
towards that end.

The constitutional committee requires a credible,
inclusive and balanced structure. That is essential
to its legitimacy. The committee will be the key to
achieving the ultimate goal of finding a negotiated
political solution in Syria, in line with resolution 2254
(2015). Its work will pave the way for holding free and
fair elections under United Nations supervision, with
the participation of all Syrians, including those who
are living outside the country. Any attempt to design
a political system for Syria without Syrian ownership
would lack legitimacy and be detrimental. The
political process must be owned and led by the Syrians
themselves, and not by others deciding on their behalf.

We reiterate our call on the Council and the overall
international community to support our endeavours
and expedite the political process. In order to give fresh
impetus to the efforts to put an end to the conflict,
Turkey has introduced the idea of hosting a quadrilateral
summit with the participation of France, Germany and
Russia. Our main objective is to contribute to efforts
to find a convergence of ideas to reach a sustainable
political solution. Talks among the four countries to set
the date and agenda of the summit are under way. We
believe that this initiative will be helpful in supporting
the efforts to reach a political settlement.

The conflict in Syria is in its eighth year, at the
cost of hundreds of thousands oflives lost and millions
forcibly displaced both within and beyond Syria's
borders. There is an urgent need for concerted efforts
to end this colossal human tragedy, meet the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people and pave the way
for lasting peace. Turkey will continue its efforts to
achieve a viable political solution in Syria, a solution
that is owned and led by Syrians and based on a lasting
ceasefire on the ground that allows for a meaningful
political process. It is high time that the Security
Council puts its weight behind efforts to that end.

Lastly, I do not consider the regime's representative
my legitimate counterpart. I will therefore not dignify
his delusional accusations with a response.

