Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by congratulating
the representative of Indonesia on his successful
presidency of the Security Council in the month of May
and to wish Kuwait an excellent presidency during the
month of June. I would like to assure you, Sir, of the
full support of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea.

I would like to thank Mr. Francois Lounceny
Fall, Special Representative and Head of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA),
and his team for informing us in a comprehensive
and illustrative way about UNOCA's activities, in
compliance with the mandate that established the Office
in order to strengthen the role of the United Nations in
promoting peace and security in Central Africa, as well
as the use of good offices, preventive diplomacy and
mediation for conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
the peaceful settlement of disputes.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea, as a member
of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), expresses its sincere congratulations and
appreciation for the arduous and dynamic work being
carried out by Mr. Fall as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa. His tireless travels
to the countries of the subregion enable him to keep
abreast of the sociopolitical situations in each country.
In that regard, we encourage Mr. Fall and his team to
continue to pursue their political mission to strengthen
the capacity of regional and subregional organizations
to prevent conflicts in the Central African region and
to push the parties to any dispute whose continuation
might endanger the maintenance of international peace
and security to seek, first and foremost, to settle their
dispute by peaceful means.

Our Government will therefore continue to support
UNOCA as it strives to foster synergies in order to
promote bilateral cooperation among neighbouring
countries and to strengthen cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations in the areas of peace,
security and conflict prevention, in particular with
the African Union, ECCAS, the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community, and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission.

With regard to the briefing by the Special
Representative, we welcome the positive developments
recently seen in the region, such as the holding of
peaceful elections and the transfer of power in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and efforts to
implement the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. I take this opportunity to thank the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for hosting the forty-eighth ministerial meeting of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, which took place
from 27 to 31 May in Kinshasa.

We further welcome the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, signed between the Government of that
country and 14 armed groups, facilitated by the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation, and the current
return to normalcy in Burundi, whereby the country has
adopted a new Constitution, put in place measures for
the holding of elections by 2020 and made considerable
contributions of troops to peacekeeping missions, all
of which exemplify the spirit of reconciliation and
tolerance prevailing in Burundi.

The Government of Equatorial Guinea issued
a communique on 8 January in which it strongly
condemned and rejected the attempted coup d'etat
and the acts of violence perpetrated in Libreville on
7January.

We are aware that the humanitarian situation
in Cameroon is aggravated by the influx of refugees
as a result of the situation in some neighbouring
countries and the subregion, including the persistent
criminal activity of non-State actors. In that regard,
we applaud the various measures that have been
adopted by the Cameroonian authorities to address this
humanitarian and security situation, including, among
other measures, the emergency humanitarian plan to
provide assistance to internally displaced persons and
refugees in the country and the National Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Committee, which is
responsible for the integration of former members of
armed groups in the country.

I take this opportunity once again to recall the
adoption of resolution 2457 (2019), which exemplified
the commitment and support of the international
community, through the Security Council, to Africa's
efforts to achieve sustainable peace and stability.
Achieving the objective of the Silencing the Guns in
Africa by 2020 initiative would contribute significantly
to saving successive generations from the scourge of
war and to the African Union's efforts to ensure an
integrated, peaceful, secure and prosperous Africa.

Building on the same vision, as we approach 2020,
when we will commemorate the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the twenty-
fifth anniversary of the Beijing Platform for Action, the
tenth anniversary of the establishment of UN-Women
and resolution 2457 (2019), aimed at Silencing the
Guns in Africa by 2020, I call on Member States to
make 2020 a turning point in the women and peace and
security agenda.

In conclusion, we appreciate the measures
implemented by the Governments of the region to
address the humanitarian situation. However, the
numbers of internally displaced persons, refugees and
asylum-seekers in the region is worrisome. Displaced
persons must be able to find sustainable means of
subsistence, and the best solution to that end is to return
to their homes, with due consideration given to their
dignity and rights. Moreover, their plight is aggravated
by the destabilizing activities of armed groups and
the constant attacks on their communities, which
remain exposed to severe climate change, malnutrition
and Ebola, which require the provision of adequate
technical, health and financial assistance.

