Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful to the
Secretary-General, the Acting President of the General
Assembly, the President of the Economic and Social
Council and the President of the International Court
of Justice for the pertinent information that they have
presented to us today. We commend their commitment
to multilateralism and the United Nations system.
Likewise, we express our appreciation to the delegation
of China for convening such an important open debate
on a matter of Vital importance to all States Members
of our Organization.

The consolidation of the multilateral system
through the establishment and strengthening of the
United Nations was one of the great achievements of
the international community during the twentieth
century, and safeguarding that achievement is one of
the great challenges that we face in the twenty-first
century. The multilateral system and multilateralism
are indispensable for the realization of the three pillars
of the United Nations: human rights, peace and security
and development, which make up the backbone of our
Organization and are interconnected and mutually
reinforcing of one another. The multilateral approach,
and in particular the various parts of the United Nations,
offers the best means to tackle the major common
challenges faced by humankind today, namely, climate
change, refugee and migrant crises, the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and,
in the scope of peace and security, the nuclear threat,
the use of weapons of mass destruction, by both State
and non-State actors, terrorism, transnational organized
crime and extremist rhetoric, among others.

In that regard, the main strength of multilateralism
derives from the degree of attachment to, and respect
for, the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. By contrast, the main threat derives
from a lack of attachment to, and respect for, the
Charter. The international community must renew its
commitment to the implementation of the Charter, while
condemning a la carte multilateralism, by which some
countries choose - as if from a menu - the aspects of
the international system to which they wish to adhere.
One cannot advocate for human rights and denounce
the main organ of our Organization on the issue. One
cannot refer to refugees and migrants as a problem and
not participate in the greatest collective effort in our
history to ensure orderly, safe and regular migration.
Climate change cannot be tackled if the main pollutant
is removed from the most relevant agreement on the
matter in history.

Turning now to the issue of peace and security, we
recognize that there are many complex challenges that
the Security Council faces in fulfilling its mandate.
However, we believe that the threats that truly jeopardize
the efforts of the Council and of our Organization to
maintain international peace and security are linked
to the insufficient implementation of the mechanisms
provided for in the Charter of the United Nations and
to the use of unilateral actions, particularly by the
major Powers.

As I have underscored, those unilateral actions
have led to Government vacuums and weakened
the forces of law and order and security. Moreover,
humanitarian crises have been unleashed and terrorist
groups and irregular combatants have proliferated,
finding new spaces to commit destabilizing acts and
crimes against humanity. These situations, in turn,
now take up the lion's share of the Council's agenda of
work. Any measure adopted unilaterally by one State to
the detriment of another, with the use of force or other
coercive measures, is outside the framework of the
Security Council and is therefore illegal and contrary
to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

In that regard, I would like to highlight what former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said on 3 September
2013 on the situation in Syria:
(spoke in English)

"As I have repeatedly said, the Security Council
has primary responsibility for international peace
and security That's my appeal, that everything
should be handled within the framework of the
United Nations Charter. The use of force is lawful
only when in exercise of self-defence in accordance
with Article 51 of the United Nations Charter and
or when the Security Council approves such action.
That is the firm principle of the United Nations."

(spoke in Spanish)

Bolivia categorically rejects the imposition of
unilateral measures, since they are a flagrant violation
of multilateralism and a serious threat to international
order, as they constitute illegal measures that extend
the jurisdiction and domestic legislation of one State
over another, thereby violating the principles of the
equality, sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.

Another threat to multilateralism that is also linked
to the lack of implementation of the purposes and
principles of the Charter is the instrumentalization of
the system and the blurred lines between the mandates
and prerogatives of United Nations organs. In order
to confront the great challenges to humankind, the
various organs and agencies of the Organization must
base their actions on the principles of complementarity
and coordination, not interference or the duplication of
tasks. The Organization is only as strong as the weakest
of its organs.

Likewise, with a view to improving its work,
the Council should encourage decision-making by
consensus, while strengthening dialogue and the
effective use of mediation, prevention, conciliation and
good offices for the peaceful settlement of disputes.

Bolivia believes that, in order to strengthen
multilateralism, it is also imperative to work on the
reform of the United Nations, including the Security
Council. The Council must be more effective, efficient,
inclusive and, above all, democratic, while ensuring that
its procedures and working methods are transparent and
that both its composition and the number of its members
are a legitimate expression of the 193 countries it
represents - avoiding the regional overrepresentation
that perpetuates a kind of institutional neocolonialism
and eliminating the prerogative of the veto, which
is anachronistic and unacceptable in the twenty-
first century.
In conclusion, we believe it is essential to create
spaces for dialogue, like the one we have today and
hope to see again in the future, in order to debate and
share positions with countries that may be questioning
the benefits of the multilateral system.

