Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): At the outset, Djibouti
would like to express its gratitude to the delegation
of the Arab Republic of Egypt for its leadership in
organizing this important debate ofthe Security Council
on the theme "United Nations-African Union peace and
security cooperation: Chapter VIII application and the
future of the African Peace and Security Architecture".
We would also like to thank the presidency for the
concept note (S/2016/428, annex) drafted in preparation
for this meeting, which helps frame the issues and
sharpen our focus on key achievements as well as on
the serious deficiencies that need to be remedied. We
would also like to express our appreciation for this
morning's very useful briefings.

Djibouti aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
sets out the international consensus on global-regional
relationships. United Nations support in managing
conflicts in Africa has become increasingly robust over
the past 25 years, rising from two United Nations-led
peacekeeping operations in 1990 to 15 in 2015. The
missions in Africa constitute the majority of United
Nations peacekeeping missions worldwide and have
served as an important proving ground for United
Nations engagement in managing conflict. What
started largely as improvisation, to quote a former
United Nations official, has evolved tremendously,
and the African Union Peace and Security Council has
proved a reliable partner on that journey.

As the concept note (S/2016/428, annex) rightly
points out, and as echoed by many speakers today,
the changing nature of conflict on the continent and
the operational questions it raises add another layer
of complexity to the cohesiveness of our global links,
which have often been seriously tested in the past. How
do we engage with non-State actors that do not respect
humanitarian law? How do we deal with the increase in
illegal activities and violent insurgencies? How do we
ensure that the peacekeeping institutions, the regional
economic communities, the African Union and the
United Nations do indeed see their relationships as
partnerships rather than a competition for which goes
first and which leads in which process? Drawing on
lessons learned and building on the pertinent views of
many stakeholders and on the outcome of today's open
debate, we should identify concrete ways for further
strengthening an integrated worldwide system for
cooperative action, as envisioned in Chapter VIII of
the Charter.

(spoke in French)

In 2015, the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) considered
it essential to improve cooperation between the United

Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
including through recommendations on strengthening
conflict prevention capabilities and mediation. It also
recommended emphasizing the importance of political
solutions and joint cooperation on such solutions
in order to ensure that the resulting broad range of
partners would enable potential crises to be detected
well in advance.

The forthcoming signing of the framework
document for the 10-year strategic partnership document
on peace and security between the United Nations and
the African Union; Agenda 2063; and the campaign
for "Silencing the guns in Africa by 2020", combined
with the annual joint consultations since 2007 between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council constitute a major institutional
framework for cooperation between the two entities.
We have noted with satisfaction the implementation
of this framework for cooperation with the United
Nations through the creation of several regional and
subregional organization liaison offices and the recent
signing, in Djibouti in November 2015, ofa partnership
framework between the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the United Nations. Thanks to such
mechanisms, cooperation at the inter-organizational
level should be another resource to take advantage
of. Such tools should inevitably result in developing
shared strategies founded on joint assessments, solid
decision-making mechanisms based on consultation
and information-sharing, and follow-up arrangements
that enable cooperation on planning and operations
throughout the conflict cycle. Only with productive
partnerships can we improve collective security.

The deployment of Blue Helmets, 50 per cent of
them Africans, in a number of peacekeeping operations
in various parts of the continent clearly demonstrates
the commitment of African Member States and of the
African Union and its regional components and member
States to contribute, in complementarity with the United
Nations, to collective security as it was envisaged by
the Charter. The examples of cooperation with the
African Union are many and varied - the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the joint missions in the Central African Republic and
Mali, as well as the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), are illustrations of that partnership.

Since its deployment in 2007, AMISOM, with
its 22,000 soldiers and police, has contributed to a
significant improvement in the security situation
in Somalia. While Somalia remains fragile owing
to the continued existence of areas of insecurity, a
great deal of progress still remains to be made on the
humanitarian front. In order to provide AMISOM. with
logistical support, and in keeping with carrying out its
mandate effectively, the United Nations established the
United Nations Support Office for the African Union
Mission in Somalia, aimed at strengthening AMISOM's
limited operational and financial capacity. However,
despite that support, the lack of force multipliers, such
as helicopters, has been no help at all to the African
force's task on the ground. To that we have to add the
upcoming 20 per cent cut in funding from the European
Union, which will have a severe effect on the Mission
and risks becoming a serious setback to everything that
has been and still remains to be achieved.

It is urgent that we find fertile ground for increased
synergies, a harmonious African Union-United Nations
partnership for preventing, mediating and managing
violent conflicts and providing opportunities for more
joint efforts to increase resource mobilization. In that
regard, greater flexibility in interpreting Chapter VIII
of the Charter would significantly reduce such problems
in matters related to international peace and security.

Seventy per cent of the world's crises are
concentrated in Africa, and the Security Council devotes
two thirds of its deliberations to them. It is therefore
vital to the continent's security, and to international
peace and security generally, that we identify long-
term solutions. To achieve that, we cannot economize
on the importance of regular, collective reflection,
particularly through holding regular meetings of the
United Nations-African Union Joint Task Force on
Peace and Security.

