Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, I would like to pay a tribute to
your great personal and professional qualities which we
all deeply value. I would also like to congratulate the
Ambassador of the Gambia for his work last month, and
I wish most cordially to bid welcome to Mrs. Louise
Frechette, the Deputy Secretary-General, and wish her
success in her sensitive job.

On behalf of the Argentine Government, we would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report. It gives
us an important analysis of the historic and current
sources of the conflicts in Africa and provides proposals
to overcome them. We cannot remain indifferent to the

 
challenge these proposals imply. We are morally duty-
bound to act rapidly, generously and jointly.

We would have to be blind to deny the complexity of
the African situations. We would have to be equally blind,
and certainly unfair, not to appreciate the efforts of most
African countries to strengthen their democracies, promote
human rights and modernize their economies. Similarly, our
assessment would be incomplete if we did not recall once
again that Africa, like Latin America, was the scene of
cruel conflicts during the cold war. These conflicts
invariably left a legacy of backwardness and
discouragement. Fortunately, this situation is changing.

In the economic area, tangible results have been
achieved. Despite the heavy burden of external debt, in
1996 the African economy grew by more than 4 per cent,
which was the highest growth rate in the last 20 years.
Similarly, many African countries have successfully
undertaken thorough reforms of their economies. The
commitment entered into by seven African Heads of State
and United States President Clinton in the Entebbe
Declaration of 25 March 1998 bears eloquent testimony in
this regard.

As the Minister for Foreign Affairs Guido di Tella
stated in his letter to the President of the Security Council
of 22 September 1997, the causes of conflict in Africa are
wide-ranging and call for comprehensive responses. We
concur with the premise, contained in the report of the
Secretary-General, that these conflicts cannot be settled in
an isolated fashion, but must be approached in a manner
that comprehensively deals with peace and security,
sustainable development, democracy and good governance.
Argentina is fully prepared to do all in its power to assist
in the implementation of the proposals of the Secretary-
General and to cooperate with the African States.

These complex political and economic situations are
not isolated realities, however. For its part, Argentina, after
decades of political instability, has re-established democracy
by making sacrifices. Therefore we understand and support
the determination of the peoples and leaders of Africa to
live in peace under the rule of law.

Argentina benefits from this trend towards change. It
has not only strengthened its relations with many African
countries but has also built up extremely fruitful trading
arrangements. The 1997 figures show a 70 per cent increase
in exports and a 50 per cent increase in imports as
compared to 1996. This provides encouraging prospects for
growth in trade.

Argentina has participated in and supported the
African decolonization process since it began in the
1950s. It has established diplomatic, economic and
cultural relations with the new independent States.

In the multilateral sphere, and in a field in which we
have valuable experience, Argentina, together with
interested African and American countries, has supported
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
South Atlantic. Further, as an active member in the Zone
of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic since it
was established in 1986, and as the venue for the fifth
ministerial meeting, Argentina, together with the 21
African States members of the Zone, is promoting the
values of democracy, development, political pluralism and
the defence of human rights.

In keeping with the aforementioned approach of
linking peace and development, Argentina has been active
in Africa and has tried to make contributions to the
maintenance of peace, humanitarian assistance, good
governance and technical cooperation for development.

Argentina has participated in peacekeeping
operations in Angola, Mozambique and the Western
Sahara, and it continues to offer to provide training
through the Buenos Aires peacekeepers training centre, as
well as to exchange experiences with African countries
regarding this delicate work.

In the area of humanitarian assistance, either through
"White Helmets" missions or directly, Argentina has
participated and will participate in the efforts to
consolidate peace in Angola, Rwanda and Sierra Leone.

As for good governance, Argentina provided
electoral observers for the first election in South Africa
with free and universal suffrage, which put an end to
apartheid, for the referendum on Eritrean self-
determination and for the legislative elections in Algeria
in June 1997. We stand ready to cooperate in the future
when assistance is requested.

At the ministerial meeting of Security Council
member States on 25 September 1997, Minister for
Foreign Affairs di Tella reiterated Argentina's
commitment to cooperate actively in the development of
Africa. In this connection, Argentina is currently involved
in the implementation of a series of programmes of
cooperation with Africa. These range from training in
farming and ranching, the eradication of diseases,
computer science and State reform. Regarding the latter,

 

from 4 to 5 May, within the framework of cooperation with
the sub-Saharan countries of Africa, a seminar organized by
Argentina will be held in Harare, Zimbabwe, in order to
exchange experiences on the process of State reform and on
bilateral cooperation.

I cannot conclude my statement without expressing the
Argentine Republic's appreciation to Africa. Without the
resolute and substantial commitment Africa has made to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, almost no changes in any such important areas
such as decolonization, disarmament, the law of the sea,
human rights and development - to mention just a few -
could ever have been achieved by this Organization.

Finally, allow me to congratulate Mrs. Ogata and
Mrs. Junod, who represent the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for their valuable
contributions to this open meeting of the Security Council.
I would also like to congratulate the Secretariat staff who
worked on the report of the Secretary-General.

