Mr. Danforth (United States of America): With
great respect for my friend the representative of
Algeria, the draft resolution that has been submitted to
the Council is not the road map to peace. It is yet one
more step on the road to nowhere.

Many speakers today have spoken about the cycle
of violence, and that is exactly what it is. One side
acts, the other side reacts, then more reaction, more
violence, and round and round it goes. Unfortunately,
the United Nations, both the General Assembly and the
Security Council, instead of saying "Stop it" to both
sides, acts as the adversary of Israel and the
cheerleader of the Palestinians. That is not the way to
peace. That is not the road map to peace.

Let us discuss briefly the facts before us. The
problem of Qassam rockets is not a new one. It goes
back a long time. This past summer, attacks began to
inflict casualties on Israeli citizens. Last June, those
rockets killed two Israelis, one of whom was three
years old. Last Wednesday, 29 September, Qassam
rockets killed two Israeli children, one aged two and
one aged four. Following that act, Hamas claimed
credit for what it called victory over the enemy, the
enemy being a two-year-old child and a four-year-old
child.

After two years of attacks, after the death of
children, it is not unreasonable that Israel felt the need
to respond. It did, and the cycle of violence continues.
So that today, two more rockets have been fired into
Israeli territory.

Qassam rockets are easy to produce. They are
easy to deploy. They are easy to launch, and they have
become a weapon of choice for terrorists. So now, the
issue is, all right, where do we go from here? It is the
position of the United States delegation that the
Council should not simply adopt resolution after
resolution - which are all one-sided - but that the
Council should insist that, again, the road map is the
way to peace.

Obviously, if Palestinians terrorists shoot at
Israelis, Israelis are going to shoot back. What the
Security Council should say - if it says anything -
should be said to both sides. And the message should
be "Stop the shooting and return to the road map".

