Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me begin by expressing
the appreciation of my delegation for your personal
efforts, Sir, in leading the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and for holding this open debate.
I also thank the Under-Secretary-General and
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs and the
representative of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for their statements.

Pakistan aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

The debate on global efforts to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors is important and timely. It needs to
be situated within the larger non-proliferation context.
Resolution 1540 (2004) has emerged as an important
instrument in the global non-proliferation architecture,
as it seeks to prevent non-State actors from acquiring
or using weapons of mass destruction. It has made a
useful contribution to the advancement of our shared
non-proliferation goals.

While two recent successes, first in the
Disarmament Commission and then the agreement
reached on objectives and the agenda for a fourth
special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament, are encouraging. However, other aspects
of the disarmament and non-proliferation landscape
do not evoke similar optimism. Some nuclear-weapon
States are not willing to give up their large inventories
of nuclear weapons or their modernization programmes,
even as they pursue non-proliferation with great zeal,
purposively ignoring the fact that disarmament and
non-proliferation are organically linked.

Further progress may be impeded by recent
developments, including the fact that one of the five
permanent mebers of the Security Council has vowed
to greatly strengthen and expand nuclear capabilities
by outmatching and outlasting potential competitors.
That would renew a nuclear arms race, in flagrant
disregard of the basic principles enshrined at the first
special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament.

Anotherkey challenge to long-held non-proliferation
norms and rules remains the granting of discriminatory
waivers to some nations, thereby creating exceptions
based on power or profit motives. Such special
arrangements carry obvious proliferation risks and open
up the possibility of the diversion of material intended
for peaceful uses to military purposes, in addition, of
course, to undermining regional strategic stability.

With regard to the implementation of the resolution,
the importance of staying one step ahead of non-State
actors who seek to kill and maim innocent people by
using weapons of mass destruction, especially in view
of the rapid advancements in science and technology,
cannot be overstated. Effective cooperation is the only
way to proceed in that matter. It is imperative to leverage
the cooperative approach and the spirit of national
ownership that resolution 1540 (2004) engenders.

Pakistan has been a consistent supporter of the
objectives ofresolution1540(2004), and our commitment
to its implementation is, we believe, exemplary. We
have submitted five national implementation reports,
the latest only last month. Over the years, Pakistan has
acquired considerable experience and expertise in the
safe and secure utilization of nuclear energy, as well as
in the application of chemistry and biology for peaceful
purposes.

With regard to assistance in particular, our latest
implementation report notes Pakistan's readiness
to offer assistance, in collaboration with the 1540
Committee, to interested States for capacity-building,
technical assistance and training in the following areas:
regulatory infrastructure in export controls and the
safety and security of nuclear and radioactive materials;
commodity identification training for enforcement
officials; training for licensing officers; internal
compliance; industry outreach and public awareness-
raising; and academic and specialized courses in the
field of nuclear safety and nuclear security, assistance
and protection courses related to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction, as well as chemical safety and security.

Pakistan also hosted a two-day regional seminar
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in
Islamabad in March 2017, in which representatives
from 18 countries and officials from the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the OPCW and INTERPOL
actively participated. The seminar also emphasized
the key role of assistance aimed at strengthening the
implementation of the resolution.

However, the real value of such assistance will
remain limited at best until we transform the process
from one that is donor-driven to the one that caters
to the actual needs of the States in need of help and
assistance.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that as the Nuclear
Suppliers Group (NSG) deliberates on the legal, technical
and political aspects of the membership of countries that
are not party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), it must establish and adhere to
transparent, objective and non-discriminatory criteria
that ensures equal treatment of non-NPT applicants for
the Group's membership, thereby strengthening, and
not weakening, the non-proliferation regime.

Pakistan's strong credentials as an active partner
in global non-proliferation efforts has established its
eligibility to become a member of the NSG.

