Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): I would like to
begin by expressing our appreciation for your timely
initiative in holding this open debate about piracy
as a threat to international peace and security. Viet
Nam associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Piracy has been posing persistent challenges to
maritime transport, and thereby to security and stability
in many regions, for hundreds of years. It has, however,
developed a more aggressive dimension in recent years
and has in fact become a threat to global security, to
States' socioeconomic development, to international
transactions and navigation, and to the safety and well-
being of seafarers.

Viet Nam itself is a victim of piracy. Combating
piracy is now an important focus for both the public and
private sectors, and for States as well as regional and
international organizations. Concrete facts and figures
underline the necessity of a global and comprehensive
approach to dealing with piracy, as we are all aware.
According to the International Maritime Organization,
in 2011, the number of acts of piracy and armed robbery
against ships that occurred or were attempted was 544,
up 81.3 per cent from 2008, when the Council addressed
the issue of piracy in a substantive manner for the first
time. Piracy is also a matter of serious concern in the
South China Sea.

Faced with such a threat to international peace and
security, the international community, including the
Security Council, has taken action and has achieved
positive initial results. We commend the work of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
the trust fund, the relevant and related United Nations
bodies, Member States and regional organizations. In
our view, there are a number of factors to which that
initial success can be attributed: first, the political will
of local and related international partners; secondly,
improved coordination and capacity-building among
national and regional contact points; and thirdly, the
application of specific technical guidance and standards
for transport management, self-protection measures
and situational awareness.

We should also pay adequate attention to the root
causes of piracy offshore, including sufficient and fair
access to education, job opportunities and individual
development. Respect for local concerns and compliance
with international law, including mandates provided
by the Security Council, are also important for our
common success. In order to fight that global threat,
those lessons should be further shared within cross-
regional mechanisms for wider practical application.

In South-East Asia, Viet Nam has actively
contributed to regional efforts against piracy, including
technical cooperation between the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and eight other
countries within the framework of the Regional
Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and
Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia, through its
information-sharing centre. Last October, ASEAN held
its third Maritime Forum and first Expanded Maritime
Forum with other countries participating in the East
Asia summit framework, in which maritime security,
including piracy, was comprehensively addressed. Viet
Nam's legal system, including its law of the sea, provides
for the criminalization of piracy. Our coordination of
national anti-piracy activities was streamlined through
a decision of the Prime Minister, issued in January
2008, on the basis of which Viet Nam authorities,
including its maritime police, are participating in
regional mechanisms. Viet Nam's navy has also taken
part injoint anti-piracy exercises with our international
partners in recent years. We look forward to closer
cooperation with international partners in our common
goal of fighting piracy.

