Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): I wish to thank the
United States delegation for convening this open debate
on children and armed conflict, an issue to which
Portugal attaches great importance.

I thank today's briefers for their presentations. I
would particularly like to take this opportunity to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict for her briefing and
to commend her tireless efforts in contributing to the
advancement of the agenda on children and armed
conflict.

Portugal fully supports the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign with a view to ending the scourge of the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflicts
by 2016, both by Governments and non-State actors.
Much has been done, and we value the significant
steps taken to prevent recruitment and to end the use
of children by armed forces and groups. Action plans
have proved to be excellent tools to engage with armed
forces and organized armed groups. However, political
commitment per se is not enough. Compliance is also
required.

The Council adopted resolution 1261 (1999), its
first resolution on children and armed conflict, 15 years
ago, recognizing that this issue has serious implications
for international peace and security. We are fully
convinced that the issue of children and armed conflict
has serious implications for international peace and
security, and we believe that the protection of children
in such situations requires the commitment of the
international community as a whole.

Despite the significant progress made in advancing
the agenda with the adoption of a number of resolutions
and the creation of mechanisms to better address
the issue, the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/339), presented in the Chamber today, is blunt
in describing the appalling reality of children affected
by conflicts and as one of the main victims of the
changing nature of warfare and related human rights
violations and abuses, who hear the impact of the use of
explosives, air strikes and terror tactics.

It is extremely worrying that the Secretary-General
notes that the situation has deteriorated in a number of
countries, including in the Central African Republic,
South Sudan, Syria and northern Nigeria. The abduction
of more than 200 schoolgirls by Boko Haram in Nigeria
in April is an appalling incident that serves to stress the
need to continue to address the issue of children and
armed conflict.

In recent years, the Security Council has consistently
underscored the need to hold accountable persistent
perpetrators of grave violations against children. We
hope that, in the near future, all perpetrators of such
grave violations, including the abduction of children
and the denial of humanitarian access, will be listed in
the annexes to the Secretary-General's reports.

The normative framework for the protection of
children in situations of armed conflict must continue.
Portugal believes that the Council should continue to
address situations of concern, while striving to find the
best way to promote the protection of children affected
by armed conflict.

We are gravely concerned about the widespread
and intentional attacks against schools, teachers
and students as an instrument of war. Schools and
education facilities are now part of the battlefield, as
they are systematically being used as bases, barracks,
weapon caches, detention centres and even torture
chambers by regular armed forces and by armed
non-State opposition groups. Education infrastructure
has become a strategic target of attack, putting children
and teachers at risk and denying children their right to
education. That pattern needs to be reversed.

Against that backdrop, Portugal supports the
development of the Lucens Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict, which we have co-sponsored, as a
concrete tool to protect educational facilities and limit
the impact of conflict on students' safety and their right
to education.

Those who abuse children in times of conflict
cannot go unpunished. The need to tackle impunity
regarding persistent perpetrators, already clearly
identified, should certainly guide our work in the near
future. We are referring to individuals or entities that
have been identified as persistent perpetrators for five
years or more, most of which are non-State actors.
The Council needs to address those difficult cases
and ensure that such individuals are accounted for and
sanctioned. If that is not done, the Council's credibility
will be at stake.

The International Criminal Court continues to play
a fundamental deterrent role, one complementary to the
roles of tribunals at national and international levels, by
holding perpetrators accountable and by investigating
and prosecuting those responsible for committing
atrocities against children.

With regard to peacekeeping operations, Portugal
would like to emphasize the importance of including
child-protection advisers in the mandates of missions. In
addition to child-protection advisers, it is fundamental
to ensure appropriate predeployment training in child
protection for peacekeepers and to provide effective
screening of peacekeepers to ensure that individuals
who have committed grave violations against children
do not serve the United Nations. United Nations
peacekeepers are the face of the Organization on the
ground and must reflect the values of respect and the
protection of human rights.

The harmful and widespread impact of armed
conflict on children and its undeniable long-term
consequences for durable peace, security and
development are widely recognized. In 1996, Graca
Machel said,

"The impact of armed conflict on children
must be everyone's concern and is everyone's
responsibility" (A/51/306, para. 317).
It still is our responsibility to take collective action to
overcome this scourge and to prevent children from
being affected by conflict.

