Mr. Manz (Austria): In adding our voice to those of
the other troop-contributing countries that have requested
you to call this formal meeting, Mr. President, we wanted
to underline two things. First, we are convinced that the
consultation mechanism put in place a little more than a
year ago was an important step in the right direction. And,
secondly, we strongly feel that the experience gained during
the past year clearly points to the need to improve our
performance.

I should like to stress that it is our common
performance that has to improve. It is not only the
mechanism established by the presidential statement of 4
November 1994 as such that limits the dialogue between
the Security Council and the troop-contributing countries,
although there are some obvious shortcomings. I have to
note that the troop-contributing countries also have perhaps
not always made the best use of these opportunities,
allowing these meetings to remain little more than briefing
sessions. While it is undoubtedly true that most of these
meetings were called at a late stage, when the Council and
the Secretariat had already finalized their deliberations, in
most cases the troop contributors could have certainly done
better in engaging the Security Council presidency and the
Secretariat in a substantial debate. Let me add, however,
that we always appreciated the accurate information we
received from the Secretariat as well as its readiness to
respond to our questions.

We are firmly committed to United Nations peace-
keeping efforts. More than 35,000 Austrians have worn
Blue Helmets over the years. We are currently engaged in
nine peace-keeping operations. We remain convinced that
peace-keeping operations are among the finest tools to
fulfil the goals of the Charter.

It is the primary responsibility of the Security
Council to make sure that it has a full picture of the
situation and the views of all parties involved in a peace-
keeping operation before arriving at particular decisions.
Having itself served on the Council only a few years ago,
Austria is aware of the need to safeguard the
competencies of the Security Council. But every troop-
contributing country has a legitimate interest in having its
views considered by the Council when pending decisions
on a peace-keeping operation might affect its citizens
serving the United Nations. For this purpose, the present
mechanism needs improvement.
We therefore fully support the proposals worked out
by a substantial number of troop-contributing countries as
presented this morning in the statement by the Permanent
Representative of Argentina.

Given the workload of the Security Council, we
should look for the most efficient as well as the most
effective way to organize such meetings. But let there be
no doubt that we feel very strongly about the need to
strengthen the partnership between the Council and the
troop-contributing countries in our common interest.

