Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to begin by welcoming you, Mr. President, as the
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America. We are pleased to see you presiding over the
work of the Security Council for the first time. I wish
you every success. We are confident that, thanks to
your wisdom and diplomatic expertise, you will be able
to successfully lead our deliberations.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Verbeke,
Permanent Representative of Belgium and head of the
Security Council mission on the Kosovo issue, for his

outstanding role in the mission's success. I would also
like to thank him for the report (S/2007/256) he
presented today on the activities and outcome of the
Council's mission to Kosovo.

There is no doubt that the Kosovo issue is among
the most important questions before the Council this
year. The Council has been seized of this matter for
more than eight years. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo has achieved many
positive results. In that regard, it may be advisable to
look seriously into Kosovo's future status, especially in
the light of recent developments.

In that connection, the Council mission to
Pristina, Belgrade and Brussels was extremely
important and timely. Its purpose was to provide more
information to the Council on the situation in Kosovo
through first-hand knowledge of developments not
easily acquired otherwise. I believe that when the
Council adopts further measures on the future status of
Kosovo it will understand the situation and its socio-
economic dimensions and will be able to adopt
decisions wisely.

The mission reached a conclusion of which we
were already aware, namely, that there is a gap
between the positions of the two sides and that in the
present situation it has been impossible to bridge that
gap. Nevertheless, we know that it will be useful to use
as a starting point the positions expressed by both sides
concerning a permanent settlement of the situation -
including the future status of Kosovo. That must be
done through various means, including by utilizing the
modalities set out by Ambassador Ahtisaari in his
report to the Council (S/2007/168 and Add.1).

In order to deal with this situation successfully,
we should take into consideration the genesis of the
crisis, the circumstances in Kosovo and the need to
address political and security issues there. The
situation requires careful consideration by the Council.
We must work sincerely and continue to focus on our
ultimate objective: stability in Kosovo and throughout
the Balkans.

