Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
A few moments ago, the Permanent Representative
of Belgium made a statement, on behalf of the
co-penholders, regarding the humanitarian situation in
Idlib and the neighbouring areas. I would now like to
address a few points concerning the political process of
the Syrian crisis.

The co-penholders - Belgium, Germany and
Kuwait - called for the convening ofthis meeting today
because we totally believe that the Security Council has
a responsibility to address the accelerated events that
are happening in Idlib and its environs. This meeting
is a precautionary step to prevent the deterioration of
the situation in Idlib. We agree with and support the
four appeals made by the Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres as the Syrian crisis entered its ninth year.
They are as follows.

First, he urged all parties to maintain the Russian-
Turkish ceasefire agreement in Idlib. Secondly, he called
on the parties to respect international humanitarian law
and protect human rights when carrying out a military
operation. Thirdly, he insisted on the provision of
humanitarian assistance as a necessity on a sustained
basis. Fourthly, he urged increased international
support in order to achieve a political solution that
would meet the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people, as well as for support for Mr. Geir Pedersen in
the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) and the
2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

As stressed by the representative of Belgium on
behalf of the co-penholders, we condemn the terrorist
acts carried out by terrorist groups in Idlib. We also
affirm that the fight against terrorist groups cannot
exempt any belligerent party from its obligations
pursuant to international law, including respect for
the principles of distinction, proportionality and the
protection of civilians and civilian targets.

We once again condemn the deliberate attacks on
populated areas and medical facilities throughout Syria.
We call on all parties to respect the Council resolutions
on infrastructure, particularly resolution 2286 (2016),
on hospitals and health centres, and resolution 2427
(2018), on the protection of schools.

In conclusion, we underscore the importance of
making progress on the constitutional committee,
which must be balanced, credible and inclusive,
bringing together all components of civil society. We
reaffirm that there can be no military solution to the
conflict in Syria. The only solution is a political one
that realizes the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the 2012 Geneva Communique, and maintains the
unity, independence and sovereignty of Syria.

