The President (spoke in Arabic): I welcome the
presence of the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr.
Kofi Annan, at this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/lOll, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations. It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to take a decision on the draft
resolution.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

May I take it that it is the wish of the Security
Council to adopt draft resolution S/2006/lOll by
acclamation?

There being no objection, I declare the draft
resolution adopted by acclamation, as resolution 1733
(2006).

It is so decided.

I shall now make a statement on behalf of the
Council.

Mr. Secretary-General, it gives me great pleasure
to express to Your Excellency, on behalf of all Security
Council members, our profound gratitude for the
dedicated service and commitment you provided to the
United Nations as you discharged your awesome
responsibility under its Charter during your 10-year
tenure as Secretary-General. We should also like to
express our appreciation for the high professional and
personal qualities and moral leadership that you
brought to the United Nations as the world's top
diplomat.

We should further like to recall your active and
efficient support to the work of the Council and the
efforts you expended to further its objectives and for
that, Mr. Secretary-General, we express our deep
gratitude.
Ladies and Gentlemen, as we pay a special tribute
to the Secretary-General at the end of his successful
term, it is befitting to reflect in retrospect on the past
decade, one that saw global crises and challenges to the
international community.

The time the Secretary-General spent in office
was a period marked by new and special threats,
challenges and changes in the international arena. As a
global leader with creative vision, Mr. Annan rose
steadfastly to the challenge and contributed to
numerous global efforts to face those threats and
changes.

Mr. Annan guided this international Organization
through the dawn of the new millennium. A remarkable
event that marked that juncture was the adoption by the
Millennium Summit of what came to be known as the
Millennium Development Goals. Those goals set by
Member States immediately became top priorities for
the Secretary-General, who contributed more than any
one else to their realization.

Mr. Annan was at the helm of this international
Organization during the past decade, which coincided,
more or less, with the timespan between the
Organization's golden and diamond jubilees. As one
would expect, that period was marked by a great many
reviews, assessments and re-evaluations of the United
Nations. At the organizational level, the decade was
characterized by intensive and considerable attention to
reform in all its aspects. To his great credit, Mr. Annan
led the reform movement with quiet deliberation and
introduced many initiatives aimed at strengthening the
United Nations system and enhancing its capacity to
meet the major challenges of our time.

Mr. Annan received wide recognition for his
dedication to the purposes and principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. His sustained efforts
towards the maintenance of international peace and
security, towards finding lasting solutions to various
complex disputes and conflicts around the globe, and
towards the development of friendly relations among
nations, arejust a few examples.

During his tenure as Secretary-General, Mr.
Annan endeavoured relentlessly to solve the economic,
social, cultural and environmental issues facing our
world today. His great concern was to meet the
humanitarian needs of people affected by both natural
and man-made disasters. He contributed significantly
to the promotion and protection of human rights and
06-67910
fundamental freedoms for all, so that peoples of the
world can enjoy living in greater freedom.

In a few days, the current Secretary-General will
pass the baton on to his successor, Mr. Ban Ki-Moon,
who, I am confident, will also perform an exemplary
job and bring bold perspectives, new ideas and critical
and vital initiatives to the United Nations and the
international community. We pledge and commit our
strong support to him, as we have done over the years
to Mr. Annan.

Mr. Secretary-General, we extend to Your
Excellency our warmest wishes for further
advancement, health and prosperity, and wish you the
best of luck as you leave the United Nations and
continue your invaluable contribution to the resolution
of issues of concern to both the Organization and the
global community.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Secretary-
General Mr. Kofi Arman.

