The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Vice-President of Uganda, the Secretary-General,
ministers and other representatives present in the
Security Council Chamber. Your presence is an
affirmation of the importance of the subject matter to
be addressed.

On behalf of the Council, I wish to extend an
invitation under rule 37 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure to His Excellency Mr. Hoshyar
Zebari, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq.
It is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zebari
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: Members of the Council have
before them documents S/2010/632, 8/2010/633 and
S/2010/636, which contain the texts of three draft
resolutions respectively. I also wish to draw the
members' attention to the documents cited as sub-items
of the agenda of this meeting. The Security Council
will take action on those three draft resolutions prior to
hearing statements. Accordingly, I shall first put to the
vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/2010/632 and co-sponsored by Austria, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, China, France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon,
Nigeria, the Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.

A vote was taken by a show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
the Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1956 (2010).

I shall now put to the vote the second draft
resolution, contained in document S/2010/633 and co-
sponsored by Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Nigeria, the Russian
Federation, Turkey, Uganda, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.

A vote was taken by a show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
the Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1957 (2010).

I shall now put to the vote the third draft
resolution contained in document S/2010/636 and co-
sponsored by Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, China,
Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Nigeria, the Russian
Federation, Turkey, Uganda, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.

A vote was taken by a show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria, the
Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

Abstaining:
France


The President: There were 14 votes in favour,
none against and one abstention. The draft resolution
has been adopted as resolution 1958 (2010).

I have been authorized by the members of the

Council to make the following statement on their
behalf.
"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the independence, sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Iraq and
emphasizes the importance of the stability and
security of Iraq for its people, the region and the
international community.

"The Security Council supports the
inclusive political process and power-sharing
agreement reached by Iraqi leaders to form a
representative national partnership Government
that reflects the will of the Iraqi people as
displayed by the parliamentary elections of 7
March 2010. We encourage its leaders to continue
to pursue a federal, democratic, pluralistic and
unified Iraq based upon the rule of law and
respect for human rights.

"The Security Council reaffirms the need to
combat all forms of terrorism and that no terrorist
act can reverse the path towards peace,
democracy and reconstruction in Iraq, which is
supported by its people, the Government of Iraq

and the international community.

"The Security Council welcomes

positive developments in Iraq and recognizes that

the situation now existing in Iraq is significantly
different from that which existed at the time of
the adoption of resolution 661 (1990). Consistent
with resolution 1859 (2008), the Security Council
also welcomes the important progress Iraq has
made in regaining the international standing it
held prior to the adoption of resolution 661
(1990).

"In recognition of Iraq's progress in
supporting the international non-proliferation
regime and complying with disarmament treaties
and other relevant international instruments, its
commitment to taking additional steps in this
regard and its provisional application of the
Additional Protocol to the Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement with the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), pending its
ratification, the Security Council has adopted
resolution 1957 (2010), which lifts the
restrictions imposed by resolutions 687 (1991)
and 707 (1991) relating to weapons of mass
destruction and civilian nuclear activities.
"In recognition of Iraq's success in closing
out the remaining contracts in the Oil-for-Food
programme, the Council has also adopted
resolution 1958 (2010) to terminate the residual
activities of the Oil-for-Food programme.

"In recognition of Iraq's progress towards
the establishment of effective and accountable
successor arrangements for the transition of the
Development Fund for Iraq, the Security Council
has adopted resolution 1956 (2010), which
terminates arrangements for the Development
Fund for Iraq on 30 June 2011.

"Welcoming the progress made by the
Governments of Iraq and Kuwait towards the
resolution of the outstanding issues between both
countries, and encouraging further cooperation,
the Security Council calls on Iraq to quickly fulfil
its remaining obligations under the relevant
Chapter VII Security Council resolutions
pertaining to the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait.

"The Security Council welcomes Iraq's
reintegration into the region and encourages Iraq
and all regional States to deepen and broaden their
relationships and to conduct those relationships in
a spirit of partnership and cooperation.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in advising,
supporting and assisting the Iraqi people and
Government to strengthen democratic
institutions, advance inclusive dialogue and
national reconciliation, facilitate regional
dialogue, aid vulnerable groups, strengthen
gender equality, promote the protection of human
rights, including through the establishment of the
Independent High Commission for Human
Rights, promote the protection of affected
civilians, including children, women and
members of religious and ethnic minority groups,
and promote judicial and legal reform.

"The Security Council commends UNAMI,
headed by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for its support throughout the
electoral process, consistent with its mandate.
The Security Council encourages UNAMI's
continued work, in coordination with the
Government of Iraq, to provide protection and
help create conditions conducive to the voluntary,
safe, dignified and, in particular, sustainable
return of Iraqi refugees and internally displaced
persons, and stresses the importance of further
attention to this issue by all concerned.

"The Security Council underscores
UNAMI's important role in supporting the Iraqi
people and Government to promote dialogue,
ease tension, and encourage a negotiated political
agreement on the nation's disputed internal
boundaries, and calls upon all relevant parties to
participate in an inclusive dialogue to that end."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/27.

With the Council's permission, I will now make a
statement in my national capacity.

It is a genuinely rare opportunity to preside over
this meeting of the United Nations Security Council,
which is addressing the important issues relating to the
Republic of Iraq.

Let us briefly reflect on what has been a critically
important period in Iraq's history. In recent years, the
Iraqi people have emerged from the depths of sectarian
violence and have flatly rejected the grim future
offered by extremists. They have earned themselves a
chance for much better days ahead. Iraqi forces are
now in charge of securing their country, and they have
proved themselves more than capable of doing so, as I
and many of those here have seen with our own eyes.

Since our Administration came to office, we have
withdrawn more than 100,000 American troops from
Iraq and ended our combat mission there. We have
transitioned from a military-led to a civilian-led
engagement. The 50,000 troops who remain until the
end of next year, under the security agreement with the
Iraqi Government, have been given a new primary
mission: advising and assisting their Iraqi counterparts.
Meanwhile, the frequency of violent attacks in Iraq has
reached its lowest level - thank the Lord - since
2003.

As the Council knows, in March the Iraqi people
conducted an historic election, and last month Iraq's
political leaders agreed on a framework for a
Government that reflects the election's results. That
Government will include blocs representing every
major community and will not exclude or marginalize
anyone. It is made in Iraq, by Iraqis, and it reflects the
remarkable development that in today's Iraq, politics
has emerged as the dominant means for settling
differences and advancing the country's interests. The
Iraqi leaders must now honour, in a timely manner, the
commitments to one another and to the Iraqi people
that were made in the negotiating process.

Going forward, the United States will continue to
do its part to reinforce the progress being made in Iraq
consistent with our Strategic Framework Agreement
with the Iraqis, and to forge an enduring partnership
across a range of sectors, including education, energy,
trade, health, culture, information technology, law
enforcement, the judiciary and security. We
respectfully urge other nations to share their expertise
as well with this new, emerging Iraq.

I do not need to remind this gathering of the
important role the United Nations played, and
continues to play, in support of Iraq's development,
and the very, very heavy price it has paid. We will not
forget the horror of 19 August 2003, when terrorists
took the lives of 22 people, including, I think we would
all agree, an outstanding, remarkable United Nations
envoy, Sergio Vieira de Mello. It was a tragic harbinger
of all that was to follow after August of 2003, but the
important work of the United Nations continued, and
continues to this day. It continues because of the
foresight of that United Nations Special
Representative, who rightly observed, and I quote him,
"There is no longer such a thing as a distant crisis",
since "You can't help people from a distance".

That wisdom, forged during a career spent in the
hard-luck corners of the world, lives on in all of those
who are bravely helping Iraq to build a better future,
including the men and women of the United Nations
Mission in Iraq (UNAMI). Over more than a dozen
visits to Iraq since the war began - as their Foreign
Minister can tell you, I jokingly kid that I deserve Iraqi
citizenship, I have spent so much time there, and I have
enjoyed every minute - I have seen first-hand, as I
hope many here have, UNAMI'S efforts to strengthen
democratic institutions, conduct elections, advance
inclusive dialogue and national reconciliation, aid
vulnerable communities, and promote the protection of
human rights and the reform of the justice system.

Quite frankly, I have watched the young men and
women who are the Special Representative's staff
literally risk their lives. I have watched them, and I
think sometimes those outside this vaulted chamber
underestimate the incredible talent, the incredible
dedication and the incredible devotion of the men and
women we send into those regions. They deserve our
gratitude and our special thanks - not just the special
envoys like Mr. Vieira de Mello, but also Ad Melkert,
who I worked with every single day I was in Iraq. I
will say again, we would not have gotten to this point -
and I think our colleague from Iraq would
acknowledge this - were it not for their staff, whose
work is often done under trying conditions. I might add
that I think that work remains as important as it has
ever been.

To be sure, Iraq faces further challenges on the
road to security and prosperity. Attacks by extremists
remain an unacceptable aspect of daily life in the
country. We are particularly concerned about recent
attempts to target innocents because of their faith,
including both Christians and Muslims, and to lash out
at security forces working to keep the country safe. But
I firmly believe that despite those challenges, Iraq's
best days are ahead.

As a founding Member of the United Nations,
Iraq seeks and deserves the opportunity to resume its
rightful role in the community of nations. Towards that
end, this meeting formally acknowledges the
significant steps Iraq has taken towards fulfilling its

obligations to the United Nations, incurred in the lead-
up to the 1991 Gulf war. Accordingly, the Security
Council has now lifted restrictions imposed by
resolutions 687 (1991) and 707 (1991), relating to
weapons of mass destruction and civilian nuclear
activities, in recognition of Iraq's commitment to
non-proliferation, its compliance with relevant treaties
and other international instruments, its adherence to the
highest non-proliferation standards, and its provisional
application of the additional protocols to its agreement
with the International Atomic Energy Agency, pending
that agreement's entry into force.

The Council has also terminated the residual
activities of the oil-for-food programme, because Iraq
has successfully closed out the remaining contracts.
The Council has ended the Development Fund for Iraq
effective 30 June 2011, due to the steps the country has
taken towards resolving debts and claims inherited
from the previous regime and establishing accountable
arrangements for transitioning the Fund.
We all know that our work on those issues is not
complete. We urge Iraq's neighbours and the rest of the
international community to continue to work closely
with Iraq on its remaining Chapter VII obligations. We
strongly support the resolution of outstanding issues
between Iraq and Kuwait.

Since President Obama asked me to oversee our
Administration's Iraq policy when we took office, let
me assure the Council that the United States will
continue to work with Iraqi leaders on the important
tasks that lie ahead: conducting the census, integrating
Kurdish forces into Iraqi security forces, keeping
commitments to the Sons of Iraq, resolving disputed
internal boundaries with regard to the future of Kirkuk,
passing critical hydrocarbon legislation and a fiscally
responsible budget, and helping stabilize the country's
economy. We must also continue our efforts to protect
and support those displaced by war and help enable
voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable returns.

Today, as we take stock of all that the Iraqi
people have endured and accomplished, and all that
still must be done, we cannot lose sight of the fact that
Iraq is on the cusp of something remarkable: a stable,
self-reliant nation with just, representative and
accountable Government - a positive force for peace
and stability in the region. We all have an interest in
redeeming that promise and preserving the gains that
Iraq has made.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I invite His Excellency the Secretary-General to
take the floor.


