Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank Special Coordinator
Mladenov for his briefing.

I would like to begin by welcoming the adoption
of resolution 2334 (2016) last December. With the
two-State solution immediately in jeopardy, it was
important for the Security Council to demonstrate a
clear commitment to a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace. The resolution demands that Israel cease
settlement activities. It also calls for immediate steps
to prevent violence against civilians and for collective
efforts to launch negotiations. Iwould like to stress that
the resolution must be taken as a whole. The cessation
of settlement activities will not bring about peace on
its own, and all other efforts must also contribute to
the relaunch of political dialogue. Japan calls upon the
relevant parties to show commitment to the resolution.

Little progress has been seen in the Middle East
peace process and future prospects are dim. Japan
rejects all acts, incitement and glorification ofviolence.
Terrorist attacks, such as the vehicular attack on
8 January, cannot be justified for any reason, and Japan
firmly condemns such acts of terrorism. At the same
time, the disproportionate use of force by Israel is also
a concern. Persistent violence leads people from both
sides to lose faith in the two-State solution.

Japan reiterates its firm position that settlement
activities are in violation of international law, and Israel
must immediately freeze such activities. Japan has on
various occasions urged Israel to reconsider its policy.
Nevertheless, house demolitions continue in 2017, with
over 70 buildings destroyed in the first week of January
alone. Those activities physically erode a two-State
solution. Unity among Palestinians is also important.
Preparations are under way for the first session of the
Palestinian National Council in 20 years. Japan hopes
that the Council will be inclusive, promote unity and
bolster efforts to achieve a two-State solution.

In Gaza, the humanitarian situation is dire. People
suffer from a severe lack of electricity, water and places
to live. Those hopeless conditions are ruining peace
efforts and feeding radicalism, and do not benefit either
side. Assistance from the United Nations and other
humanitarian institutions is vital and their political
space must be maintained. Furthermore, we call for the
easing and eventual lifting of the Gaza blockade, while
duly taking security concerns into account.

Given those impediments to the peace process, what
can we do? Japan is undertaking a three-part approach
involving political dialogue, confidence-building
and economic assistance to the Palestinians. Japan
believes that dialogue is the only way to achieve
peace and calls upon both parties to resume direct
negotiations. Japan appreciates the various initiatives
undertaken by the relevant parties. We welcome the
joint communique issued at the ministerial-level
Middle East Peace Conference hosted by France on
15 January, underscoring international support for a
negotiated solution, with two States living side by side
in peace and security. State Minister for Foreign Affairs
Kentaro Sonoura attended the meeting on behalf of
Japan, outlining our efforts to date his his statement.
Japan also welcomes the powerful call of United States
Secretary of State Kerry on Israel and Palestine to make
the difficult choice for peace. The determination shown
by the new Secretary-General at the open debate last
week (see S/PV.7857) to actively engage in mediation
and peace-making is a hopeful sign.

Turning to economic assistance, the Jericho Agro
Industrial Park - which Japan has promoted for
the past 10 years, together with Palestine, Israel and
Jordan - will increasingly contribute to the Palestinian
economy and the building of trust in the region. We
must also remember the importance of investing in
future generations. Last November, Japan initiated
a technical assistance programme to revise math and
science texts and curricula in Palestine. That augments
our previous assistance to those schools and underlines
our commitment to future generations.

On confidence-building, Japan promotes regional
cooperation in the agricultural sector with Israel, Jordan
and Palestine, which enhances mutual trust and the
development of agriculture in Palestine. At the grass-
roots level, we invited 10 future leaders of Israel and
Palestine to Japan last month as part of the programme
we have been running for 20 years. The participants
spent time together, familiarizing themselves with
the history of Japan's post-war reconciliation and
development, while exchanging views and developing
mutual understanding among themselves. One
participant from Palestine commented that it was the
first time he had an opportunity to talk to Israelis other
than soldiers.

I firmly believe that a peaceful environment enables
such an exchange of Views and mutual understanding.
Recently, I heard from Mr. Pierre Krahenbiihl,
Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, that young people in Gaza have extremely limited
opportunity to exit Gaza, much less to interact with
Israelis. I recognize the importance of continuing this
programme.

In conclusion, Japan reiterates that peace is
achieved only through direct negotiations between the
parties. I urge both sides to make a decision for peace.
Alongside support for political dialogue, Japan will
continue to promote confidence-building that enables
such dialogue and to offer economic assistance that
keeps a two-State solution viable.

