Mr. Ould Abdallah: I would like to thank all
Member States and organizations for the support I have
been receiving from them in my functions, and thank
them for the attention they have been giving to Somalia
and the Somali people for the past 17 years.

In this connection, the United Nations and all
international partner institutions and countries have
made and are still making extraordinary efforts to
assist Somalia under extremely harsh conditions.
Many, including journalists and aid workers, have
sacrificed their lives in the course of their work with
little or no recognition. I would also like to thank the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). It is
doing excellent work with limited resources and
manpower. In addition, protecting shipments of food
against high-seas piracy is new, most welcome and
should be continued.

The conflict in Somalia is not, in my opinion, an
African Union or a League of Arab States or an
Organization of the Islamic Conference issue. It is
neither a liberation struggle, nor an ethnic or religious
war. It is also not just a struggle for power among the
clans, as many believe. The frequently shifting
allegiances between and within clans demonstrate that
other factors are also responsible for the continued
instability of the country.

The conflict in Somalia, which began in 1991, is
a threat to peace and security. The situation is
dangerous and is becoming more so each day.
Somalia's youth, who make up about two thirds of the
population, has only one employment opportunity -
participation in a conflict that has blighted their lives.
This situation has continued over the past 17 years,
despite l7 agreements.
07-64634
I see three possible approaches to international
involvement in Somalia.

The first course of action is simply continuing the
current status quo, or "business as usual". The second
approach would be an organized withdrawal of the
international community from Somalia, in effect
accepting our inability to protect the population or to
bring about a lasting peace. A third possible solution
would be immediate and effective action on the
political and security fronts.

The first approach is to maintain the status quo.
Policies tried and implemented over the past 17 years
have clearly failed to restore stability. Even worse, they
may have fuelled the conflict owing to some side
effects of international assistance. Aid may give the
impression that it addresses the root causes of the
crisis, but it does not. An increase in humanitarian
assistance and improved access for agencies would be
helpful but it will not put a stop to the violence. The
suffering might be mitigated, but it will not be ended,
as long as instability prevails. Despite millions of
dollars, efforts and resources, national reconciliation
continues to be elusive. The Somalis and their
neighbours are frustrated by this continued war, which
is generating deep resentment and cynicism.

The current military situation cannot last forever.
In addition, it should not be used as an excuse for
continuing business as usual. A "wait and see" attitude
would only postpone the day of reckoning and would
not facilitate meaningful progress towards a lasting
peace. That is why we really have only two choices -
either withdrawal or looking at other forms of action.

For those who believe that Somalia is one of the
world's unsolvable problems, withdrawal is the only
course of action. A withdrawal would provide an
alternative to the costly, continued engagement in
Somalia that has so far failed to bring about stability,
and it may not be difficult as an operation, because
there are only a very limited number of international
staff in Somalia and none is based in Mogadishu.

The decision to intervene in some conflict situations
while ignoring others of similar gravity would, however,
have a far-reaching effect, especially in relation to public
opinion, and not necessarily only in Africa. That is why I
recommend the third option - taking effective action.

Taking effective action would entail new political
and security initiatives. The Transitional Federal
07-64634

Government (TFG) would have to be more active and
make greater room for neutral personalities and
competent members of the opposition. I take this
opportunity to appeal to the Parliament to support this
orientation. The objective is to form a Government that
can support itself and administer the country
effectively and peacefully. The Cabinet should be as
representative as possible; we will never have
unanimity - if we have 60 or 70 per cent in the first
phase, that will be good. That Government should be
capable of defending itself and maintaining good
relations with all its neighbours.

With regard to the conditions for success, as I see
them, the Somalia crisis is an international problem.
The United Nations should launch diplomatic action to
mobilize a consensus aimed at stabilizing the country. I
recommend two simultaneous actions - one on the
political front, the other on the security front.

On the political front, the Government should
help by taking concrete steps to unite and strengthen its
own ranks as well as its relationship with the
opposition. The establishment of a Government of
National Unity is one of the best ways to do so. More
meetings between selected members of the TFG and
those of the opposition should take place so as to
prepare the ground for further and higher-level
meetings. No large conference or freelance mediators
would be welcome. This "critical path to stabilization"
should include the opposition as part of the political
process and should require the opposition to assume all
of its responsibilities.

These discussions should preferably be held in a
location close to Somalia or in one where most
observers following the situation in the country are
based. Once agreement on talks is reached, the
discussions should be concluded within a fixed time
frame. Political leaders and, especially, members of the
business community and prominent Somalis of the
diaspora, should be invited to contribute. I am
preparing the agenda, identifying a possible list of
participants and the timing for this process. I am
convinced that, when left alone, Somalis are ready to
join their ranks and efforts to get their country back on
its feet in the next few months.

On the security front, concurrently with the
political action, AMISOM. needs to remain operational
and its effectiveness strengthened. A new initiative
should reinforce it with the deployment of additional
3
capacity to stabilize our country. As time is pressing,
this new peace presence has become a must. In this,
Saudi Arabia - and I am mentioning Saudi Arabia
because, last Ramadan, they invited Somalia for a
meeting - Custodian of the two holiest sites in Islam
and a close neighbour, where more than 350,000
refugees are currently living, should be invited to play
a leading role. Given its successful contribution to
peace in the previous conflict, Saudi Arabia can help.
And why should support from one or two NATO
member States not be made available, if necessary?

On the practical level, the United Nations and the
Somali Government should come to a swift agreement
in close consultation with other concerned countries.
With the Secretary-General's support, I plan to pursue
this road to peace without delay. The Security Council
may wish to support these two simultaneous actions.
With its blessing, a group of Somalia's partners should
reinforce the security capacity and deploy a peace
presence. This would bring forward national
reconciliation, encourage the return of the international
community to Mogadishu and beyond, and reassure
neighbours with respect to their security concerns. This
arrangement, sanctioned by a major international
conference, should mark the complete return of
Somalia to the international community.

The situation in Somalia is deteriorating daily,
and it is time for the international community to
commit itself to a clear course of action. If the current
trends of internal violence and external neglect
continue, the consequences would be catastrophic for
peace in the region, for the image and reputation of the
United Nations, and, above all, for the long-suffering
Somali civilians.

A combination of many factors - support,
pressure and effective action - would help patriotic
Somalis to free themselves from the scourge of war and
the ghosts of the past and to unite for a strong,
independent and peaceful country. I have asked for
some pictures of Somalis trying to flee their country to
be circulated.

