Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Mr. Mark Lowcock for his briefing.

As our Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jacek
Czaputowicz, stated yesterday with regard to eastern
Ghouta, there is no justification for the indiscriminate
attacks on innocent civilians, including children, or on
civilian infrastructure, such as health facilities. They
must stop immediately and all parties to the conflict
must strictly comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law. We would like to stress
that all actors should use their influence to bring about
immediate and improved conditions on the ground.

Once again, we urgently call for the cessation
of hostilities in the whole of Syria. Attacks against
civilian targets, including medical facilities, must stop
now in order to relieve the enormous and unreasonable
suffering of the Syrian people. We therefore call
upon all parties to alleviate the suffering of civilians,
including children, by granting them urgent, free and
safe access to humanitarian assistance.

With regard to the de-escalation zones, which
include eastern Ghouta, I should recall that they
were aimed at ensuring a ceasefire and humanitarian
access in accordance with international law, including
international humanitarian law. In the light of
this fact, I call on all parties engaged to respect
their ceasefire-related commitments. I also call on
States members of the Security Council to use their
leverage on the parties in order to implement relevant
previous commitments and to create conditions for a
permanent ceasefire.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance
of maintaining the unity of the Council on the question
of humanitarian access. We should find a mutually
acceptable way to express a clear position of the
Security Council in this regard. Accordingly, Poland
would like to reiterate its support for the work of Sweden
and Kuwait as penholders of the draft humanitarian
resolution for Syria. Now more than ever do we need to
make every possible effort to adopt the draft resolution
as soon as possible. It is the Council's responsibility not
to fail to stop the ongoing humanitarian tragedy in the
eastern Ghouta.

