At the outset, I would like to thank High Commissioner Filippo Grandi for his informative briefing, and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for the efforts it has made in the challenging times presented by the coronavirus disease and with the risks the pandemic poses for international peace and security, especially in conflict zones and war-devastated countries, and particularly on the most vulnerable populations - refugees, displaced persons and returnees. The question of refugees and displaced persons remains a major source of concern, as it reflects to what extent our world is unstable. Unfortunately, the statistics today indicate that the problem is getting worse, since the numbers of refugees and internally displaced persons have been growing, owing to conflicts, war, poverty, underdevelopment and environmental degradation related to climate change. While we commend the crucial role that UNHCR and the other humanitarian organizations play in providing assistance to these populations, we underline the urgent need to multiply and intensify regional and international efforts aimed at addressing the root causes of the problem. This is a sad reflection of the status of peace and security in world today after 75 years of multilateralism, and it is putting the financial and human resources of humanitarian and refugee organizations under enormous strain. The resolution of the problem of refugees and displaced persons is a matter of high priority. It is clear that promoting long-term conditions for peace, stability, national reconciliation and development is not possible without taking adequate steps to ensure the dignified voluntary and safe return of refugees and internally displaced persons to their homes and places of original residence, to reverse the consequences of conflicts and to heal as much as possible the wounds they have caused. Otherwise, their plight will remain unresolved, with all the impact that that could have on the global situation. In the meantime, it is crucial to facilitate the flow of humanitarian assistance and provide protection to these populations. In this regard, the international community should take action to prevent all forms of exploitation of refugees and displaced persons for political gains and to stop the boats of death from attempting to cross the seas in search of safety. To address the issue of refugees, we need to focus not only on curing symptoms but also on identifying the root causes of flows of refugees and internally displaced persons. Armed conflicts continue to be the principal drivers of the plight of refugees. The Security Council and its members have a major responsibility and role to play in preventing conflicts from erupting. Properly addressing the structural causes of problems of refugees requires a holistic approach that strengthens the nexus among peace, security and development and which also investigates newly identified causes, such as climate change, as the High Commissioner has noted. Fifty-one years ago, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) Convention Governing Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa was adopted, and 11 years ago, the African Union (AU) adopted the Convention for the Protection and Assistance for Internally Displaced Persons in Africa. These pioneering legal and policy instruments reflect the AU's strong commitment to the protection of refugees, internally displaced persons and vulnerable migrants in all circumstances, which we wholeheartedly commend. Many African countries have demonstrated a remarkably high level of solidarity, providing asylum to refugees at a time of increased anxiety, xenophobia, border closure and denial of asylum in many parts of the world.
