Mr. De Mistura: It is good to be with the Council.
Since my previous briefing to the Council (see S/PV.8383), the Secretary-General has announced
that Mr. Geir Pedersen of Norway - a good friend of
mine and an excellent choice, ifI may say so - will
be the new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, following my own announcement that I will be
moving on in the near future. The precise date will be
determined by the Secretary-General in the light of all
of the relevant circumstances. I therefore anticipate
that I will be briefing the Security Council once again
in December.

The Secretary-General has asked me to complete
one final task: to verify whether the Sochi final
statement can be implemented or not, and either to
convene - which I hope to do - or leave clarity on
exactly why we have not convened a United Nations-
facilitated, Syrian-owned and Syrian-led constitutional
committee that is credible, balanced and inclusive, and
that contributes, in the context of the Geneva process,
to the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).

That work is therefore - as far as I am concerned and

I am sure the Council will agree with me - absolutely

urgent. It is vital to make progress in the political process,

particularly on the constitutional committee. It is also

central to the Secretary-General's considerations on the

upcoming sequence of events, and I am not the only one

to emphasize the urgent need to advance that work. On
27 October, we saw a quadrilateral summit take place
in Istanbul between the Presidents of the Republic of
Turkey, the French Republic and the Russian Federation
and the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany.
I attended that meeting and briefed the four leaders.

The summit was important because it was
composed of two groups of countries with influence,
including some of the guarantors of the Astana group,
who had also been convening the Sochi meetings in
January, and the members of the so-called small group
on Syria. I saw how much importance the four leaders
and their teams gave to the issue of the constitutional
committee in hours of tough negotiation, including at
the highest level. The four leaders were able to find
common ground. They took many of my own messages
on board and they produced a final declaration that I
saw as positive and helpful. Other Governments have
also thereafter welcomed it. Let me highlight three
aspects in particular.

First, the declaration commended the progress
made in implementing the Idlib memorandum. We
all know how concerned we were just over one month
ago about the developments in Idlib. We therefore also
assessed that there continues to be progress on the
implementation of the memorandum. We acknowledge
that there have been occasional setbacks, including
reports of violations on the part of both sides. However,
it is still holding and it is holding much better than we
had ever dreamt, so we should be keeping our fingers
crossed. But any civilian from either side of the front
line would definitely say that the overall situation has
improved from that of a few months ago. That should
be preserved and built upon. We therefore echo the
emphasis of the Istanbul summit final declaration on
the lasting ceasefire in Idlib.

Secondly, the declaration called for creating the
conditions for the safe and voluntary return of refugees
and internally displaced persons (IDPs) to their
original places of residence in Syria. The guarantors
underscored that returnees needed security from armed
conflict, political persecution and arbitrary arrests, as
well as humanitarian infrastructure, including water,
electricity and health and social services. Let me
translate that for the Council, if I may. It is clear that
we need to establish the basic conditions ofa safe, calm
and neutral environment that will help to realize the
conditions conducive to the safe and voluntary return
of millions of IDPs and refugees, which is, in any
case, a fundamental element of a political package to
implement resolution 2254 (2015).
Thirdly and, frankly, perhaps most importantly,
the declaration outlined very concrete steps towards
that political package by calling for the establishment
and early convening, considering the circumstances,
of the constitutional committee in Geneva by the end
of this year with a view to achieving constitutional
reform, paving the way for free and fair elections under
United Nations supervision and in compliance with the
highest international standards of transparency and
accountability, with all Syrians, including members of
the diaspora, who are eligible to participate.

Since Istanbul, I have been proactively in touch with
relevant players. I have been, as Council members know,
in various places, and in London I hosted a consultation,
within the context of the Geneva process, with senior
officials of the small group, comprising Egypt, France,
Germany, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom
and the United States. I also had a bilateral meeting
with the Geneva negotiations head of the Syrian High
Negotiations Committee, Naser Al-Hariri, who briefed
me on the Committee's in-depth discussions that they
are having in Riyadh on the constitutional issues. In
fact, he indicated that they are ready to move forward
and participate in any meeting convened by the United
Nations within that context.

I have been in contact with officials from Russia,
Turkey, the United States and other countries. An
Iranian delegation came to see me just a few hours ago
here in my office in Geneva on that subject, after its
members had themselves been in Damascus. Senior
Russian, Iranian and United States officials have also
been travelling the region recently. Presidents Erdogan
and Putin are meeting, as far as I understand, today and
tomorrow in Istanbul.

Regarding the broader atmospherics, since this
briefing is predominantly a political one, allow me to
briefly refer to some bullet points.

First, we have noted some violations in Idlib, but,
as we have said, they have been limited so far, as well
as some infighting there. Secondly, there have been
signs of activities of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) in eastern Syria, with reports of many
civilian deaths resulting from the fighting with ISIL.
Thirdly, there have been reports of tensions between
the Turkish armed forces and the Syrian Democratic
Forces along the Turkey-Syria border. Fourthly, there
are reports of detainees facing new death penalties in
Syria. Fifthly, a breakthrough convoy to Rukban has
been facilitated - and we are very pleased to see that
type of cooperation - by the Russian Federation, the
Government, the United States and Jordan. My own
colleagues returned from the area expressing shock at
the terrible human misery in that stretch of the desert,
including reports of severe protection issues, such as
sexual and gender-based violence and the recruitment of
child soldiers in that camp. Recently, we received some
good news of the liberation in the south of children and
women, who had been held by ISIL for far too long.

Let me note, apart from what I have said and going
back to the political context, the announcement that the
three guarantors - the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Russian Federation and the Republic of Turkey - will
meet again in Astana at the senior level on 28 and
29 November. We believe that the meeting should be
an opportunity for them to consolidate their efforts
on the implementation of the Idlib memorandum of
understanding. On the issue of detainees, abductees
and missing people, we strongly urge them to make the
kind of progress that we have so far not seen and which
has been forecast in that context. Many thousands of
families in Syria are asking for no less.

It is also clear that the meeting in Astana will take
place against the backdrop of the efforts being made
by the same three countries, in their own capacity as
conveners of the Sochi meeting almost a year ago, to
begin the implementation of their own final statement.
It was in January that the Sochi declaration made
clear that they, and all of us, wanted to establish a
constitutional committee. I will be closely monitoring
to see if the progress will be useful in informing the
preparations for the Astana meeting in relation to the
constitutional committee.

As members can see, there are many strands of work
under way, and we will draw final conclusions only in
December. By that time, the Presidents of the Russian
Federation and the United States of America will also
have met on the margins of the Group of 20 meeting
in Buenos Aires, where, presumably, they will also be
discussing Syria. Many other important consultations
will have taken place by then as well.

As I told the Council from Beirut, the United
Nations welcomes and indeed encourages constructive
and moderate suggestions on the issue of constitutional
committee as long as they maintain the same spirit of
credibility, balance and international legitimacy of the
middle third list. Let me unpack what I mean by that.
I mean that the middle third list must fulfil the Sochi
declaration criteria of

"Syrian experts, civil society, independents, tribal
leaders and women, [and] adequate representation
of Syria's ethnic and religious components".

I mean that the middle third list cannot just be a vehicle
for political representatives, particularly eminent
political leaders, of the political side, whether the
Government or the opposition side. Civil society - the
Syrian people - deserves a voice in a process that
will determine their future. The first and second lists
include political representatives, so here we should
include the other Syrians.

To be credible and productive, the constitutional
committee should contain experts who are known
not only for their own relevant technical prowess, but
who are broadly acceptable and known for their own
skills in bridge-building between the sides. I also mean
that there must be a balance of political orientations,
including space for people who do not identify with the
Government or the opposition.

Finally, a key part of legitimacy, which is very
important to me and, I know, to the Secretary-General,
is for the committee to contain a minimum of 30 per
cent of women. The Government and the opposition
lists fell short of that standard. In fact, the Government
was better than the opposition. We need the middle third
list to make up for that. The United Nations-facilitated
middle list, as it stands, is on the table and encompasses
all those dimensions.

Of course, credibility, balance and international
legitimacy also relate to the overall package, including
voting, the mandate, the chairmanship and the role of
the United Nations. For instance, for us, credible rules
of procedure mean that they do not make it possible for
any single party to dictate or to encourage paralysis.

Those are some of the criteria I had in mind when I
constructed the elements that are currently on the table,
and they will remain the litmus test for how I will be
assessing any suggestion regarding a credible, balanced
and legitimate constitutional committee. If that is not
going to happen, we may have to conclude then that it
may not be possible to form a constitutional committee
that is credible and inclusive at this stage.

In such an unfortunate case, I would certainly
be ready to explain to the Council why it had arisen.
However, let me be clear that our aim is and remains
for the United Nations to issue invitations at the latest
by mid-December and to convene a first meeting of
the constitutional committee before 31 December,
which is the date indicated in the very constructive
Istanbul declaration.
Respect for Syria's sovereignty has never been
called into question. I would like to remind Ambassador
Ja'afari, who is present in the Chamber and often talks
about it, that the United Nations has never questioned
Syria's sovereignty. Resolution 2254 (2015) is explicitly
prefaced by a strong commitment to Syria's sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity. It makes
clear that the process must be Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led.

However, let us also remember that this is a
constitutional discussion in the context of one of
the most tragic, brutal, cruel and merciless armed
conflicts of this century. The Syrian people therefore
must be enabled independently and democratically to
determine their own future. That is called sovereignty
of the people. For that reason, in the same resolution,
the Security Council gave the United Nations the
mandate to convene a political process, which, must,
inter alia, identify a process and schedule for drafting
a new constitution. As I have repeatedly stated, the
Sochi meeting itself appealed to the United Nations
to convene the constitutional committee in Geneva
and was accompanied by a firm understanding in
that regard.

At my last briefing in December, it will be my duty
to explain where we are in terms of the constitutional
committee and to leave a clean and clear path to my
successor in that regard. In other words, we are
in the final days of the attempts to implement the
constitutional committee in line with resolution 2254
(2015) and the Sochi final statement. The weeks to
come will be of crucial importance in that regard. The
United Nations remains ready for the establishment of
the constitutional committee. It is prepared to do its
part, and I personally will spare no effort towards that
goal up until the final day of my tenure.

