Mr. Fatemi (Pakistan): We welcome the initiative
of the Australian presidency to organize this high-level
meeting of the Security Council on Yemen. We highly
appreciate the detailed and insightful briefing provided
by the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
Yemen, Mr. Jamal Benomar. The presence of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Abubaker Al-Qirbi,
in the Chamber today is a sign of the Government of
National Unity's continued resolve to complete the
transition process. We also thank the Secretary General
ofthe Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), Mr. Abdullatif
bin Rashid Al Zayani, for his statement.

Yemen has walked back from the precipice. A
couple of years ago, the Government and people of
Yemen were at a crossroads. They decided to shun
violence and walk the difficult, rocky and sometimes
arduous path of dialogue and engagement. Regional
efforts, steered by the Gulf Cooperation Council, and
the good offices of the Secretary-General, ably led
by Mr. Benomar, notwithstanding, it is primarily the
Yemenis themselves who deserve full credit.

Pakistan enjoys deep historical cultural and
religious ties with the people of Yemen. The peace,
stability and prosperity of Yemen is dear to us. We
hope that full implementation ofthe GCC initiative will
lead to the normalization of conditions in that country.
The continued support of the international community
for that endeavour is therefore crucial. That, however,
does not mean that the international community should
micromanage Yemeni affairs. Respect for Yemen's
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
should remain paramount in the Council's deliberations.

Yemen is in the final phases of an inclusive
National Dialogue, unprecedented in its history and
groundbreaking for the entire region. We understand
that the process has been delayed by a few weeks.
We urge all Yemenis to continue working in a spirit
of compromise and cooperation, and to conclude the
process expeditiously. While we appreciate the efforts
of President Mansour's Government, including the
recently announced formal apology to the South for
transgressions during the conflict of 1994, a number of
hurdles must still be overcome. The issue of the South
and the economic and humanitarian situation must be
handled skilfully and effectively. Those issues have the
potential to derail the entire process. We also appreciate
the special attention President Mansour has given to the
question of the South. We condemn the violence that
led to the killing of scores onemeni security personnel
last week, and offer our sympathy and condolences to
the families ofthe victims, as well as to the Government
and people of Yemen. We welcome President Mansour's
resolve to fight the scourge of terrorism.

The Security Council's active engagement in
Yemen, and its unity on the issue, has had a positive
impact on the ground. Resolutions 2014 (2011) and 2051
(2012) and other Council pronouncements have helped
to deter the activities of spoilers. We hope that the
Council's positive contribution will continue.

Yemen's economic and humanitarian needs require
urgent attention, as my colleagues have pointed out. We
welcome the meeting of the Friends of Yemen held in
New York earlier this week and hope that pledges made
at the Riyadh donors' conference and at the various
meetings of the Friends of Yemen will be fulfilled in a
timely manner.

Pakistan believes that the Dialogue process should
lead to the framing of a new constitution, a referendum
and elections. Meeting some deadlines, of which the
most important is that for the elections in 2014, is
therefore imperative.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Pakistan's
full support for the Government and people of Yemen
in their efforts aimed at national reconciliation and
political transition.

