Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I am pleased to see you
preside over the Security Council this month, Madam
President. I would also like to thank you for convening
this important debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

I also express my thanks to Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Herve Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights; and Mr. Yves Daccord,
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, for their useful briefings today.

The protection of civilians is of paramount
importance to the Government of Afghanistan. The
Afghan people expected a long-awaited peace when
the Taliban regime came to an end following decades
of war, unprecedented destruction and loss of life. Yet
despite joint stabilization efforts towards peace and
security, the suffering of the Afghan people continues.
The security situation remains today precarious, and
incidents have in fact escalated in intensity since 2009.

Afghan civilians are targeted with guns and bombs
by enemies who measure success in terms of the blood
spilled and life lost. Women, children, Government
officials, journalists, religious leaders and judicial
authorities are at risk as they go about their daily lives,
shopping at a bazaar, visiting a friend or commuting to
work. They are attacked in villages, on public roads,
in restaurants, Government offices, courthouses and
mosques.

With total and utter disregard for civilian life,
the brutal terrorist campaign by the Taliban and
other extremist groups affect ordinary Afghans
most profoundly. The Taliban are responsible for
the overwhelming majority of civilian casualties in
Afghanistan, causing thousands of deaths in 2013 alone,
which represents a sharp increase from previous years.

The brutal campaign opened a murderous era in
Afghanistan's history - devastating in terms both ofits
acute impact on the Afghan people and of its savagery.
Terrorists' tactics are a horrific manifestation of man's

inhumanity to man, of which graphic video footage
of beheadings posted on Taliban websites, the recent
heinous attack on a popular restaurant in Kabul and the
cold-blooded murders and violence against women and
children are but a few harrowing examples.

The Council condemned Taliban attacks in the
strongest terms six times last year, stressing that
terrorism in all its forms was criminal and unjustifiable
and underscoring the need to bring its perpetrators
to justice. It is clear that the Taliban show flagrant
disregard for international law as well as the basic
tenets and principles of Islam.

We note with deep concern an increase in the
indiscriminate use of improvised explosive devices
(IEDs) by armed insurgent groups in the past year. IEDs
remain the leading cause of civilian deaths and injuries,
accounting for 34 per cent of all civilian casualties in
Afghanistan. To address this menace, a national counter-
lED strategy was instituted by presidential decree in
2012. We are working to strengthen our counter-IED
capabilities and the related training programmes by the
International Security Assistance Force for the Afghan
National Security Forces - a further important step in
minimizing the danger posed by such weapons.

Tragically, ground engagements in counter-
terrorism and counter-insurgency operations have
resulted in the deaths and injuries of civilians. It is
unfortunate that Afghans have lost their lives during
operations by international and national forces that
aimed to protect them. In that regard, the Afghan
Government has repeatedly called on international
military forces to take all the necessary measures to
stop the loss of Afghan civilian life. Important steps
have been taken in that regard in recent years.

With Afghan forces now at the forefront of
protecting the Afghan people from terrorist attacks,
we see situations in which civilians are caught in the
crossfire of ground engagements with the enemy. One
life lost is one too many, and, with that sentiment in
mind, Afghan forces are strongly committed to the
protection of civilians. Stabilization efforts are guided
by their sense of responsibility, sobriety and duty to
their fellow Afghans.

It is clear that the surest way to protect the lives,
honour and dignity of citizens is to end the cycle of
violence that harms innocent civilians. In that regard,
achieving peace and security in Afghanistan requires
the following three key components: first, international
assistance throughout the next decade to support
the Afghan capacity to counter terrorist campaigns
against the Afghan people; secondly, the elimination
of terrorist sanctuaries that fuel the cycle of violence;
and, thirdly, vigorous pursuit of our Afghan-led peace
and reconciliation process, intended to engage those
ready to renounce violence and contribute responsibly
to their homeland. Effective regional and international
cooperation is key to the successful outcome of the
process.

