Mr. Wolff (United States): There can be no
denying that today's thematic debate focuses on a goal
that we all share, namely, sustainable peace in the
Middle East. The aspirations of the people of the
region for a more secure and prosperous future have
been left unfulfilled for too long. In this regard, the
United States remains firmly committed to the vision
of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side
in peace and security, as well as to the Road Map and
the principles contained therein, as the Road Map is the
only agreed international basis upon which to move
forward towards that goal.
As President Bush noted unequivocally before the
General Assembly,

"I am committed to two democratic States, Israel
and Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security. I am committed to a Palestinian State
that has territorial integrity and will live
peacefully with the Jewish State of Israel. This is
a Vision set forth in the Road Map, and helping
the parties reach this goal is one of the great
objectives of my presidency." (A/61/PV.10, pp. 10-11)

To help make this goal a reality, President Bush has
repeatedly stressed that the United States would pursue
diplomatic efforts to engage moderate regional leaders,
help the Palestinians strengthen and reform their
security sector, and support the parties in their efforts
to come together to resolve their differences.

In part, to this end, the United States is the single
largest donor to the Palestinian people, having
provided $468 million in direct assistance in 2006. But
while we work closely with our Quartet partners and
our friends in the region to create an environment that
will facilitate progress towards the realization of this
two-State vision, we must make certain that our
parallel efforts here at the United Nations bolster, and
do not inadvertently undermine, the pursuit of a lasting
peace in the region.

In this regard, the United States is disappointed
that in recent weeks the Security Council and the
General Assembly have indulged in debate over an
excessive number of politicized and biased resolutions
that do not contribute constructively, in our View, to
that effort, nor have they enabled any progress towards
the two-State solution in accordance with the Road
Map. Calls for high-level debate and a greater role for
the Security Council in encouraging peace efforts
cannot sidestep the fundamental fact that the ultimate
responsibility for progress towards peace rests with the
parties and with their fulfilment of the parallel
obligations they have agreed to undertake in
accordance with the Road Map.

Therefore, the role of the international
community, including this body, must be to help create
an environment that will enable the parties to come
together to resolve their differences. We must ask
ourselves whether that goal will be achieved through
the sort of polarized, hortatory debate that has
characterized recent Security Council and General
Assembly discussions of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.
In the region itself, President Abbas and Prime
Minister Olmert have reached agreement on an
important ceasefire in Gaza, and Prime Minister
Olmert has delivered an address making clear his
interest in working towards peace with the
Palestinians. President Abbas has deployed security
forces to northern Gaza to try to enforce that fragile
ceasefire, and Israel has demonstrated remarkable
restraint in not responding to recent rocket attacks into
Israel.

In order to build on that progress, the United
States is actively involved in efforts to reform the
Palestinian security sector. We are engaged in that
important effort because we recognize that, ultimately,
the only way that real progress is going to be made is if
Palestinian security forces are able to bring stability to
Gaza and prevent attacks against Israel.

With Israel, the United States has pressed for
concrete progress related to Palestinian access and
movement within and between the West Bank and
Gaza. We are pleased at the success of the European
Union Border Assistance Mission at the Rafah
checkpoint in Gaza, and we are working to build on
that success. While we recognize that important
progress in this area remains to be made, the United
States remains committed to working actively on this
issue with both parties in order to make real, concrete
progress and to improve the lives of millions of
Palestinians living in the West Bank and Gaza.

Implementation of the Road Map necessitates
partnership. The United States has worked with the
international community to support the efforts of
President Abbas to establish a Palestinian Government
that accepts the Quartet principles of renunciation of
violence, recognition of Israel and acceptance of
previous agreements between Israel and the
Palestinians. We commend President Abbas for his
efforts to break the current impasse caused by a
Hamas-led Palestinian Authority that fails to govern
responsibly.

We deeply regret that Hamas has walked away
from a proposal for a technocratic Government that
would have allowed for early engagement. We were
also dismayed at the statement made by Palestinian
Authority Government Prime Minister Haniya on
8 December in Tehran that the Palestinians would
never recognize Israel. That position demonstrates that
the Hamas-led Palestinian Authority Government is not
interested in becoming a partner for peace and
continues to fail in its duty to the Palestinian people to
govern responsibly.

Having mentioned Tehran, I wish to state that the
United States strongly condemns the recent Iranian-
sponsored conference on the Holocaust, which called
into question the magnitude of the horrors of the
Holocaust, and rejects in the strongest possible terms
any and all efforts that seek to refute the historical fact
of the Holocaust.

When one considers the many aspects of this
issue, it is clear that any discussion of fostering greater
peace in the region must include Lebanon. The conflict
launched by Hizbollah in July caused enormous
suffering and destruction in both Lebanon and Israel,
highlighting the risks of acquiescing to a status quo in
Lebanon that permits militias to remain armed and
unchecked.

The United States supports the efforts of the
democratically elected Government of Lebanon as it
expands its sovereignty over all its territory. We
continue to call for the full implementation of Security
Council resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and
1701 (2006), particularly the provisions regarding the
disbanding and disarming of the militias. We call once
again for the immediate, safe and unconditional release
of the soldiers of the Israel Defense Forces, Eldad
Regev and Ehud Goldwasser, kidnapped on 12 July.

The current demonstrations in Lebanon are an
attempt by Hizbollah and its allies, with support from
Syria and Iran, to overthrow Lebanese Prime Minister
Fouad Siniora's democratically elected pro-reform,
pro-sovereignty Government, in a clear bid to re-
establish Syrian influence over Lebanon. The recent
assassination of Lebanese Minister of Industry Pierre
Gemayel is especially shocking in that light and
underscores the threat to the physical safety of
Lebanon's remaining Cabinet members.

The people of the Middle East deserve a realistic
approach to fostering peace and security. For decades,
the United States has remained committed to working
directly with the parties. We call upon others to join us
in pursuing viable diplomatic strategies rooted in a
clear understanding of the underlying sources of this
conflict. Only that approach will serve the interests of
peace and advance our collective aspirations for a more
secure, stable and democratic Middle East. Thank you,
Mr. President, for your own efforts to that end.

