Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today's discussion ofthe problem of Kosovo
is taking place in new circumstances: when the
Yugoslav people has made a democratic choice. More
favourable conditions are being created at a fast pace to
overcome the many years of crisis in the Balkans. To a
decisive extent this will depend on how the
establishment of good-neighbourly relations proceeds
among all the States in the Balkans, how the
outstanding problems are resolved in relations between
them, how the peace process advances in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and, of course, on the settlement of the
Kosovo problem.

In this context, Russia notes with regret that
resolution 1244 (1999) is still being implemented in an
incomplete and unsatisfactory manner. A situation has
emerged in which ill-considered and mistaken actions
by the international presences in Kosovo, instead of
confirming the sovereignty of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, are helping to reinforce the trend towards
secession of this Yugoslav territory from the rest of the
country. It may seem paradoxical, but at every forum
Russia has to advance an argument that is recognized
in words by everyone but is often disregarded in actual
fact. The argument is that the crucial, basic principle
for political settlement in Kosovo is respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, as established in resolution
1244 (1999). In these new circumstances, this question
becomes even more acute.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Bernard Kouchner, for the
information he has given us about the municipal
elections that took place in Kosovo. However, we
cannot share what we heard in his statement - the
basically positive results that he told us about. We
think that controlling and halting the tendencies
towards Kosovo's secession should be a priority of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). However, the Mission leadership
did not deem it necessary to heed the opinion of the
new democratic leadership of Yugoslavia, and, in
violation of generally recognized standards, held
municipal elections in Kosovo. As a result of this
non-democratic process, a large part of the population
of the province-of Kosovo, the Serbs both those
living in the province and those who were forced to
leave the country, most of the Turks there and
representatives of other national minorities - were left
outside this process.

The negative consequences of the elections are
also seen in the fact that the entire election campaign
was not about purely municipal matters. The political
leaders who participated basically conducted the
campaign around the question of the independence of
Kosovo. Taking advantage of the results of the
municipal elections, which did not reflect the will of
the entire Kosovo population, the Albanian leaders are
now saying that they want to see the speedy holding of
provincial parliamentary elections, since they view
them as the next step towards independence. They
stress this argument all the time in their public
pronouncements.

We think that the problem of the future status of
Kosovo needs to be resolved not by violating
resolution 1244 (1999), but, rather, by launching a
specific dialogue between the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Kosovar leaders. The
changed political situation in Yugoslavia now makes it
possible to discuss the question of a new start in
implementing resolution 1244 (1999). It is high time to
break the inertia of the confrontational relations with
the leadership of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and fully involve it in implementing this basic Security
Council resolution. In the interest of a fair settlement
of the Kosovo problem on this basis, we might discuss
a kind of package that would include the normalization
of relations between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and UNMIK and the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
in parallel with the implementation of measures for the
reaffirmation by the international presences of the
sovereignty of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia over
Kosovo and steps to curb separatism in the province.

The Joint Implementation Commission should
start working at full strength and become a real organ
for harmonizing views between the leadership of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and UNMIK on
practical questions relating to the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999). We must review the question
of the status of UNMIK and KFOR. We must promptly
rescind the 17 August declaration by the head of
UNMIK and the KFOR Commander, which violates the
sovereignty ofthe Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and,
as is normal international practice, we need to conclude
the appropriate agreements with the Government of
Yugoslavia.

The question of the return to Kosovo, as spelled
out in resolution 1244 (1999), of an agreed number of
Yugoslav and Serb military and police personnel needs
to be resolved. Problems which arose as a result of the
speedy, improperly prepared municipal elections in
Kosovo could be partially dealt with by organizing
additional elections for those inhabitants of the
province who, for reasons we are all familiar with,
were kept out of the election process. The best option
would be to hold Kosovo elections at the same time as
the parliamentary elections to be held on 23 December
in Serbia. We are convinced of the need to make sure
that voting in the elections for the Serbian Parliament
also takes place in the territory of the province of
Kosovo. We do not understand why some elections can
be organized in the territory of Kosovo while others,
because of technical problems, apparently cannot. A
significant portion of the country's population-not
only Serbs, but also Romas, Bosniacs, Turks, Goranis
and other national minorities-must be allowed to
exercise their fundamental right to participate in the
election process in their own country. This is extremely
important from the standpoint of supporting the
democratization process in Serbia and Yugoslavia. The
UNMIK leadership should create favourable conditions
for the elections. Otherwise, resolution 1244 (1999)
would again be grossly violated.

I would like to draw attention to another matter,
which we feel requires a prompt solution. I refer to the
lifting of the arms embargo imposed on the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia by resolution 1160 (1998). This
step is long overdue, since the demands of the
resolution have in essence already been met.
Maintaining the sanctions regime in these new
circumstances is totally unjustified and
counterproductive. We are sure that after the admission
of democratic Yugoslavia to membership of the United
Nations, the process of its rehabilitation in other
international organizations and institutions will be
more actively pursued. The emergence of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia from international isolation and
the resumption of its activities as a fully fledged
member of the international community are impossible
without the lifting of all the sanctions and restrictions
that are still in force.

Russia welcomes the responsible political
decision of the European Union to lift the measures
formerly imposed against Yugoslavia. Not only should
the United Nations not stand aside from these trends,
but it should do everything to encourage them. By
deciding to lift sanctions, the Security Council would
thus demonstrate confidence in the new leadership of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and would support
its efforts for the democratic transformation of
Yugoslav society.

We hope that Russia's approach will be met with
understanding and support.

