Mr. Mulet: I will brief the Council on events
related to the mandate and area of responsibility of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG). I would like to recall some information
about the Mission itself. We have 136 military
observers; we have 18 United Nations police personnel
on the ground, and 311 civilians, in different sites. The
key mandated tasks for this Mission are to monitor and
verify the implementation by the parties of the 1994
ceasefire agreement, to contribute to the creation of
conditions conducive to return of internally displaced
persons and refugees, and to promote a political
settlement of the conflict.
3

The situation in Abkhazia remains of extreme
concern, with a military build-up continuing on the
Abkhaz side of the zone of conflict, as well as
bombings of the Upper Kodori Valley. Over the past
two days, the Abkhaz side has moved troops and heavy
weapons into the zone of conflict. Such movement was
initially prevented by the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) peacekeeping force, but their
commander, General Chaban, yesterday informed
UNOMIG that they could no longer stop the Abkhaz
from moving weapons and personnel into the zone.
UNOMIG has confirmed that the CIS peacekeepers did
not attempt to stop such deployments. Abkhaz troops
and heavy weapons are now present all along the
ceasefire line.

Yesterday morning, the Abkhaz de facto deputy
defence minister requested that UNOMIG withdraw its
observers from the Upper Kodori Valley, as their safety
could no longer be guaranteed. UNOMIG then
withdrew all 15 observers that had been present in the
Upper Kodori Valley. Following the request for
UNOMIG to leave the Upper Kodori Valley, the
Abkhaz de facto authorities announced a decision,
taken by de facto president Bagapsh, to push the
Georgian armed forces out of the Upper Kodori Valley.
Beginning yesterday afternoon, UNOMIG has reported
ongoing aerial bombardments of Georgian villages in
the Upper Kodori Valley. The Mission also observed
the movement by the Abkhaz side of substantial
numbers of heavy weapons and military personnel
towards the Kodori Valley.

Earlier today, Abkhaz de facto president Bagapsh
gave a press conference, where he announced that their
operation in the Upper Kodori Valley was proceeding
according to plan. He stated that Georgian civilians and
armed personnel had both been given an ultimatum to
leave the Upper Kodori Valley. Bagapsh also stated
that his side was coordinating their activities with the
CIS peacekeeping forces in order to restore order in the
peacekeepers' area of responsibility. He said that
Sukhumi had requested Russia to take measures to
strengthen the Abkhaz maritime border. Negotiations
with Georgia, he said, were only possible after the
current Abkhaz operations were completed.

UNOMIG has received information from multiple
sources that most of the civilian population of the
Upper Kodori Valley has left. Throughout last night
and today, UNOMIG has obtained information on an
ongoing build-up of forces, both Abkhaz and Russian,
in and near the zone of conflict. UNOMIG observed a
Russian airborne battalion move towards the zone of
conflict this morning. UNOMIG also reports that a
number of Ilyushin-76 transport aeroplanes have
landed at Sukhumi airport, beginning yesterday
evening. It also appears that a number of Russian ships
belonging to the Black Sea fleet have moved close to
the coast of Abkhazia. Abkhaz forces and heavy
weapons have been moved to the administrative border
with Georgia across the entire zone of conflict.
Bombings have taken place in the vicinity of the
Georgian city of Zugdidi, causing panic among the
local population, many of whom are trying to seek
protection at the UNOMIG regional headquarters
located there.

As a result of the increasing tension and the
bombings in the Mission's area of operations,
UNOMIG has had to scale down its operations and is
now conducting only essential patrols. The Mission
continues to liaise with the sides and with the CIS
peacekeepers. For the time being, UNOMIG has not
observed major movements of troops or weapons into
the zone of conflict on the Georgian side. So far, the
only actions observed have been reinforcements for
existing positions along the ceasefire line.

Overall, with the exception of the bombing of the
Upper Kodori Valley and of targets near Zugdidi,
including the Senaki military base, no direct
confrontations appear to have broken out as yet in our
area of operations. UNOMIG has requested that the
CIS peacekeepers provide security for its regional
headquarters in Gali and Zugdidi.

