Ms. Mohammed: At the outset allow me to commend
your delegation, Madam President, for convening this
timely meeting and for giving me the opportunity to
share with the Security Council the perspectives of
the African Union (AU) on the important and urgent
matter concerning the situation in the Sahel region and
the operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five States for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).

The African Union remains deeply concerned about
the continuing deterioration of the security situation
in Mali and of the greater Sahel region as a result of
the increasing threat posed by terrorism and violent
extremism and its spread to the surrounding countries.
The events in that region again remind us ofthe fact that
terrorist groups know no borders. They think and act
globally. The international approach in dealing with that
scourge must therefore be coherent, comprehensive and
integrated. Sustainable and simultaneous engagement
is needed in all affected areas and regions.

There is therefore an urgent need for robust
international engagement in support of the efforts of
the countries of the region. The African Union has
been very supportive of the various regional initiatives,
in particular the G-5 Sahel and the Nouakchott
process, which demonstrate the political will and the
commitment of the countries concerned to combating
the serious threat of terrorism and transnational crime.

Such initiatives deserve international support
that is commensurate with the threat confronting the
region. We should be fully aware that the efforts being
deployed by the region will prevail only ifthey continue
to benefit from strong international consensus and
robust support. The African Union will spare no effort
towards that objective and will continue to sensitize its
member States and the international community with
regard to the urgent need to enhance its support.

(spoke in French)

The African Union commends the progress
made to date by the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, which
has successfully led its first two operations since the
establishment of its headquarters in Se'vare, Mali. I
would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
leaders of the States members of the G-5 Sahel, namely,
Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania, the Niger and Chad,
for their renewed resolve to work together for the peace,
security and stability of the region.

I would also like to express the gratitude of
the African Union to the bilateral and multilateral
partners for their multifaceted assistance, including
those that pledged at the high-level conference held
in Brussels on 23 February. We also welcome the
first African financial contributions, in particular
those of Rwanda and States members of the West
African Economic and Monetary Union.

In that regard, while reiterating our call for the
rapid disbursement of the pledged funds, I wish once
again to underscore the urgent need to ensure the
predictable and sustainable funding of the Joint Force,
for, as the Security Council already knows, owing to
financial difficulties and the lack of major equipment,
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force has fallen behind in achieving
its operational capacity. To that is added the fact that
the Joint Force cannot lead large-scale operations,
ultimately leaving the way open for terrorist groups
and organized crime, in particular the trafficking of
weapons, drugs and human beings, which is wreaking
havoc in the region.

The needs in terms of logistical support and
intelligence gathering are also vast and require huge
contributions. That is why it seems prudent to us to
once again request the support of the Security Council
for the G-5 Sahel and to draw attention to the volatile
security situation in the Liptako-Gourma region, where
the civilian population, symbols of the State and the
international forces are increasingly becoming prime
targets. In that context, only a robust mandate under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
as well as significant resouces made available to the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force, would help to eliminate the
identified threats.
(spoke in English)

Before concluding, I would like to report that, at
its seven hundredth and fifty-ninth meeting, held in
Addis-Ababa on 23 March, the African Union Peace
and Security Council decided to extend the deployment
of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force for an additional period of
12 months, effective from 12 April.

Going forward, the African Union will continue
to work towards strengthening the region's ownership
and will pursue its efforts to achieve greater
coherence within the framework of the African
Peace and Security Architecture in the Sahel region.
Our objective is to ensure increasing support and
cooperation from countries in the region, including
in terms of border security and intelligence sharing.
An important step in that direction was completed by
the signing of the memorandum of understanding for
the operationalization of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force,
concluded on 24 March between the AU Peace and
Security Department and the Permanent Secretariat of
the G-5 Sahel. In that context, it would be remiss not to
acknowledge and to applaud the efforts of Mr. Maman
Sidikou since his appointment at the helm of the G-5
Sahel Permanent Secretariat.

The African Union will also continue to lend its
support to ensuring the effective implementation of
the Algiers process Peace Agreement. That remains
the best way to further isolate terrorist and criminal
groups. We urge all Malian parties to redouble their
efforts in order to ensure the timely implementation of
the key provisions of the Agreement.

Finally, the complexity and the multidimensional
nature of the challenges facing the Sahel region attest
to the necessity for our collective response to fully
take into account the strong nexus between security
and development. We therefore need to recalibrate
our respective interventions in order to better respond
to the national and regional needs to address the root
causes of instability and to put an end to violence. In
that regard, we are taking steps to map out the various
projects and programmes carried out by African Union
institutions in the region in a number of areas. These
cover infrastructure, human development, health,
the environment, agriculture, food safety and the
fight against terrorism and transnational organized
crime. The objective is to ensure greater synergy in
our interventions and align them with the region's
priorities, bearing in mind that no lasting security and
peace can be achieved that is not rooted in sustainable
and inclusive development.
