Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by welcoming the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) back to the Council and thanking
her for her briefing today. The United Kingdom is
grateful for her twelfth report, and I thank her and her
Office for their continuing investigation of the situation
in Libya.

Whether in Libya or any other country, the ICC
has a vital role to play in challenging impunity and
ensuring the accountability of those who bear the
greatest responsibility for the most serious crimes of
international concern. Sadly, such crimes continue to
this day in Libya. We are deeply concerned about the
fact that civilians continue to suffer inexcusably from
the conflict and are subjected to violations and abuses
perpetrated by the parties to it. Civilian and residential
areas have been besieged, restricting people's access
to food, medical supplies and sometimes water and
electricity. More than 400,000 people have been
displaced by the conflict.

The spread of Da'esh is further exacerbating the
crisis. The group poses a serious threat to all Libyans
and the wider region. We condemn its barbaric crimes
and call for their perpetrators to be held to account. The
global campaign to bring Da'esh to justice - launched
during the general debate of the General Assembly
in September by the Foreign Secretary of the United
Kingdom, Mr. Ibrahim Al-Jaafari, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq and Mr. Didier Reynders, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Belgium - will help to ensure that
there is no impunity for those responsible.

We fully understand the Office of the Prosecutor's
determination to prioritize her investigations in Libya
in 2017, but we remain concerned about the possibility
that the security situation will continue to prevent
her from undertaking full investigative activities at
this time. Without a unified and accountable security
structure across the country to enforce law and order
and protect civilians, supported by an independent
judiciary, crimes falling within the Court's jurisdiction
may continue to occur. The rule of law must apply
throughout Libya and, ultimately, all perpetrators must
be held to account and tried in court in a transparent
and open manner. The United Kingdom will continue
to work with international partners to provide Libya
with the support it needs to meet the challenges it faces.

We have taken note of the Office of the Prosecutor's
request for assistance through the Security Council
regarding applications for new arrest warrants for
additional suspects. We thank the Prosecutor for her
briefing on the cases against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi. The United Kingdom calls
on Libya to take steps to enable the handover of Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the ICC without delay, and to
consult with the Court in order to address any problems
that might impede his transfer to The Hague.

We thank the Prosecutor's Office for continuing
to monitor allegations of torture and similar abuses
in Al-Hadba prison, and we note with concern the
unconfirmed report that an individual previously
suspected of torture has returned to the prison and
holds a position of authority there. We support the
steps that the Prosecutor's Office has taken to enhance
cooperation with additional national law-enforcement
agencies that are also working on Libya-related
investigations. We commend the Libyan Prosecutor
General and Libya's representative to the Court for
their continued positive and constructive engagement
with the Office of the Prosecutor. Cooperation
between the Office and the Libyan authorities is vital
if they are to tackle impunity for atrocity crimes. We
would also like to take this opportunity to thank the
Tunisian and Jordanian authorities for facilitating the
Prosecutor's investigations.

In conclusion, we recognize the additional financial
constraints that the Office of the Prosecutor faces. We
respect her independence in deciding on the best use
of those resources. As the United Kingdom, we are
working for a budget outcome that both meets the needs
of the Court and is aligned with the means available.

