I would like to welcome your presence among us, Mr. Minister, and to commend the presidency of the Niger for organizing this debate, which follows the meetings held at the initiative of Germany in July (see S/2020/751) and France in April (see S/2020/340). This demonstrates the integration of the environmental dimension into conflict prevention and crisis resolution. It has become a reality at the Security Council. The President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, the Executive Secretary of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification and Inna Modja spoke with conviction. The consequences of climate change and environmental degradation are considerable. They lead to the displacement of populations and an increase in the level of food and health insecurity, as well as nutritional, economic, demographic and social imbalances. The Sahel is unfortunately an excellent illustration of that, and the populations have undeniably understood this. The French Development Agency therefore supports several Sahelian non-governmental organizations that are at the forefront of the fight against desertification through regional projects, such as the Great Green Wall. It is an ambitious project, commensurate with the challenges of the region. In support of the populations and authorities, which are of course on the front line, we need preventive diplomacy that addresses all the destabilizing factors, including those related to climate change and biodiversity collapse. This will be my first point. We need to anticipate the humanitarian consequences of environmental disasters. We are not starting from scratch. For the past ten years, the European Union and the United Nations have established a partnership to build capacity in conflict prevention and land and natural resource management. That needs to become more systematic. We need to go further and equip ourselves with analytical tools. Some 2,500 conflicts are linked to fossil fuels, water, food and land, with already terrible humanitarian consequences that will be even more destabilizing in the future. In order not to be taken by surprise and to enable the Security Council to react in time, France would like the Secretary-General to be able to present every two years an assessment of the threats to international peace and security posed by the impacts of climate change in all regions of the world and over different time horizons. In addition, it is essential to assess the risks of environmental damage in fragile humanitarian situations. This will be my second point. The case of the FSO SAFER oil tanker in Yemen demonstrates the seriousness and urgency of the problem. The tanker poses an immense risk to the ecosystem and biodiversity, as well as to the health and livelihoods of millions of people in the Red Sea coastal States already affected by conflicts and environmental disasters. That is particularly the case in Yemen. It is urgent that the United Nations teams can have access to the tanker. Finally, climate and environmental issues must be systematically integrated into the planning of interventions by armed and security forces, while conducting humanitarian relief operations after natural disasters or during peacekeeping operations. Taking climate and environmental refugees into account is a global challenge that requires considerable coordination efforts between all actors, particularly on the ground. It is also with that in mind that we are continuing to reflect as to how to adjust our humanitarian instruments to better anticipate and take into account the possible environmental and climatic consequences of any humanitarian action on the ground. Protecting the environment therefore requires the full investment of all and greater international cooperation, since reconstruction and lasting peace depend on that. Rest assured that France, in conjunction with its partners, will continue its efforts in that direction.
