Mr. Rubadiri (Malawi): About three months ago, in
July, when we sat in this very room to consider the
Secretary-General's report of 27 June 1996 on the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), we
spoke with feelings of great hope and conviction that the
ray of hope at the end of the tunnel would soon be seen
in Angola. We will therefore be very brief. We still have
that conviction and hope, as the Angolan people have
dreams and aspirations to have their misery and suffering
ended.

We are disturbed, however, by the gloomy picture
that seems to be emerging from that part of our world, as
confirmed by the Secretary-General in his report
contained in document S/ 1996/827 of 4 October 1996.
The reluctance with which the worthy Mr. Jonas Savimbi
and UNITA are implementing the Lusaka Protocol is very
disheartening to us in Malawi and to all others in the region.

Malawi attended the summit meeting of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) Organ on
Politics, Defence and Security which was held in Luanda
last week. We subscribe fully to each and every
paragraph of the communique issued at the conclusion of
that very important summit. It is particularly regrettable
that Mr. Savimbi failed to attend the summit. But we
sincerely hope that the Security Council, in its
consideration of the Secretary-General's report will take
due account of the voices of concern, and at the same
time of the commitment to peace, that come out very
clearly from the communique. The Security Council needs
to send a strong and clear message to Mr. Savimbi and
UNITA that the international community will no longer
tolerate his and UNITA's intransigence.

It was only yesterday, in the general debate of the
General Assembly, that my Foreign Minister appealed to
Mr. Savimbi to comply fully with the speedy
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. We do so again
today, if only to echo the cries of a people yearning for
peace.

In making this strong appeal, we are always gratified
by the good work of the United Nations personnel in

 

Angola. We pay tribute once again to the continuing efforts
of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, the personnel of UNAVEM. III
and all the humanitarian workers who have dedicated
themselves to the service of peace in Angola. We urge the
Security Council, in considering this matter, to remember
the good work of these people and not to allow Angola to
recede into violence and despair. Angola is a special jewel
in the region of SADC, on whose shores, and on the shores
of Mozambique at Sofala, stopped those worthies who came
first to Africa from Portugal. Southern Africa is a region
that is now working hard to stand as an African example of
peace, good governance, stability and development. Lasting
peace in Angola will enable the region to realize its dream
for peace and development as we approach the next
century.

