Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): First of
all, my delegation wishes the Malaysian delegation a
very successful presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I am sure it will head our work in the very
best way possible.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Presidents
and Prosecutors of both Tribunals and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for their
reports (S/2015/340, S/2015/34l and S/2015/342) and
for today's informative briefings. This year we will
celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations, mark 70 years since the Holocaust and
10 years since the establishment of the responsibility to
protect, and remember the twentieth anniversary of the
Srebrenica genocide.

A little over 20 years ago, the Security Council
established the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), which was the first war crimes court
created by the United Nations and the first international
war tribunal since the Nuremberg and Tokyo tribunals.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has continuously supported
the work of the ICTY and the ICTR and the contribution
of the Tribunals to international criminal law, the rule
of law and justice.

We emphasize the importance of the successful
completion of the work of the ICTY. The Tribunal's
achievement will serve as a reminder to future
generations that there is no impunity for genocide,
crimes against humanity or violations of the laws or
customs of war, with the hope that such crimes will be
prevented in future. At the same time, we are concerned
that the successful completion of the Tribunal's mandate
is beingjeopardized by the health conditions of several
detainees as well as by Tribunal staff attrition. The
current situation is causing significant delays in the
judicial proceedings.

Furthermore, we are deeply concerned about the
possibility that years-long judicial proceedings could
end without final judgements having been passed. We
once again stress the importance of fair and expeditious
judicial proceedings. Therefore, we encourage the
ICTY to undertake all possible measures to implement
the best judicial praxis in order to avoid further delays.
The victims and their families have waited long enough.

We underline the vital role of justice in the building
of sustainable peace in post-conflict societies. In this
regard, regional cooperation remains essential to the
process of reconciliation within the country as well as
the region as a whole.
Bosnia and Herzegovina signed the protocols
on cooperation in the prosecution of war crimes
with neighbouring countries, with the intention of
intensifying cooperation in the investigation of war
crimes and the protection of witnesses. Valuable results
have been achieved. In March, the prosecutors of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia cooperated in the
arrests of eight persons accused of carrying out killings
in Srebrenica in 1995.

The cooperation of witnesses, particularly
victim-witnesses, is crucial to successful war crimes
prosecutions, not only before the ICTY but also
before the courts in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Victim-
witnesses often testify about very traumatic events.
During their testimony, they frequently relive their
traumas repeatedly. Furthermore, the same victim-
witness might often testify in different processes
against different persons accused of war crimes. We
underline that all who deal with victim-witnesses
should have a high degree of sensitivity for them and
should treat them with humanity and respect for their
dignity and human rights.

The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have
continued fully to cooperate with the ICTY during
the reporting period, particularly in terms of allowing
access to documents and archives and in witness-
protection matters. We have continuously increased our
level of cooperation with the ICTY and will continue to
do so with the Mechanism.

Our commitment to exercise our obligation to
investigate and prosecute persons responsible for war
crimes remains unquestionable. Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to strengthen the national justice system at all
levels so as to create the legal and political framework
necessary to bring to justice persons responsible for the
most serious crimes. We welcome the support of the
European Union in the strengthening of the capacity
of the judicial system in my country as well as in the
achievement of the goals of the national strategy for
war crimes processing.

The tracing of missing persons, exhumation and
the exchange of information about the victims have
constituted a valuable part of the cooperation between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the ICTY. After the
war, Bosnia and Herzegovina had the largest number
of missing persons compared with other countries in
the region. Around two thirds of the estimated 30,000
missing persons have been found and identified; we
still have about 8,000 missing persons.

The trilateral meeting of the Chief Prosecutors of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia held in
February this year is a step in the right direction to
strengthen regional cooperation in the process of the
tracing and identification of missing persons. This
meeting was organized with the support of the United
Nations Development Programme mission to Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and we would like to thank all of
those who helped the families ofmissing persons obtain
information about their missing relatives.

We welcome the progress made in the establishment
of information and documentation centres in Sarajevo
and Srebrenica to provide public access to copies of
public records of the archives of the ICTY and the
Mechanism. The centres have a deeply symbolic
significance in terms of serving as a constant reminder
to future generations that violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law should never be
repeated. We would like to encourage other countries
as well as organizations and non-governmental
organizations to support the project. The legacy of the
ICTY does not belong only to the countries concerned
but to all of humankind as a reminder of and testimony
to the fight against impunity.

Finally, we would like to emphasize that if the
Council is committed to ensuring that the victims and
survivors of the tragedies in the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda get the justice they deserve, it must continue
to provide all the support that the Tribunals and the
Residual Mechanism need to enable them to complete
their work and conclude this important chapter in
international criminaljustice, which will leave a lasting
and vital legacy.

