Mr. Chambas (spoke in French): I would like to
begin by wishing members a very happy 2017. It is an
honour for me to once again brief the Security Council
on the situation in West Africa and the Sahel. In addition
to the report (8/2016/1072) of the Secretary-General
on the activities of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel covering the period from 1 July to
31 December 2016, I would like to inform members of
recent developments and trends and of their impact in
the region.

At the outset, I would like to stress that much
progress has been made since our previous meeting,
in July 2016 (see S/PV.7735). In particular, the citizens
of the region have shown their maturity and their
willingness to freely and peacefully exercise their right
to choose their leaders. By way of example, I would
like to mention Cape Verde and Ghana, which carried
out presidential elections in strict compliance with the
norms and standards in this area, which confirmed
their status as good examples in the region and beyond.

(spoke in English)

On 1 December 2016, voters waited patiently to cast
their ballots in presidential elections in the Gambia,
which took place against a backdrop of key opposition
members being in prison and a communication
shutdown. I shared the joy of many witnessing the
announcement of the results by the Independent
Electoral Commission and the concession speech by
President Yahya Jammeh Babil Mansa on 2 December.
Conversely, we were saddened by the quickly unfolding
political crisis resulting from President Jammeh
changing his mind and deciding to reject the results,
citing irregularities, calling for fresh elections to be
managed by a new independent electoral commission,
and eventually lodging a petition aiming to invalidate
the results of the 1 December polls.

On 13 December 2016, I took part in the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Heads
of State mission to the Gambia and, since then, have
been facilitating interactions and negotiations aimed at
ensuring a peaceful transfer ofpower from the outgoing
President to President-elect Barrow. On 17 December,
at the fiftieth ordinary session of its Authority of
Heads of State and Government, ECOWAS agreed to
uphold the results of the 1 December elections and
decided to take all the necessary actions to enforce the
results. UNOWAS is fully involved in supporting the
ECOWAS-led mediation, which continues to explore all
avenues towards a peaceful transfer of power.

A high-level delegation has returned to Banjul
today, 13 January, as we meet here, in an attempt to
persuade President Jammeh Babil Mansa to abide by
the elections results and step down. The delegation
plans to leave no doubt about the determination of
ECOWAS to use all the necessary means, including
force, to have the will of the Gambian people upheld.
Should that be deemed necessary, ECOWAS intends
to seek the endorsement of the African Union Peace
and Security Council and the formal approval of the
Security Council to deploy troops to the Gambia.

Despite a pre-election period that was marked at
times by high political tension, the people of Ghana
lived up to their reputation for organizing elections that
serve as an inspiration for the rising tide of democracy
throughout the African continent. I salute outgoing
President John Dramani Mahama for his gracious
acceptance of the results, and I congratulate President
Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo on his victory. While
credit is due to the people of West Africa, I would
also like to acknowledge the country's regional and
international partners that jointly accompanied those
important milestones.

In Guinea, we are concerned that the local
elections, which are forecast to take place in February
2017, in accordance with the terms of the 12 October
political agreement, may be postponed. There is still
a lack of consensus between the ruling party and the
opposition regarding the balloting system. Moreover,
the amendments to the electoral code, which are needed
to hold the elections in February 2017, were not adopted
during the recent parliamentary session. In fact, the
opposition members of Parliament withdrew from
the National Assembly on the last day of its session,
threatening to resume street protests. UNOWAS
will continue to engage Guinean stakeholders on the
imperative of implementing the provisions of the
12 October agreement.

Elsewhere in the region, a number of countries
are undertaking efforts to update their Constitutions
and build the foundations for prosperous, cohesive
and democratic societies. In line with the ECOWAS
Vision of moving from an "ECOWAS of States" to
an "ECOWAS of people ", UNOWAS continues to
encourage these efforts to take place in a spirit of
dialogue and participation.

During the reporting period, several parents in
Nigeria were reunited with their daughters who had been
captured by Boko Haram in the north-eastern town of
Chibok approximately two years ago. Enhanced efforts
are under way to release more of the abductees. Several
hundred terrorists have also collectively surrendered to
the authorities, due, in part, to the concerted efforts of
troop-contributing countries and partners supporting
the Multinational Joint Task Force.

At the same time, the group's attacks have recently
become more frequent, disrupting the return of refugees
and internally displaced persons to their homes. With
new areas liberated, the full extent of the tragedy has
become all the more Visible. Hundreds of thousands
of children are severely malnourished and may face
starvation. While the United Nations has scaled up the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to the Lake Chad
basin countries, in particular in Borno state in Nigeria
and Diffa province in the Niger, I am concerned that the
Nigeria humanitarian response plan remains less than
37 per cent funded. Council members will agree that we
can, and must, do better.

Amid increasingly vocal internal demands for peace
dividends to materialize, I call upon partners to support
the democratic and economic consolidation of Burkina

Faso, which finds itself in the middle of a volatile
regional security environment. Our aim is to ensure
that post-conflict societies do not relapse into crisis,
thereby hurting peace consolidation and democratic
gains. Last Friday, 6 January, in neighbouring Cote
d'Ivoire, it was worrisome to see former fighters who
had been integrated in the armed forces try to take
control of the locality of Bouake' and other cities on
account of remuneration-related grievances.

Looking forward, UNOWAS will enthusiastically
contribute to the implementation of resolution 2282
(2016) and the General Assembly resolution on
sustaining peace. My Office is an active member of the
Inter-Agency Working Group on Sustaining Peace in
Burkina Faso and is contributing to the development
of the sustaining peace strategy in that pilot country.
My good offices and the technical-level support of
UNOWAS will continue to provide support to this
holistic United Nations approach in Burkina Faso and
throughout West Africa and the Sahel.

My Office will also provide support on issues related
to regional stabilization, including through the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. As members
are aware, the review of the integrated strategy, which
the Council had mandated, was completed last year.
Taking a critical look at the challenges of coordination
against a shifting implementation environment, we
remain committed to promoting and coordinating a
holistic approach that addresses the root causes of
deprivation, exclusion and insecurity.

In line with the recommendations of the report of
the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446), the Secretary-General's report
on the future of United Nations peace operations
(S/2015/682),and the report of the Advisory Group of
Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture
(see S/2015/490), we will continue to strengthen our
collaboration with regional and subregional partners.
To mention just a few examples, we have stepped up
our partnership with the Group of Five for the Sahel,
including by facilitating cooperation with the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force and providing
support to the Group of Five regional cell on the
prevention of radicalization and violent extremism.

In support of the Strategy for Cross-border Security
in the Mano River Union, we have facilitated platforms
where representatives of the joint border-security and
confidence-building units shared experiences in order
to strengthen security and cooperation in a way that also
binds youth, women and other community actors. That
is but one example of an inclusive approach working
together across institutions. In that regard, I call upon
the member States of the Mano River Union, as well
as the broader international community, to provide the
minimum resources required to maintain and expand
the unit's operations.

The United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel is collaborating closely with the United Nations
missions in the region and, in the context of the drawdown
of the United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire and the
United Nations Mission in Liberia, we are intensifying
our collaboration and information-sharing at the
leadership and technical levels.

Before concluding, allow me to mention that the
Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission continued the
emplacement of pillars for the definitive demarcation of
the border between the two countries, a process that has
been accompanied by confidence-building activities on
both sides ofthe border. The Mixed Commission remains
a shining example of what long-term commitment and
effective cooperation can achieve.

Rest assured that my Office will redouble its efforts
to prevent conflict and sustain peace in West Africa
and the Sahel, always of course in collaboration with
other institutions of the United Nations, ECOWAS and
the wider international community.

