Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like at the outset to thank Special Representative
Salame, African Union Commissioner Chergui and
Ambassador Schulz for their respective briefings.
I commend Mr. Salame for coming to New York to
brief us.

Since early April, the military conflicts that have
broken out around Tripoli have resulted in heavy
casualties, including civilians. The increasing number
of refugees, migrants and displaced persons and the
rise in terrorist activities are undermining the stability
and development of Libya in the political, security,
economic and social areas. They are also spilling over
into other areas, such as the Sahel and the Mediterranean
coastal region. China is extremely concerned about
developments in Libya. The international community
should pay increased attention to Libya and work
together to reach a solution to the Libyan issue as soon
as possible. In that regard, I shall make the following
four points.
First, we must continue to seek a political solution.
China has always believed that the Libyan issue must
be settled through political means. We hope that
the parties to the conflict in Libya will focus on the
interests of the country and its people, respond to
the calls of the international community, achieve a
ceasefire as soon as possible, de-escalate tensions
and return to the path leading to settlement through
peaceful dialogue and consultation. We must safeguard
the safety and security of civilians and try to improve
the humanitarian situation.

Secondly, synergy must be created. The
international community should respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Libya.
Countries with influence should play an active role and
exert their influence by encouraging the Libyan parties
to resolve their differences and build mutual trust and
by providing constructive assistance to the parties in
achieving a ceasefire and resuming political dialogue.

Thirdly, we must strengthen coordination. China
supports the active promotion of the political settlement
process in Libya, under United Nations leadership, and
the good offices of Secretary-General Guterres and
Special Representative Salame. My country supports
the active role of regional organizations, such as the
African Union, and hopes that the relevant mechanisms
will fully leverage their advantages and enhance
coordination and cooperation.

Fourthly, the issue of sanctions should be properly
handled. We have always believed that sanctions are
not an end in themselves, but rather a means. They
should always serve to reach a political solution to the
problems at hand. While maintaining the enforcement
of sanctions on Libya, it is imperative to ensure
avoiding their negative impact on its civilian population
and third countries. The overall interests of the Libyan
nation and the day-to-day life and humanitarian needs
of its people should not be undermined.

China stands willing to work with the international
community in an active and concerted effort to achieve
lasting peace and stability in Libya.

