Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to congratulate
Mr. Smith on his assumption of the post of Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED). We wish to thank him for his
briefing to the Security Council.

We welcome constructive ideas proposed by the
representatives at today's meeting regarding the future
work of the Executive Directorate. We believe that the
discussion today will help the Council, CTED and the
Counter-terrorism Committee (CTC) carry out their
work more effectively.

The fight against terrorism is a major common
concern to mankind in today's world. Under the aegis
of the United Nations and other international agencies,
an international legal framework for the fight against it
has been established, which provides the legal
foundation for the efforts of various Governments and
the United Nations against terrorism. The Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy was adopted by the
General Assembly at its sixtieth session, in 2006
(General Assembly resolution 60/288). It reflects the
common concern of countries about the question of
terrorism.

It is the view of China that the United Nations
plays an irreplaceable, central role in international
cooperation against terrorism. We hope agencies within
the United Nations system that are active in the area of
counter-terrorism will implement the four pillars of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in a balanced
manner and will reflect the concerns of various
countries about terrorism in a fair and reasonable
manner.

It is the consistent view of China that
comprehensive measures against terrorism should pay
attention to the various manifestations of terrorism and
to its underlying causes so that both the manifestations
and the root causes can be tackled. China is against any
attempt to link terrorism to any specific religion or
ethnic minority groups. China is also against the
adoption of double standards in the fight against
terrorism.

At present, acts of terrorism break out frequently
around the world, which is ample proof that it poses a
serious threat to international peace and security. It
also highlights a need for the United Nations and the
Security Council to continue to strengthen its fight
against terrorism.

It is China's view that the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) constitutes an important part of
the Security Council's efforts against terrorism, while
CTED and its expert groups should continue their
supporting role in the implementation of that
resolution. China welcomes CTED's recently adopted
reorganization plan. China appreciates CTED's
measures to improve its consistency. We believe that
the reorganization plan and the working
recommendations will help increase the efficiency of
CTED.

We hope that CTED will strengthen its
communication with Member States so that the
transparency of its work can be increased. China has
noted that CTED is in the process of revising the
global survey of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) and will continue its dialogue with Member
States by way of the preliminary implementation
assessments. It is China's hope that in implementing
those two important tasks, CTED will give full
expression to the principle of consistency and to
transparency so that its overall performance can be
raised to a higher level.

It is the view of China that, although the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and CTED are mandated to
monitor and assist Member States in implementing
resolution 1373 (2001), it is the Member States
themselves that are to implement that resolution.
Therefore, in future, both the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and CTED should give more consideration
to the choices of Member States in identifying their
domestic and counter-terrorism strategy and their
methods of implementation; should give full
consideration to the specific conditions of each country
and the practical difficulties in assessing
implementation; and should try to be fair and
reasonable. When offering technical assistance, efforts
should be made to meet the needs and desires of the
Member States.

The Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is the
embodiment of the common understanding among
countries against terrorism. It covers various aspects of
the United Nations efforts against terrorism. It also
provides a framework for effective cooperation
between the United Nations and the international
community in the fight against terrorism. China
supports the active engagement of CTED within its
terms of reference in the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and calls
on it to increase its cooperation with the vast majority
of Member States so that the United Nations and the
Security Council can play an even greater leading role
in the international fight against terrorism.

Over the past few years, under the policy
guidance of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, CTED
has done a tremendous amount of effective work in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and has thus
become an important and integral part of the Security
Council counter-terrorism mechanism machinery.
China supports the extension of the mandate of CTED
by the Security Council. We hope that CTED will
continue to adhere to the principles of cooperation,
transparency and even-handedness, in a continuous
effort to improve its working methods so that it can
make greater contributions to the implementation of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) and the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

