Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the distinguished
manner in which you have presided over the Council
for the past month. I would also like to thank Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, for his briefing on the status of the political
process in the country.

South Africa wishes to reiterate that the only
sustainable solution to the conflict in Syria is a
comprehensive political one that emanates from an
inclusive Syrian-led dialogue. That process should be
aimed at achieving a political transition that reflects the
will of the Syrian people with guaranteed protection
for all groups of Syrian society. My delegation
appreciates and supports Mr. Pedersen and his team
in their continued engagement and diplomatic efforts
in building trust among the various parties, including
civil society and women's groups, and we welcome the
progress that he has made thus far. Without trust, there
can be no progress.

South Africa calls on the Council to unite towards
the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) as the
blueprint for a long-term political solution in Syria.

In addition to the Special Envoy's efforts to engage
with all Syrian stakeholders, my delegation supports
the Special Envoy in his efforts to establish a common
forum with the aim of supporting a common purpose
for peace in Syria. That would be an opportunity to
revitalize broad-based international cooperation and to
support the Geneva processes, including the finalization
of the constitutional committee, with a minimum of
30 per cent representation of women.

As many speakers stated earlier this week during
the humanitarian briefing (see S/PV.8561), the
escalation of violence, particularly in north-western
Syria, undermines the efforts made in the political
process and further aggravates the dire humanitarian
situation in the country. The perpetuation of such acts
has had an increasingly destabilizing impact on the
wider region through the displacement of thousands
of people, the exacerbation of political and sectarian
differences and the potential to spread extremism
beyond Syria's borders.

The political and humanitarian situations in Syria
cannot be addressed independently of each other. An
escalation of violence and the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation negatively affect the political
progress. In the same vein, progress in the political
sphere will support efforts towards ensuring that
all Syrians can live in a safe, secure and prosperous
environment, free of violence and terrorism.

Peace, stability and democracy are unassailable
rights of the Syrian people. The international
community should fully support the political processes
towards long-term peace in Syria as a matter of priority
and continue to support the United Nations, including
the Special Envoy, as well as other mediation efforts

aimed at resolving the conflict. It is the Council's
responsibility to ensure that there is political progress
and a return to normality in Syria.

In conclusion, South Africa reiterates its position
that the annexation of any territory seized through
force is invalid under international law and calls on
Israel to withdraw from occupied territories. As many
speakers have previously stated, the need to uphold
and respect international law is essential to restoring
long-term peace and stability in the Middle East. In that
regard, we call on all parties to uphold and respect their
international obligations if they expect the same from
other countries.

