The President: At the outset, I should like, on
behalf of the Council, to express profound sympathy
and condolences to the Governments and peoples of
Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Switzerland, and to the bereaved families, in
connection with the deaths of two international
humanitarian workers of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) and four nationals of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, who gave their
lives yesterday in the cause of peace while serving with
the ICRC in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Council strongly condemns the wanton killing of
those humanitarian workers.

I would like to request members to stand and
observe a minute of silence in memory of those six
humanitarian workers who so tragically lost their lives
on 26 April 2001.

The members ofthe Council observed a minute of
silence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation concerning Western Sahara

Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/2001/398)

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation
concerning Western Sahara, document 8/2001/398.
Members of the Council also have before them
document 8/2001/413, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Security Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(8/2001/413) before it. IfI hear no objection, I shall
now put the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Bangladesh, China, Colombia, France, Ireland,
Jamaica, Mali, Mauritius, Norway, Russian
Federation, Singapore, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1349 (2001).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.05 pm.

