Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank Chile
for convening this debate. We see how acute economic
problems and social injustice fuel discontent, terrorism,
extremism and radicalism in many parts of the world.
Therefore, economic and social progress, with inclusive
development, are the most effective ways to diminish
risks and enable long-term stability.

It is critical to examine how societies are governed
based on the rule of law, how resources are distributed
and how new risks and vulnerabilities are responded
to. Hence, in the preventive, conflict and post-conflict
phases in Africa, we should ensure that inclusive
economic, political, legislative and judicial institutions
are strengthened, made effective and accountable
and respond to the needs of all, including the poorest
and most vulnerable, especially women and youth.
Therefore, United Nations peacekeeping operations in
Africa should take on increasingly complex and hybrid
operations, as well as specific and comprehensive social
reconstruction tasks designed to create legitimate,
inclusive and effective States.

The work of the Peacebuilding Commission and
its Support Office will have to be better equipped,
in close cooperation with the European Union, the
African Union and subregional structures, to build
inclusive governance systems that withstand shocks
and vulnerability, with a strong role for women in peace
and development.

In the context of the post-2015 agenda, Kazakhstan
is committed to inclusive, people-centred development
as the bedrock for peace and security, through
our Kazakhstan 2050 Strategy and the recently
launched Nurly Zhol programme. Both are political
and macroeconomic stabilization plans aimed at
establishing, at the same time, social protection, quality
health care, education, housing and employment.
Kazakhstan has enacted progressive legislation to
recognize its 130 ethnic groups and almost 20 religious
denominations on its territory.

My country is committed to inclusive development
at the global level as well. To ensure harmony among all
ethnicities on its territory and in the region, my country
has taken the lead in regularly convening the Congress
of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions. Astana
is going to host the fifth Congress in June this year on
the theme "Dialogue of religious and political leaders
for peace and development". My Government thanks
the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations for its
continued support to the Congress.

The Astana Economic Forum that Kazakhstan
has been hosting, together with the World Anti-Crisis
Conference, has provided new road maps for economic
stability. Notable among them is the concept of the
World Anti-Crisis Plan, which the United Nations can
consider and elaborate on.

Asthechairofanumberofregionalorganizations-the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the Collective

Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-building Measures in Asia - Kazakhstan
has been trying its utmost to ensure security and keep
the region safe from conflicts, transnational crime and
terrorism. Our country is now proposing to host the
United Nations regional hub in Almaty, with a focus
on sustainable development, humanitarian assistance
and building resilience. We believe that a strong and
stable Central Asian region contributes to global peace.
Valuing the importance of inclusive development,
Kazakhstan's campaign for a non-permanent seat on
the Security Council is focused on human security
through reaching nuclear security and food, water and
energy security.

My country will remain fully supportive of the
activities of the Security Council and the international
community in seeking solutions for global peace and
security in the context of inclusive development.

