Mr. Owada (Japan): At the outset, I should like to
express, on behalf of the Government of Japan, my
gratitude for the opportunity given to me to address the
Security Council on this historic occasion. I wish also to
take this occasion to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of November.

The appreciation of my delegation goes also to your
predecessor during the past month, the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria, for the excellent manner in
which he carried out his responsibilities.

After four years of conflict, which has claimed the
lives of 250,000 people and forced more than three million
people from their homes, the groundwork has now been
laid for a lasting peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Having
repeatedly stressed that peace can only be achieved through
negotiations, the Government of Japan finds it most
gratifying that an Agreement has now been reached by the
representatives of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to bring the conflict to an end.

Japan pays high tribute to all those who have been
engaged in intensive negotiations, with patience and
perseverance and in a spirit of compromise, to achieve this
historic and long-awaited Agreement. I wish in particular to
applaud the untiring efforts of the United States in bringing
the parties concerned to the negotiating table and in
organizing the proximity talks. Members of the Contact
Group and other countries concerned, various international
organizations, as well as the United Nations
Secretary-General and the Security Council, have all played
their indispensable roles in fostering the negotiating
process, for which they deserve our sincere appreciation.

Hard as the negotiating process has been, the
implementation of the Peace Agreement that lies ahead of
us will be even more difficult. Indeed, the Agreement
reached yesterday in Dayton, Ohio, is nothing more than
the first step - albeit a crucial one - on the long and
arduous road to the consolidation of peace. The restoration
of peace and the future development of the region that was
formerly Yugoslavia will depend directly on the full
implementation of this comprehensive Peace Agreement.

The parties to the conflict must faithfully implement
it. They must strive to build a new order which will foster
the process of reconciliation among various ethnic groups
and the repatriation and resettlement of refugees and
displaced persons. Moreover, they must cooperate fully
with the efforts of the international community towards
the implementation of the Agreement. We look forward
to the formal signing of the Peace Agreement which is
expected to take place shortly, and then to the meeting in
London where the concrete implementation scheme will
be worked out. This will be an extremely complex and
delicate process. In particular, the successful
implementation of the agreement will depend in no small
part on the smooth deployment of the implementation
force (IFOR). This is a task which the Security Council
will have to supervise with utmost care.

As international efforts towards the reconstruction
and rehabilitation of the region are undertaken, it is of
vital importance that the respective roles of the various
organizations involved be clarified, and that all civilian
activities be coordinated. Furthermore, coordination
between the implementation force and the organizations
engaged in civilian activities, such as the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), is also essential.

Speaking at the General Assembly this past
September, the Foreign Minister of Japan affirmed
Japan's intention to cooperate, together with other
countries concerned and relevant international
organizations, in the rehabilitation of the region once the
conflict is brought to an end. In his message yesterday to
congratulate the parties on the successful achievement of
the comprehensive Peace Agreement, the Foreign Minister
reiterated the intention of the Government of Japan to
take an active part in the international assistance efforts
for the region of the former Yugoslavia.

With regard to the resolutions which the Security
Council has just adopted, Japan welcomes the resolution
to suspend sanctions against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia indefinitely. It is an expression of the
acknowledgement by the international community of the
cooperative spirit demonstrated by that country.

As to the resolution to terminate the arms embargo,
Japan, while endorsing the lifting of the embargo, is of
the view that an unbridled inflow of arms into the region

 

might run the risk of jeopardizing the durable stability of
the region. For this reason, we might consider the
possibility of establishing a system for the control of arms
in the region.

In adopting these resolutions, the Security Council has
demonstrated its desire to foster a consensual Agreement
among the parties concerned. It has also challenged the
parties concerned to remain committed to the peace process.

I wish to conclude my brief intervention by expressing
the sincere hope of Japan that the leaders of the three
countries will work steadfastly for the implementation of
the Agreement, and will not be deterred from their task of
ensuring that their people can look forward to living in
peace, secure within their national borders. I wish to assure
them that their efforts will have the full support and
assistance of the entire international community, including
my own country.

