The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Gabon.

My delegation joins others in congratulating and
thanking the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
Tribunals for their respective briefings. I would also
like to take this opportunity to welcome the excellent
work done since January by the delegation of Portugal
in leading the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.

Gabon welcomes the progress made in
implementing the completion strategy and commends
the firm determination that the Judges, Prosecutors and
staff have shown to bring about the rapid completion of
their work. We are convinced that all of these efforts
will enable a smooth transition towards the Residual
Mechanism as provided for by the Council in
resolution 1966 (2010).

Our debate is taking place at a time when
important developments in the fight against impunity
have just taken place. The arrests on 25 and 26 May of
Bernard Munyagishari and Ratko Mladic', respectively,
have great symbolic value and show the determination
of Governments to cooperate in the fight against
impunity in their respective States. My delegation
would like to express its satisfaction and
congratulations to these Governments, in particular that
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

These arrests also remind us that justice requires
patience and sacrifice. We must seize the momentum
thus created, and Gabon encourages the international
community and concerned States to strengthen their
cooperation with a view to achieving the arrest of the
other fugitives. This cooperation should also contribute
to the implementation of the completion strategy.

Without efficient judicial and penal institutions,
such as the International Criminal Tribunals, it would
be very difficult to fight effectively against impunity or
to strengthen international criminal justice. The
standards-setting actions of the Security Council in this
area are universal in scope and should be strengthened
in time. Gabon encourages stronger political will and
actions to strengthen the work of the Tribunals in their
actions to complete their work within the trials'
schedules. The Judges and Prosecutors have told us
about the difficulties that could compromise the pursuit
of their mandates. We hope that the measures
recommended will be taken into consideration.

The Tribunals must be given appropriate financial
and human resources until the transfer of responsibility
to the Residual Mechanism. The provisions contained
in General Assembly resolution 65/253 are a step in the
right direction.

In conclusion, as we highlighted during the last
debate on this issue (see S/PV.6434), it is important to
strengthen the capacity of national judicial systems.
The training of staff in national judicial institutions, in
particular judges and support staff, should be a
fundamental aspect of the global mechanism for
implementing this strategy.

Finally, Gabon would like to thank the Office of
Legal Affairs for the work it has done in supporting the
various Tribunals.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Pursuant to rule 37 of the Council's rules of
procedure, I now give the floor to the representative of
Serbia.

