Ms. Wensley (Australia): Let me add Australia's
voice to all those which have expressed sympathy to
the Governments of India and Pakistan for the deaths
and the suffering which have been caused to so many
of their citizens by the serious earthquake which struck
their region yesterday.

I want to thank you warmly, Sir, for arranging
this open meeting of the Council, which has given non-
members once again the opportunity to hear directly
from the Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Mr. Vieira de Mello, on developments in the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) over the past six months, and his views on
the tasks and the challenges which must be dealt with
in East Timor in the coming year and beyond. I would
like to thank him for his thorough and characteristically
candid briefing and to reiterate the Australian
Government's appreciation of the excellent work of
UNTAET under his skilled guidance as the Secretary-
General's Special Representative.

We also appreciate the opportunity to hear from
the United Nations Development Programme, the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the
President of the General Assembly and, especially, Jose'
Ramos-Horta. These presentations underlined in a very
practical and clear way the unique character of
international cooperation over East Timor and
conveyed an evident commitment to seeing this effort
succeed fully.

The work of UNTAET, in close cooperation with
the East Timorese, over the past 15 months has set in
place many of the building blocks required for East
Timor to become a self-reliant independent nation. The
renewal of UNTAET's mandate, which Council
members will consider following today's substantial
debate, will be decisive in determining UNTAET's
capacity to continue to build on the work it has done so
far and, importantly, to focus on preparations for the
next steps, up to independence and beyond.

Australia certainly welcomes recent United
Nations efforts to accelerate the transfer of authority to
the East Timorese. We agree with the emphasis in the
Secretary-General's report on maintaining the pace of
what has been called "Timorization" over the coming
months. As a fundamental element of capacity-
building, Timorization will remain critical to East
Timor's successful transition to independence.
Continued capacity and institution-building will be
essential to achieving a timely transfer of authority
from the United Nations to an effective East Timorese
Government and administration.

In addition to this key task, UNTAET and the
East Timorese face other considerable challenges over
the next 12 months. One of these is to build the basis
for a transparent, democratic political system,
including through the provision of adequate civic
education - a point which, I noticed, the Ambassador
of Colombia also placed strong emphasis on in his
statement earlier. Another is assisting the development
of East Timorese capacity to maintain security, law and
order. The establishment of the East Timorese Defence
Force will be an important factor enhancing East
Timor's capacity for self-reliance in security matters.
But we also look forward to progress in the training
and development of the Timor Lorosa'e Police Service,
as independence approaches.

The prompt repatriation of remaining East
Timorese refugees in West Timor remains an important
and pressing priority for East Timor's future stability
and security. An end to militia intimidation, unimpeded
access to camps for humanitarian workers and a
credible registration process all remain key
prerequisites for this to succeed.

As I have emphasized at every possible
opportunity, Australia considers it crucial that
international support for East Timor's transition to
independence be maintained. Gains have been made,
but there is significant distance yet to be travelled to
consolidate the good work of UNTAET to date and to
build the necessary foundations for an independent
East Timor that will take its place in the region and in
this United Nations, confident, secure and well-
prepared to manage the many challenges of statehood.

For all these reasons Australia strongly supports
the Secretary-General's recommendation to renew
UNTAET's mandate until 31 December 2001. We are
looking to the Council to renew the current mandate in
terms that will secure continuity of its operation. Given
continuing security concerns, maintenance of a strong
security component is particularly important. We feel
that troop-contributing countries will all need to remain
committed to the UNTAET peacekeeping operation
over this period. It is also our firm View - and I note
that we share this with a number of other speakers
today - that any consideration of a reduction in the
military component of UNTAET should be based on an
objective military assessment by UNTAET forces. It is
the situation and circumstances on the ground that must
be the paramount determinant.

I would like to take this opportunity to note
Australia's appreciation for the outstanding leadership
that Thailand is providing to the current UNTAET
peacekeeping operation.

Finally, on this question of the peacekeeping
operation, in recognition of the recent important
discussions on HIV/AIDS and peacekeeping in the
Council, and indeed elsewhere ongoing in the United
Nations system, I also want to highlight the importance
that Australia attaches to UNTAET peacekeeping
operation members being fully briefed on the
prevention and control of HIV/AIDS and other
communicable diseases.

The United Nations role in East Timor is not
going to end on the day of independence, although
obviously the nature of the Organization's relationship
with the East Timorese will change as soon as they
achieve a government of their own independent nation.
We should therefore be thinking and planning now not
just for the renewal of this mandate, but for the period
beyond independence, when it is going to be necessary
to ensure that the groundwork laid by UNTAET can be
maintained and developed by the new East Timorese
Government.

The Secretary-General's report recognizes that an
independent East Timor will still require substantial
international support, including military and civilian
police components and support for civilian
administration. I reiterate that it is timely now that
Member States - and particularly troop-contributing
nations - focus on the need for early planning and
preparation for such a presence, including possible
contributions. My Government is certainly giving very
close consideration to these matters, and we look
forward to ongoing dialogue with UNTAET, in turn in
the closest of consultation and collaboration with the
East Timorese, on the appropriate shape and mandate
for a future United Nations presence. East Timorese
input on models for post-independence cooperation
between the United Nations and East Timor will
obviously be critical to the planning and the
preparations for the next phase in its transition.
Ultimately, as we all recognize, it will be for the East
Timorese themselves to determine how they wish the
United Nations to assist.

To contribute to this process of dialogue and
consultation, including with other international actors,
Australia offers the following ideas on the future
United Nations role.

Any post-independence United Nations presence
in East Timor will most likely be smaller than
UNTAET, and focused on the main task of assisting
East Timor with capacity and institution-building,
including in the areas of financial management -
about which we heard quite a great deal this
morning -judiciary, police, defence, health, education
and infrastructure. To this end, the mission should be
staffed by United Nations personnel with appropriate
experience and qualifications, capable of providing
skills transfer to accelerate the localization of skills.
The mandate for a new mission obviously should be
constructed to ensure that it has an appropriate
relationship with the new East Timorese Government.

A post-independence United Nations security
component should, in our view, take the form of a Blue
Helmet operation mandated by the Security Council
with a clear end-state. The size of the peacekeeping
operation should be based on an assessment of the
security situation done much closer to independence.
Diversity of troop contributions will remain important,
and a wide range of international contributors,
including strong regional representation, should be
encouraged. In the field of law and order, assessments
of the results of police training to date indicate that
United Nations civilian police will need to remain
beyond independence, and we would welcome any
further comments that the Special Representative might
be able to offer with respect to the results of the police
training to date.

More broadly, in the area of security, I would
make two additional points that might seem obvious
but which we feel should not be underestimated. First
concerns the need for continued efforts to bring to
justice those responsible for crimes and human rights
violations in East Timor, and in this regard, like a
number of my colleagues, I particularly note and
welcome the fact that the Dili District Court has just
completed its first successful prosecution of a case
related to the violence that took place in 1999. Second
is the importance of East Timor working actively to
build positive relations with its neighbours, especially
Indonesia. I note that this morning Sergio Vieira de
Mello emphasized this as a foundation stone for the
future and that Jose Ramos-Horta laid special emphasis
on this and, indeed, indicated that the East Timorese
leadership is working very actively on this.

Finally, it is fundamental that arrangements
across a range of areas, of which financial are
particularly important, support the transition to an
effective East Timorese Government and do not cease
on the formal date of independence. In this context, we
endorse the Secretary-General's support for
consideration of increasing flexibility in the use of
assessed contributions allocated to UNTAET and its
post-independence successor. I think in this respect that
Mark Malloch Brown's strong call for a funding
strategy is particularly relevant.

To conclude, I want to underline the two key
points of my remarks. First, Australia fully supports
the continuing UNTAET operation, including the
progressive transfer of authority to the East Timorese,
as the path to a fully functioning independent State.
Secondly, it is our strong View that it is important that
the international community begin now to prepare the
groundwork for an appropriate United Nations
presence in East Timor after independence. In order to
be effective and to preserve all the gains made by
UNTAET, the transition from one to the other must be
as seamless as possible, in both organizational and
financial terms.

Many of us here today have already made a
significant investment in the future of East Timor. But
the long-term success of that future depends on
continuing commitment to the UNTAET operation and
our willingness now to plan, prepare and commit for
the period beyond independence.

Let me assure the Council and Member States
that Australia remains committed to East Timor and
ready to do its part, working with the United Nations,
the East Timorese and all other international players
which share that commitment.
