Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): As an observer State of
the African Union, Kazakhstan commends the Kingdom
of the Netherlands for selecting a very timely and
critical issue for consideration during its presidency of
the Security Council this month. We look forward to a
discussion that results in greater awareness and action.

We also thank our briefers, Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed; the representative of the
Lake Chad Basin Commission, Mr. Bila; and Senior
Conflict Adviser at Adelphi, Ms. Chitra Nagarajan,
for their updates. We also welcome the delegation of
Nigeria to the Chamber today.

The humanitarian situation across the Lake Chad
region is presently one of most severe in the world.
This year approximately 10.7 million people are in
need of relief assistance and persistent insecurity and
violence continue to drive displacements in higher
proportions. In addition, approximately 4.5 million
people are currently food insecure. We therefore call
on the international community to increase its support
for humanitarian assistance in the affected countries.
Sustained humanitarian efforts must be accompanied
and reinforced by support for recovery and increased
development efforts.

The worsening ecological situation in the region
also has a deep impact on its socioeconomic prospects.
It is estimated that 40 million people depend on Lake
Chad for crop and livestock farming, fishing and trade.
Over the past 60 years, the size of Lake Chad has
decreased by 95 per cent as a result of the consequences
of an extended drought and climate change, affecting
both the ecosystems and the economy of the region.
Consequently, unemployed youth fall prey to the
extremist group Boko Haram.

Along with the efforts of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission (LCBC) to address security issues,
it is urgent that international partners and donors
support projects such the Inter Basin Water Transfer,
aimed at restoring Lake Chad. Such a measure
would foster not only regional integration but also
development. We commend the Government of Nigeria
and the Commission for hosting the international
conference on saving Lake Chad, held in Abuja last
month. We emphasize the importance of the United
Nations continuing to carry out risk assessments of
climate-related security challenges, when appropriate,
and to highlight the need to implement the relevant
Security Council documents to mitigate the surge.

On the security front, we strongly condemn the
attacks on the civilian population by Boko Haram
insurgents, especially the abduction of children,
women and girls for sexual exploitation and for the
purpose of suicide bombing. Commendable results
have been achieved by the Multinational Joint Task
Force in reducing the operational capacities and the
geographical reach of Boko Haram. Likewise, it is
critical to continue to strengthen the partnership among
regional countries through the Joint Steering Committee
of the LCBC and the African Union with a view to also
mobilizing support for the urgent operational needs of
the Task Force.

However, United Nations support and engagement
in regional issues are vital. We note the efforts of the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
for West Africa and the Sahel, as well as for Central
Africa, to enhance coordination and the support of
regional partners, with a focus on joint support for the
LCBC and on combating Boko Haram in addition to
other areas of cooperation.

We would like to stress the importance of
strengthening the nexus between security and
development as the bedrock of the stabilization,
reconciliation and development of the Lake Chad
region. We also firmly believe that the United Nations
and regional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States and the Economic
Community of Central African States, should develop
a single and comprehensive operational strategy that
addresses the root causes of the crisis. Such a strategy
should be implemented in close cooperation with the
affected countries. We therefore welcome the holding
of the first regional stabilization conference in the
Lake Chad Basin region as an initial step towards
that purpose.

As proved time and again, in conflict situations a
regional approach is one of the most effective ways to
move forward. We therefore commend the measures of
the United Nations and the African Union, together with
other international organizations and Governments,
to introduce peace initiatives in the Lake Chad basin
region. That in turn requires a synthesis between
bottom-up and top-down strategies to bring about a
true and lasting transformation.

