Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation regrets that the
Security Council was unable to adopt draft resolution
S/2014/9l6, which would have strengthened the
generally recognized international legal basis for the
Middle East peace process, including the resolutions of
the Security Council, the Madrid terms of reference and
the Arab Peace Initiative. Recent events in the Middle
East have illustrated with new force the undeniable truth
that alternatives to a genuinely collective approach to
resolving such a complex problem do not exist, especially
since the almost 70 years of unresolved conflict are one
of the most serious factors in the destabilization of the
whole region. They serve as a very strong argument in
the hands of those who recruit extremists, convincing
them that seeking political solutions is pointless.

We are convinced that in order to step up and
reinvigorate collective efforts in this area, we need
not only a greater profile for the Quartet, with the
involvement with the League of Arab States in its work,
but also a general broader involvement of the Security
Council in the Palestinian-Israeli peace process. That
of course should give the process new impetus and
focus the parties on more responsible steps towards a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace.
We do not share the objections of those who believe
that the draft resolution would undermine the prospects
for the negotiating process. Unfortunately, the past year
has revealed that the process has wandered into a blind
alley, with its monopolization by the United States and
its pull-back from the Quartet. We believe this to be a
strategic mistake, as is the dismissal of our proposals
to brainstorm in the Council in order to find ways to
reinvigorate the negotiation process, including by
sending a Council mission to the Middle East. Moreover,
the conflict in the Holy Land is deepening; regularly
and with increasing fury, violence erupts on both sides.
The construction of illegal settlements in the occupied
territories continues, including in East Jerusalem,
undermining the chances for the implementation of the
two-State solution.

We are coming to the end of 2014, which
the international community has proclaimed the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People. Have we come any closer to implementing the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians this year?
Are we closer or farther from the two-State solution?
Unfortunately, the answer is obvious. The Security
Council's inaction on this matter dooms the situation
to a dangerous status quo that we cannot accept. One
chance for hope is not enough.

