Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to first thank
you, the Right Honourable Mr. Eriya Kategaya, Deputy
Prime Minister of Uganda, for organizing today's
debate and to express appreciation to the leadership of
the Government of Uganda in supporting African
Union (AU) peacekeeping. I would also like to express
appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Henry Odein
Ajumogobia for his participation in and contribution to
this morning's debate. I also thank the Secretary-
General and Mr. Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union, for their valuable
briefings.

Japan highly praises the conflict-prevention and
peacekeeping efforts made in recent years by the
African Union and Africa's subregional organizations,
as well as the tangible outcomes obtained as a result of
those efforts under African ownership. The
international community must extend further
cooperation to support this positive trend. If the
African Union fulfils its unique role and makes the best
possible use of its competencies and advantages in the
fields of conflict prevention, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, it will be to the
benefit of the entire international community.

Japan believes that we must continue to seek an
appropriate path to expand the role of the AU and to
strengthen the partnership between the AU and the
United Nations. In this regard, Japan welcomes the
enhanced relationship between the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council, and proposes
regular action-oriented follow-up meetings through the
platform provided by the Security Council's Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa.

With respect to capacity-building, it is essential
to continue to extend our support to African
troop-contributing countries. Japan has committed
itself to assisting in the capacity-building of the
African peace and security architecture through the
African Union's Peace Fund. Japan also contributes to
efforts in national and regional capacity-building,
including the support programme for peacekeeping
operations training centres in Africa. Japan stands
ready and committed to continuing its support in this
field. We are also engaged in security sector reform
programmes, such as those supporting the Congolese
and Somali police. The United Nations has an
important role to play in support of activities that
contribute to the protection of civilians. To that end, it
is our hope that the United Nations will cooperate
further in this area.

The international community should pay tribute
to the sacrifices that African nations have been making
and continue to extend its assistance. Japan recognizes
the importance of securing predictable, sustainable and
flexible funding. We have been taking active part in
discussions addressing the needs, and will continue to
make efforts to this end. The use of assessed
contributions was one of the requests made yesterday
in the discussion on Somalia. To help the Security
Council to produce a feasible solution, taking into
account that request from the African Union, Japan is
committed to continuing to be involved in extensive
discussions with relevant actors and the Secretariat
concerning the questions of how the troop level of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) can be
increased and of whether or not the current logistics
support package can be expanded, and if so, what
scope and content will be envisaged.

It is essential that international partners
strengthen their cooperation in support of African
Union peacekeeping activities. In this connection, we
welcome new partners in our efforts. We also
appreciate the current reform efforts of the AU
Commission and hope that the AU will be able to
increase its capacity by enhancing its financial
management. It is crucial to have proactive efforts at
both ends.

It is our hope that the lessons learned from the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and AMISOM. will be closely analysed in the
report of the Secretary-General to be issued within six
months. Those lessons must be wisely utilized in future
missions. Japan also hopes that the report will include
an assessment of the activities and operation of the
United Nations Office to the African Union.

To conclude my statement today, I would like to
thank Uganda again for preparing the draft presidential
statement, which Japan supports. A durable peace
cannot be achieved by peacekeepers alone. Political
and reconciliation processes are essential to
consolidating peace. The Council is counting on the
cooperation of African countries in this regard.

