Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We are grateful
to the United States presidency and to you personally,
Secretary Pompeo, for this opportunity to consider
further steps for achieving the complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

Kazakhstan knows first-hand that nuclear
disarmament is a complex and comprehensive process
that demands a step-by-step approach, with incredible
effort, immense patience, mutual concessions and
good faith on the part of all stakeholders. That is why
we invite the leadership of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to follow the successful experience
and bright path taken by Kazakhstan, and I hope that
my dialogue with my colleague from North Korea will
be meaningful.
As we all know, despite the great temptation to
become a new nuclear Power upon our independence
in 1991 and the unpredictable geopolitical uncertainties
in our region at that time, my President, Nursultan
Nazarbayev, made the momentous decision to abandon
the fourth largest nuclear arsenal in the world, which
we had inherited, as well as to shut down the world's
second largest nuclear test site, at Semipalatinsk. We
steered that ship successfully through uncharted waters
and eventually became a trusted and reliable partner for
the world community, which in turn has invested in us,
resulting in many economic gains for both our nation
and our people. Today Kazakhstan is a progressive,
stable and prosperous State with the ambitious goal
of becoming one of the world's 30 most advanced
economies and countries in the next few decades.

Our robust steps to achieve denuclearization were
a testament to strong political will, and they succeeded
thanks to the exemplary cooperative efforts of the
Russian Federation and the United States. I believe
that such practical, pragmatic and mutually beneficial
collaboration could be used in other, new circumstances
for tackling new threats emerging in our world today.
We are also deeply grateful to the United Kingdom,
France and China for their constructive support to
our anti-nuclear endeavours. It is indeed remarkable
that all five nuclear Powers simultaneously signed the
Protocol to the Central Asian nuclear-weapon-free
zone treaty, also known as the Semipalatinsk Treaty.
It is a good example of mutual goodwill, indicating
that despite the differences among the five permanent
members of the Security Council, there can be further
joint efforts on important issues aimed at strengthening
non-proliferation.

Our invaluable experience says that disarmament
is the best way to build confidence. Having chosen a
nuclear-free path, we went further, together with our
four neighbouring fraternal countries, in creating
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia. It is the
first and still the only one of its kind in the northern
hemisphere, flanked by two large nuclear Powers and
not far from some other actors in this area.

Our President also initiated an extremely important
project aimed at establishing trusting and trustworthy
cooperation in Asia on a broad scale. In 1992 we created
the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building
Measures in Asia (CICA), which now unites 27 States
in the region and works to avert threats to stability in
the region by successfully tackling many challenges. It
is a unique regional structure in which Iran and Israel,
India and Pakistan and other States with complex
relations sit at one table, side by side, to negotiate
measures in mutual respect and goodwill. We would
therefore gladly receive the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea and Japan into CICA membership so
that we can welcome North-East Asia into our fold and
lay new ground for solidarity and trust. My President's
experience and further ideas on confidence-building
measures were shared with the Council in January at
the signature event of Kazakhstan's presidency of the
Security Council (see S/PV.8160).

Today's developments on the Korean peninsula
demonstrate the relevance of this approach. We
commend the two Korean States for their meaningful
efforts and joint projects to restore an inclusive
dialogue. We also greatly appreciate the decision of
the United States and the Republic of Korea to suspend
their regular joint regional military exercises. All
of these steps encourage the parties to continue with
the peaceful political and diplomatic measures that
made possible the historic Singapore summit and the
continuing inter-Korean summits. We strongly support
such endeavours and welcome the outcome of the
third meeting of the two Korean leaders, with further
important agreements contained in the joint Pyongyang
Declaration. The continued friendly political dialogue
and mutually beneficial projects between Pyongyang
and Seoul have the potential to become the most
effective way for the long-term settlement of tensions
in the region, resulting in mutually acceptable solutions
for full, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization.

How can the Security Council better contribute
to that noble cause? First of all, unity in the Council
must be preserved and harnessed to achieve that key
overarching task. We hope that there will be a speedy
settlement to some of the remaining disagreements
among the members of the Council on the basis of
mutual trust and endurance.

Kazakhstan understands the serious concerns
regarding the continued violations of Security Council
resolutions and related sanctions requirements from the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and others. It has
to be realized that our constructive actions are based on
good intentions, with an understanding that sanctions

are interim measures designed to solve problematic
issues by peaceful, political and diplomatic means.
Based on its practical experience, Kazakhstan
advocates for transparency and a gradual process in the
massive task of disarmament, which must give equal
consideration to the concerns of all parties and include
a mutual realization of the commitments pledged.
My President noted during the January meeting that
providing security assurances to the disarming party
is an important sine qua non for moving forward (see S/PV.8160).

In that specific context, Kazakhstan suggests
considering the possibility of developing a road map for
the phased denuclearization of North Korea, with solid
security guarantees from the five permanent member
of the Council, in return for the full implementation
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea of all
of its obligations and its return to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The compulsory
implementation of that course of action could be
enshrined in a relevant Council resolution, with clear
consequences if not fulfilled.

Kazakhstan is ready to share its experience
and provide technical expertise to realize a phased
and transparent process of denuclearization. We are
confident that the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea will be able to replicate our success and even
go beyond by setting a practical example to inspire the
North-East Asia region to become the second nuclear-
weapon-free zone in the northern hemisphere. Such
zones should be necessarily encouraged by obtaining
security guarantees from the five permanent members
of the Council. In that regard we reiterate our hope
the Central Asia nuclear-weapon-free zone will be
endorsed by the final remaining member of the group
of five permanent members.

Finally, the situation today on the Korean peninsula
is much improved and more favourable than ever
before. It prompts us to focus more on working with
determination and to redouble our goodwill, patience
and political will to successfully advance towards the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. That, in turn,
will result in new stability for the region and the world
at large, on the understanding that peace in one country
is an investment in global peace, for we are all bound
together by a common humanity and shared destiny
for all.

