Mr. Janabi (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): It is an
honour to be here today, at the kind invitation of Her
Excellency the Swedish Minister for Foreign Affairs,
to give a briefing on climate-related security risks. This
is a vital issue and today's debate is a testimony to its
importance. I commend Sweden for the initiative of
convening this open dialogue.

I would like at the outset to convey to the Council
the sincere greetings of the Government and people of
Mesopotamia - my country, Iraq, which aspires to
stability, progress and prosperity, and hopes that these
deliberations will contribute to the promotion of peace
and security worldwide. The Council's deliberation
on climate-related security risks is an important
step forward in terms of international responses
and a precautionary measure to mitigate risks and to
avoid potential conflicts at the national, regional and
international levels. The United Nations system focuses
on the pillars of peace, development and human rights,
and we believe that climate change has a significant
negative impact on those three pillars.

The rising temperature of Earth's surface, if
not by itself a direct and concrete threat - and I do
believe that it is - undoubtedly magnifies the threats
of other familiar risks, increases their complexity and
intensity in many regions of the world, including ours,
and impedes the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals in our countries. That is particularly
true of Goals 1, 2, 6, 13 and 15. That in turn will lead to
further impoverishment, displacement, food and water
insecurity, and violations of human rights, especially
those of women, children and other vulnerable groups,
amid conditions of instability.

Declining rainfall and the unsustainable use ofwater
resources exacerbate the problem of water scarcity,
causing the depletion of life-sustaining land resources,
displacement and migration. There is no doubt that the
United Nations maintains frightening statistics on the
number of displaced persons and migrants for social
and environmental reasons. Although the number of
those who have drowned in the high seas is unknown,
the causes of their deadly migration attempts are
known to everybody inside and outside this Chamber.
Those reasons include poverty, wars, instability and
the lack of decent means of living resulting from the
spread of desertification, global warming and the loss
of biological diversity. Those are the challenges to the
conclusion of three important conventions: the United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and the Convention on Biological Diversity, in
addition to other international and regional conventions
adopted since the Rio Declaration on Environment
and Development.

The first human civilizations arose in the valleys
of major rivers on various continents. In our part of the
world, that includes the Mesopotamian rivers - the
Tigris and Euphrates, home of the great Sumerian
civilization - and the great Nile river in Egypt. We
are concerned that the great river basins of the Middle
East in particular are being subjected to the greatest
threat and stress ever, resulting primarily from
climate change and then from competition for the use
and control of shared water resources in the absence
of effective bilateral or multilateral conventions or
regional frameworks for the equitable and reasonable
use of shared water. Such stress may result from
indifference towards the application of the principles of
international law and its tools to ensure the rights of all
riparian countries.

That exacerbates the political, economic and social
problems and intensifies the negative impact of climate
change, which, according to our observations, led to the
decline of about 25 per cent of rainfall or snow cover in
the upper river basins of the Tigris and the Euphrates.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
expected that the reduction in rainfall and snowfall
would be between 10 and 60 per cent in the Tigris and
Euphrates basins. That, of course, translates into a
similar decline in the flow of the two rivers through
my country, Iraq, coupled with increased demand
for shared water due, inter alia, to population growth
and the needs of economic development, which leads
to unfair competition for the downstream countries,
including Iraq. In the uncertain political and security
situation of the Middle East, the refusal to cooperate,
non-respect for existing uses and the inequity of access
to water represent a real threat to peace and stability in
the region.

The combined effect of climate change and the
operational modes of large dams have led, for example,
to a decline in the rate of inflow of the Euphrates
river by 50 per cent over the past 20 years. They have
changed the patterns and seasons of the natural water
flow and led to the shrinking of the green cover and
expanding desertification. Consequently, the average
temperature has increased by at least 1.5°C in Baghdad
and southern Iraq, which represents a loss of at least
15 per cent in land productivity, according to the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
and an increase in unused land as a result of water
scarcity or agriculatural marginalization.

Our observations show that nearly 90 per cent
of Iraq's historically fertile land is threatened by
desertification to varying degrees, resulting from
global warming and water scarcity. The same applies
to the countries of the region. Egypt, and this year
Iraq, have therefore been forced to limit the amount of
cultivated land and prohibit the cultivation of certain
agricultural crops that people historically used to grow,
owing to water scarcity. This undermines deeply rooted
social, economic and cultural traditions and causes
food insecurity for millions of people.

Climate change and the depletion of water resources
destroy the fertility of the soil and make it barren,
forcing people to move to another location where
their living conditions may be just as severe owing
to their inability to adapt and to their vulnerability,
with dwindling water resources and scattered and
unpredictable rainfall due to climate change.

What is more threatening here is that the
displacement of rural populations, who are usually
the food producers, means a double loss: a decrease
in the number of food producers, on the one hand,
and an increase in the number of food-insecure
people on the other. It is therefore only fair for the
international community to intervene positively in
order to enhance resilience and stability in the face
of harsh changes in living conditions in fragile areas
or areas most vulnerable to climate change. This will
require supporting adaptation programmes, which is
environmentally and economically less expensive than
attempts to accommodate migrants elsewhere after
they have abandoned their land because it is no longer
fertile and cannot return to it.

This is in addition to the fact that proactive and
preventive measures can avoid humanitarian tragedies,
which most heavily impact women, children and other
vulnerable social groups. In fact, many of the measures
required may be legally binding on States parties to the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
or the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, as well as covered by the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

IfI had to cite an example, I would point to the
grave deterioration in the environment of the Iraqi delta
at the mouth of the Gulf, the famous waterway known
as Shatt AI-Arab, which is the historical location of the
legend of Sinbad and the Garden of Eden, according to
certain holy books and religions. It is a striking example
of the change in a freshwater ecology characterized
by fertile soil and dense forests of palm trees, and
its transformation into a mainly lifeless environment
due to advancing seawater owing to less fresh water
coming from the river streams of the Tigris, Euphrates,
Karkhah and Karon. The same danger threatens the Nile
delta and other rivers in the region, ultimately forcing
millions of people below the poverty line to migrate.

I would refer also to an important site where the
ancient Sumerian civilization was born. It is a unique
and ancient water formation, at the confluence of
the great rivers in Mesopotamia at the mouth of the
Gulf, on the edge of the desert known as the Iraqi
Mesopotamian marshlands, which historically covered
an area of more than 15,000 square kilometres. There
the ancient Sumerian lifestyles have continued without
interruption to this very day, like the old civilizations
in Egypt and the Indian peninsula, where great historic
cities were founded such as Ur, Erido, Uruk and others.

This significant site was criminally and
deliberately dried up by the infamous Iraqi dictator
who was overthrown in 2003. Subsequent Governments
undertook restoration programmes and successfully
brought back to life large areas of the marshlands. The
site, which was listed as a World Heritage Site in July
2016, is now gradually drying up because of climate
change and a change in the waterways or because of
water depletion.

The descendants of the Sumerians, who live in
the marshlands and who breed cattle, have asked me
to convey to the international community their call
for saving their water environment, lifestyle and
human heritage. This can be achieved only when
international conventions and parameters are respected
by neighbouring countries, and when standards are
set that are aimed at preserving biodiversity and
traditional lifestyles.

We cannot ignore the destruction caused by the
terrorist organization Da'esh in Iraq or the damage
deliberately inflicted on civil and water installations.
Terrorism is an international phenomenon, not a regional
one. Regardless of the different interpretations as to the
root causes of the phenomenon of terrorism in many
regions, the fact is that instability and economic and
social fragility contribute to the spread of extremism
and acts of revenge. This requires coordinated
interventions to address hotspots that threaten peace
and stability. We believe that measures to adapt to
climate change are part and parcel of addressing social,
economic and political challenges and that SDG 13, on
climate change, is of particular benefit to our region.

Lastly, I was asked to deliver amessage from the Iraqi
Government to the Council reaffirming the country's
commitment to peace, security and development
and to adopting a joint cooperation approach with
neighbouring countries that is based on respect, mutual
benefit, international law and the reasonable and
equitable utilization of shared water resources. Given
that climate change is a global phenomenon that knows
no political borders, comprehensive regional approaches
based on the provisions of international law as well as
initiatives based on diplomacy among riparian States,
such as water diplomacy and global security initiatives,
along with environmentally smart programmes, could
prevent tension and instability from arising and create
an environment conducive to defeating terrorism,
speeding up the rebuilding of various infrastructures,
and enhancing mechanisms for adaptation to climate
change and the sustainable use of natural resources.

Iraq commends the supporting role of the
international community in defeating terrorism on its
territory and calls for respect for its water rights and
for protecting the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. We
believe that this will help spread peace and security in
the region.

