Mr. Lacroix: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on recent developments in northern Israel
related to the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).

As members of the Council are aware, on
4 December the Israel Defense Forces announced that
they were conducting Operation Northern Shield to
uncover and disable tunnels believed to cross the Blue
Line from Lebanon into Israel. Today, two weeks later,
the Operation is ongoing. During that period, the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) carried
out a series of technical visits at suspected tunnel sites
identified by the Israel Defense Forces near the Blue
Line. Based on its own findings, UNIFIL confirmed
the existence of four tunnels south of the Blue Line.
Technical assessments carried out by UNIFIL further
determined that at least two of those tunnels - one in
the vicinity of Metulla, close to Kfar Kila, north of the
Blue Line, and one near Zarit, close to Ramyah, north
of the Blue Line - cross the Blue Line and constitute
violations of resolution 1701 (2006).

From the outset, UNIFL sought to accurately assess
the alleged violations and to work with the parties to
maintain the prevailing calm along the Blue Line. To
that end, General Del C01, UNIFIL Head of Mission
and Force Commander, in coordination with the Acting
Special Coordinator for Lebanon, has consistently
engaged with the authorities in Israel and Lebanon.
A meeting of the tripartite mechanism took place on
5 December, at which there was an initial exchange of
information between the two parties and a reaffirmation
of their commitment to avoid any escalation. Based on
additional information obtained by UNIFIL's technical
teams, the Head of Mission and Force Commander
held several meetings with the Lebanese authorities,
including President Aoun.

A thorough investigation to establish the
trajectories and points of origin of the identified tunnels
is a complex task. The tunnels are between 29 and 46
metres below ground, difficult to detect and in close
proximity to areas that are sensitive for both parties.
While the tunnels do not appear, thus far, to have exit
points on the Israeli side, they are a serious violation
ofresolution 1701 (2006). UNIFIL is actingjudiciously
to complete its investigations of the tunnels - with
technical teams on the ground - and to work with both
parties to ensure that any tunnels, which are in violation
of resolution 1701 (2006), are disabled decisively and
safely.

This is a matter of serious concern. The United
Nations, including the Secretariat, has requested
the Lebanese authorities to ensure urgent follow-up
actions in accordance with the responsibilities of the
Government of Lebanon pursuant to resolution 1701
(2006). UNIFIL has requested the Lebanese authorities
to work with the mission to identify and disable any
tunnels crossing the Blue Line from Lebanon in
violation of resolution 1701 (2006).

I commend both the Israeli Defense Forces and the
Lebanese Armed Forces for their stated commitment
to continue to use the liaison and coordination
arrangements established with UNIFIL and their
intention to maintain the prevailing calm along the
Blue Line and avoid any escalation. The potential for
miscalculation, however, cannot be underestimated.
The parties have been reminded that provocative
activities along the Blue Line and heightened rhetoric
contribute to an environment ofincreased risk.

UNIFIL has observed subsequent gatherings
of civilians in Meiss Ej Jabal (Sector West) in close
proximity to the Blue Line. On 10 December, UNIFIL
observed a group of 30 to 50 individuals in civilian
clothes, led by a member of Parliament in Lebanon,
gather near Meiss Ej Jabal, with several individuals
crossing the Blue Line. On 16 December, about 500
people, including members of Parliament, participated
in a seven-hour-long gathering in Meiss Ej Jabal. Many
of them crossed the Blue Line in connection with the
protest.

On 17 December, in connection with works being
carried out by the Israeli Defense Forces south of the
Blue Line near Meiss Ej Jabal, a Lebanese Armed
Forces soldier cocked his weapon, directing it towards
the Israeli Defense Forces. That prompted a total
of seven Lebanese Armed Forces and nine Israeli
Defense Forces soldiers to take position, pointing
their weapons at each other. UNIFIL's liaison branch,
present throughout the entire period, intervened and
was successful in de-escalating the situation.

UNIFIL has deployed additional troops and liaison
teams to sensitive locations along the Blue Line. UNIFIL
will continue to assist the parties to maintain calm and
meet their obligations under resolution 1701 (2006). I
would like to recognize the continued important role
of UNIFIL under the leadership of Major General Del
Col. I would also like to thank the Security Council for
its continued support to UNIFIL. We will continue to
keep the Council apprised of relevant developments.

