Mr. Arnault: I would most like, perhaps, to
clarify the situation with respect to the troop strength
of the Afghan military forces. As has happened in
many post-conflict situations, the issue of the strength
of military forces is always - or most of the time -
the subject of much debate. Afghanistan was no
exception.

Last year, the figure initially provided by the
Ministry of Defence for the total number of troops
under the Ministry of Defence was approximately
700,000. After some discussion and absent any
credible, verified statistics, agreement was reached in
November on the working assumption of
approximately 100,000 soldiers and officers for the
purpose of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process. Since then - and that is
since October of last year - as the United Nations and
other organizations got involved in the DDR process in
quite some detail, it appeared very clearly that in fact
the troop strength of the nine corps had been vastly
overstated. In several cases, when 2,000, 3,000 or
4,000 soldiers were supposed to belong to a corps, it
would turn out that a maximum of 200, 300 or 400
were actually employed. That is why it is now a
working assumption of the DDR process that we are
talking about no more than 40,000 to 50,000 actual
troops under the umbrella of the Ministry of Defence.
That figure might change somewhat, but we feel fairly
confident that as the DDR process progresses, we will
find out in fact that the numbers are smaller rather than
larger.

Allow me to reassure the Ambassador of Pakistan
and the members of the Council that there is no room
for political bias at the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). As a matter of fact,
with regard to the overall analysis of the situation, to a
very large extent we share the analysis presented by the
Ambassador of Pakistan, in particular his analysis with
regard to the role of factionalism in the situation of
insecurity. Not only do we share that analysis, but as
the Council may know, much of our mandate is
directed at the need to control and contain factionalism
through the DDR process, the verification of human
rights and political rights and, most of all, of course,
through the organization of a free and fair election in
Afghanistan, the ultimate purpose of which is to create
a post-war order based on popular will, not on the
precarious balance of military forces that was
established in the wake of the collapse of the Taliban
regime.

However, our contention is that today, Taliban
activities are directly undermining the expression of
popular will and, paradoxically, they are doing so
precisely in the communities they claim to support and
which we want to empower. We do not dispute in any
way that the Taliban has assets and resources in the
country itself, even though the outcome of the
registration process and the interest and the passion for
registration shown by communities in the south, south-
east and east demonstrate in fact how isolated those
extremist forces currently are.

Among the tools that the extremist forces have at
their disposal are cross-border operations and
infiltration, which have been used to attack the peace
process and, more specifically, to attack the electoral
process. As UNAMA, we would be irresponsible if we
did not appeal to the international community, to the
Government of Pakistan and to the Government of
Afghanistan and its national forces to put an end to that
situation, particularly on the southern border. With the

support of the Security Council, we will continue to do
so.

