Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
would first like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Mr. Lacroix for his very useful briefing on recent
events in Mali. I would also like tojoin my colleagues in
welcoming Mr. Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Mali. It goes without
saying that the presence among us of Mr. Coulibaly
demonstrates the Malian Government's commitment to
finding an appropriate solution to the current situation.

We warmly welcome the positive measures taken
by the Government in the areas of defence, justice,
security and economic development. We encourage
it to continue with such measures and to step up its
efforts to implement the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. We call on all the parties to
cooperate and participate in the process in order to
ensure the implementation of the agreement and to
address the common terrorist threat.

In that context, we support the amended timeline
for the implementation of the agreement agreed to by
the signatory parties at the most recent meeting of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee in the capital of
Mali, Bamako, on 16 January. We urge all the parties
to implement the outstanding parts of the Agreement in
accordance with the established timetable.

We deplore the extremely worrying deterioration of
the situation in Mali. We commend the efforts of the
peacekeepers, who risk their lives every day in their
efforts to maintain peace and security in a dangerous
environment, and 42 of whom died in 2017. It will be
crucial to identify and address the underlying causes
of the conflict if it is to be contained. Kuwait supports
the commitment of the Coordination des mouvements
de l'Azawad and the coalition of armed groups to the
ceasefire since the signing of the latest agreement on
20 September. We call on all the parties to work to
improve the security situation as quickly as possible.

We have been attentively and worriedly following
the increases in terrorist attacks, the spread of extremist
ideas and the targeting of peacekeepers and Malian
security forces. We firmly condemn the terrorist
activity in the region and emphasize the importance of
the efforts of the Joint Force of the Group of Five (G- 5) for the Sahel in fighting terrorism, ensuring border
security and combating transborder crime. With regard
to the Joint Force, we support resolution 2391 (2017) and
call on the G-5 countries and the United Nations to put
the finishing touches on the technical agreement aimed
at facilitating the Joint Force's efforts, an initiative that
is a successful, positive model ofregional ownership in
combating the various transborder threats. We welcome
the active efforts in that regard of the Niger, Chad,
Burkina Faso, Mauritania and Mali and commend their
valuable contributions to the Joint Force.

Despite the current political situation and the
deteroriating security conditions, Mali is seeing
promising improvements in its economic development,
according to the most recent briefing by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa and the Sahel, on 11 January (see S/PV.8156).
We support the Government of Mali's efforts to
cooperate with the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
in implementing projects aimed at creating job
opportunities for the people of Mali and improving
its economic situation. We also support the efforts to
finalize a formula for the Government's plan for the
Sustainable Development Goals. We wish the friendly
people of Mali a prosperous future and reiterate our
commitment to working with the other members of the
Council to help them reach their goals. The country's
economic development has created an opportunity for
resolving various outstanding social and economic
issues, and we call on the Government of Mali, with the
support of the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel and MINUSMA, to pursue and promote
that development by implementing the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel, newly revitalized
under the leadership of the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Amina Mohammed.
We support the Secretary-General's decision to
establish an International Commission of Inquiry
in Mali, as expressed in a letter sent yesterday to the
members ofthe Council, which says that the Commission
of Inquiry will address flagrant violations and abuses
of international human rights and international
humanitarian law, including sexual violence related to
the conflict, in accordance with the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation and with resolution 2364 (2017). We
are committed to supporting the Secretary-General in
his efforts to combat human rights violations.

Lastly, we commend the efforts of Special
Representative Annadif and MINUSMA and affirm
the importance of their role in stabilizing the situation
and ensuring security for civilians. We emphasize the
importance of their efforts to give technical, logistical
and advisory support to the Government of Mali. We
wish the Government every success in holding local
and presidential elections this year and encourage it to
ensure that elections are regular, transparent and open
to the participation of every sector of Malian society.

