Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I would like to thank our
colleagues from Equatorial Guinea for their principled
position and for including this meeting on Kosovo
in the Security Council's February programme of
work to enable us to discuss the situation there and
the Secretary-General's periodic report (S/2019/102),
issued on 31 January, on the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999). We welcome the participation
of Mr. Ivica Daeie, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, in this meeting,
and we share his serious concerns about the situation
in Kosovo. We also thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), for his informative briefing on the
situation in the region. We value the Mission's work
and support Mr. Tanin and his efforts. We also listened
attentively to the statement by Ms. Citaku.

Ms. Citaku said that she simply could not
understand why we were here today. I will now explain
why. Furthermore, having read out to us yet another
tract, in which I heard not one substantive response to
Deputy Prime Minister Dacie's fair and serious claims
regarding Kosovo, she called this Security Council
meeting a charade, I am much obliged to her for her
opinion of our Council meeting. And as long as she
considers them a charade, she is completely free to
choose not to participate in these meetings, to which
she is invited, by the way.

We cannot accept Pristina's Western sponsors'
position on removing the subject of Kosovo from the
Council's agenda. Behind phrases such as "we recently
discussed", "there is nothing to discuss", "the situation
is calm" and "why so often?" we see a desire to hide
the truth from the international community about the
real situation on the ground and the games being played
with Kosovo behind the scenes. The same applies to the

calls for a strategic assessment.

We want to remind everyone that the Security
Council has been and continues to be the main platform
for international dialogue on Kosovo, in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999). Considering that the
problem is getting worse, it should remain firmly
under the Council's control and be considered based
on the established practice of holding open briefings.
The situation in Kosovo is extremely unstable and
could spiral out of control at any time. Incidentally,
the semi-annual report of the Head of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe's Mission in
Kosovo has a similar assessment, expressed recently at
a meeting of the Permanent Council of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. Kosovo
remains the main hotbed of instability and a source
of potential conflict in the Balkans. The authorities in
Pristina have taken a path exacerbating the crisis that
poses a threat of renewed violence and war. Twenty
years after NATO's barbaric bombing of the allied
Republic of Yugoslavia, and after 10 years of unilateral
independence, we are seeing an increasing number of
signs that the Kosovo-Albanian leadership is emerging
out of the control of the Western countries that designed
this so-called independence. To put the question another
way, could the so-called Pristina leadership behave this
way without outside collusion? The answer is obvious.

During the reporting period, Pristina initiated
a whole series of provocative acts directed at Serbia
and Serbs in the autonomous region. In violation of
its obligations under the Central European Free Trade
Agreement, Kosovo's so-called Government announced
its introduction of a 100 per cent tariff on goods from
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. The measures
are still in force, despite President Vucie's urging,
including here in this Chamber. The United States and
the European Union have made unconvincing demands,
unsupported by any concrete measures, that the tariffs
be lifted, and Pristina has simply ignored them.

On top of that, on 14 December, in a serious
violation of resolution 1244 (1999), the so-called
Parliament decided to transform the Kosovo Security
Force into a fully fledged Kosovo army. As the
Secretary-General emphasized once again, the
resolution remains the fundamental international
legal basis for a Kosovo settlement. It includes a
completely definitive requirement for demilitarizing
any armed Kosovo-Albanian groups, and the sole
presence permitted on Kosovo's territory is that of
multinational contingents under international control.
Based on that, if Pristina establishes any armed forces,
the Kosovo Force must disarm them. On the contrary,
however, those who should be preventing the creation
of an army are doing everything they can to facilitate
and encourage it. Pristina's Western patrons have been
trying to whitewash the decision, arguing that it does
not really change the nature of the Kosovo Security
Force. But the fact is that its numbers are being doubled
and reserves created, and above all its purpose - which
until recently was civil defence - has changed. With
the assistance of the United States and several NATO
countries, the Kosovo-Albanian military is undergoing
intensive training and being supplied with increasing
amounts of weapons and technology. There can be no
guarantees that these so-called Kosovo armed forces,
consisting in large part of terrorists from the Kosovo
Liberation Army, will not be used in future against the
Serbian population in the north.

The calls from Kosovo-Albanian parties for the so-
called unification ofNorth and South Mitrovica are also
a serious cause for alarm. In the current tense situation,
any movement in that direction could become, as we
say, the spark that starts the fire. It is quite clear that
the decisions made in Kosovo are all links in a chain.
The goal is to intimidate the Serbian population in the
region and deprive them of possibilities, and all of that
is happening against a backdrop of loud propaganda
about the creation ofa multi-ethnic society in Kosovo.

In the light of our partners' biased approaches, the
impotence of the European Union's mediation efforts,
which our partners refer to as ifto a guiding star, in the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina makes perfect
sense. A case in point is that for more than five years now
there has been no progress in reaching a key agreement
on the formation of an association/community of Serb-
majority municipalities in Kosovo. Brussels is not in
a position to get Pristina to do it. Nothing has been
heard in response to the Kosovo Albanians' outright
flouting of their obligations. Instead of that we hear
vague urgings, for some reason addressed to both sides,
to normalize relations, which only reinforces one side's
feeling that it can get away with anything, inciting
it to take maximalist approaches that do not allow
for compromise.

Russia's position on Kosovo is consistent. We
support a viable, mutually acceptable and sustainable
settlement for Belgrade and Pristina on the basis
of resolution 1244 (1999). It should be fair, it should
comply with international law and it should have the
Security Council's approval. In our view, forcing a
so-called final normalization between Belgrade and
Pristina and tying it to any artificial deadlines would
be destructive. If we want to achieve stability in the
Balkans, we must be able to find compromises, and
when solutions are found in the framework of those
efforts, they must be implemented, not sabotaged. That
particularly applies to the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo.

We are seriously alarmed about the series of
flagrantly irresponsible statements by Pristina
about UNMIK. The statement by the Prime Minister
of Kosovo, Ramush Haradinaj, that his so-called
Government is going to stop cooperating with the
Mission is a blatant violation of resolution 1244 (1999).
I had a question at this point in my statement 4 that I
would be interested to hear what our Western partners
thought of that situation, or whether they would prefer
to ignore it and once again pretend that nothing has
happened. I have listened intently to our colleagues'
statements, but frankly I knew the answer already.
None of them even mentioned it.

There have been no results in the work of
the Specialist Chambers investigating the crimes
committed by the Kosovo Liberation Army, including
the kidnapping and murder of people in order to harvest
their organs. There was a noteworthy interview in the
Serbian newspaper Veeernje novosti with the Swiss
former member of the Parliamentary Assembly of the
Council of Europe Dick Marty, the author of the report
on "Inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking
in human organs in Kosovo". The interview contains
some interesting facts. For example, in July 2014 Clint
Williamson, the former United States Prosecutor in
the Specialist Chambers in The Hague, stated that
the results of the investigation were consistent with
the fundamental conclusions of the report, and yet,
strangely enough, for some reason resigned immediately
after that. A third Prosecutor was then appointed, but
nothing has happened.

In Mr. Marty's words, it is inconceivable, absurd
and dubious from an ethical point of view that Geoffrey
Nice, a former prosecutor of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, should now be employed
in defending Kosovars in the Specialist Chambers.
Mr. Marty's most striking point is that it is entirely
possible that the Kosovo-Albanian leaders involved in
those crimes will not be held accountable. In our opinion,
that sums up both the real situation of the Chambers
and its prospects and the tendencies we see in its work.
In that regard, we emphasize that the unambiguous
message that Mr. Marty is sending requires an adequate
response on the part of the international community.
What is at stake is the reputation of international justice
and the European Union as a guarantor of the Specialist
Chambers' implementation of its functions. Those who
were involved in the most serious crimes, including
the illegal trade in human organs, must be severely
punished, regardless of the offices they currently hold
in Pristina. We will not allow the issue to be swept
under the rug, and we will continue to shine a light on
it in future. We should note in passing that our Western
partners' position on the Specialist Chambers only
confirms the multiple levels of standards that they
apply to international justice.

Kosovo has continued to be a haven for recruiting
radicals, and terrorists returning from Syria and Iraq
have been flocking there. Unfortunately, every year
fewer and fewer refugees and internally displaced
persons return. Crimes against Serbs and their property
are a daily occurrence, but the perpetrators frequently
escape punishment. We continue to see takeovers
of Serbian Orthodox Church property by Kosovo
Albanians. We want to point out once again that the
Church of Saint John the Baptist and the Saint Paraskeva
Pyatnitsa Chapel in the town of Pee are no longer
listed in the local land register as Serbian Orthodox
Church property. There have been attempts to carry out
illegal construction in UNESCO-protected areas near
churches and monasteries. Let me remind the Council
that Kosovo has tried to join UNESCO. We should
also view in that context the so-called Parliament's
recent adoption of a new charter for the Trepca mining
complex, in Serb-populated northern Kosovo, which
constitutes an unlawful expropriation of a Serbian State
enterprise on whose functioning thousands of families
in the area depend.

We continue to see determined attempts by the
Kosovo authorities, with the support of a number of
States, to join various international organizations.
We reaffirm our unwavering position, which is that
Pristina can participate in multilateral structures only
through UNMIK. Anything else would be a serious
contravention of the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).
We would like to focus the Secretariat's attention on
the importance of thoroughly monitoring developments
in this situation, which, as the facts I have stated show,
requires close attention at the international level, which
should be conducted by the Security Council.

