Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
meeting, which is focused on African countries but
is relevant throughout the world. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and Chairperson Faki
Mahamat for their remarks today and to welcome the
ministers who are joining us in the Security Council.
The United States congratulates Equatorial Guinea on
its presidency of the Security Council. We look forward
to working closely with your delegation, Mr. President,
on pressing matters of peace and security this month
and throughout the remainder of its term on the
Security Council. We also congratulate the Dominican
Republic on its excellent work during its presidency of
the Council in the month of January.

We share your concern, Mr. President, that stability
in Central Africa is undermined by the activities of
mercenaries and terrorist organizations that foment
both internal and international conflicts. Private
military companies or mercenary groups that act
without a mandate, oversight or accountability have
played a destabilizing role throughout history and,
in the most extreme cases, have sought to take power
from sovereign Governments. In conflict areas around
the world, there are instances of private military actors
conducting operations that are detrimental to peace and
security. By way of two examples, in Syria, we have
seen private military actors conduct defensive combat
operations to attempt to seize territory in the middle
Euphrates river valley and in the Central African
Republic, private military actors are operating in
mining areas to exploit that country's natural resources.
I would like to make three points that place today's
debate in the broader context of the peace and security
challenges facing the Council.

First, we must remain focused on the worrying
trend of terrorist and violent extremist activity on the
African continent, where in recent years the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida and other
terrorist organizations have increased the lethality of
their attacks and expanded their area of operations. The
deplorable attack on civilians at a business and hotel
complex in Nairobi on 15 January was a stark reminder
of the threat posed by such terrorist groups.

Secondly, State fragility leaves many countries
more vulnerable to terrorism, violent extremism and
armed conflict. When we encourage accountable,
transparent governance, promote the rule of law and
support fiscal transparency, we are doing the essential
security-promoting work of strengthening State
capacity and fostering self-reliance.

Thirdly, given the growing youth population of
many African countries, it is essential to foster economic
opportunities that offer young people the chance to
thrive and prosper. We know that armed groups, rebel
leaders and terrorist organizations recruit young men
who have few alternatives. We must encourage the
adoption of policies that improve the business climate,
develop Africa's middle class and provide apath forward
for sustainable and inclusive economic growth. Finally,
the United States would like to draw a sharp contrast
between illegal destabilizing mercenary activities
and the legal legitimate role that private military and
security companies can play in many places, including
in Central Africa. Private security actors train national
militaries, provide logistics support to United Nations
and African Union (AU) peace operations and protect
facilities. Actors operating in such roles in accordance
with all applicable laws and the consent of host
Governments contribute positively to the maintenance
of peace and security across the continent. For example,
the United States Global Peace Operations Initiative
has invested nearly $1.2 billion since 2005, frequently
operating with private security contractors to build the
capacity and readiness of forces to take part in United
Nations and AU peace operations.

We again thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this important meeting. We look forward to continuing
to work together on this topic, which is central to the
future of international peace and security.

