Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, Ms. Helen Meagher La
Lime, for her briefing on the situation in Haiti and the
work of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti (MINUJUSTH).

We are now approaching the transition period at
the end of which the United Nations and Haiti will
open a new chapter in their history, one that will be
written outside the peacekeeping framework. In that
regard, France welcomes the progress made in the
training of the Haitian National Police. A total of more
than 15,000 officers have been trained, demonstrating
their professionalism during the frequently violent
demonstrations of recent months.

MINUJUSTH's contribution to the country's
stability since it was established, a little over a year
ago, has been crucial, including its support for
strengthening the rule of law, police training and the
good offices provided by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. However, the volatility in
recent months also highlights how fragile the situation
in Haiti remains. In that context, and in the run-up to
the withdrawal of MINUJUSTH, I would like to focus
today on three points.

First, all political actors must fully commit
themselves, as appropriate and in conjunction with the
Special Representative's good offices, to strengthening
the rule of law in Haiti and responsibly defending the
interests of the Haitian people. The adoption of the legal
aid law and Haiti's accession to the Convention relating
to the Status of Stateless Persons should be welcomed
as encouraging steps. However, much remains to be
done to strengthen the legislative framework necessary
to protect the rights of Haitian citizens and ensure
an independent and impartial judiciary. An inclusive
political dialogue is needed to reach agreement and ease
tensions. France supports the efforts made to that end
by the Prime Minister, on behalf of the Head of State.

While the efforts of the authorities and the
mobilization of the population in favour of the
development of a State governed by the rule of law are
real, we nevertheless condemn in the strongest terms
the use or threat of the use of violence. In its press
release issued of2 November, the core group on Haiti
recalled

"the democratic legitimacy of the Government
of Haiti and that in a democracy, change must be
through the ballot box and not through violence."

We deplore the loss of human lives caused by
that violence.

My second point focuses on the essential reforms
needed to move towards sustainable prosperity and
entrench democracy in Haiti. At times we hear voices
that defend the idea that economic goals should take
priority over the legitimate demands of the people,
including when they fight for their fundamental rights
and against impunity. That is a false dichotomy. In the
current context, stability in Haiti and, by extension, its
prosperity, now depends more than ever on strengthening
its judicial institutions, providing greater access to
social services and improving detention conditions in
prison facilities, where there is still work to be done.
Dealing with corruption, which is an issue often
condemned at the highest level, must be a major part
of the various reforms that are crucial to the country's
recovery. France encourages the Haitian authorities to
ensure that the management of public funds is entirely
transparent and do their utmost to see that justice is
served, particularly where the PetroCaribe affair is
concerned. The sense of impunity must be addressed
with determination in the courts.

Thirdly and lastly, France attaches tremendous
importance to the vibrancy of Haitian democracy, and
in that regard welcomes the commitments made in
preparation for the holding of legislative and senate
elections in October 2019, in particular the request
for election assistance from the United Nations.
Haiti's ability to ensure that its elections are held in
accordance with its published calendar will increase
the Government's credibility. We therefore hope
that the elections will be held as scheduled, and that
the preparations for them will be conducted in the
best conditions possible and with the support of the
international community. All the relevant political
actors must take advantage of the elections to launch a
dialogue with civil society that takes into account the
aspirations of the people.

It is our collective responsibility to help the Haitian
authorities prepare for MINUJUSTH's withdrawal
next October in order to ensure a smooth transition.
That is why we must meanwhile redouble our efforts
to strengthen the rule of law and democracy in Haiti.
Haiti can depend on France's support. My country
rejects in the strongest terms any violence aimed at
destabilizing the country. It is up to Haiti's leaders
from its three branches of Government and across the
political spectrum to meet the crucial challenges faced
by Haitian society, particularly its young people, and
to strengthen democracy and the rule of law so as to
ensure stability and a decent standard of living for all.

