Mr. Wahab: Mr. Minister, it is indeed a great
pleasure for my delegation to see you presiding over
this important debate. The Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC) is proud to have Indonesia as one of
its active and important member States.
The evolving nature of present-day conflicts and
security challenges transcends national and even
regional boundaries. The OIC believes that regional
and intergovernmental organizations are better placed
to assess the root causes of conflicts and, accordingly,
to devise specific strategies to tackle them. They have
a greater vested interest, as they are attempting to
resolve challenges arising in their own backyard. They
also have an intimate understanding of the social,
cultural, political and economic underpinnings of such
conflicts and have the ability to identify and mobilize
existing home-grown mechanisms to address them
effectively and efficiently.

It is critical to proactively engage the concerned
regional and other intergovernmental organizations
from the very early stages, when the signs of instability
first begin to appear. For this to happen, greater
emphasis must be placed upon multilateralism, where
cooperation and dialogue take precedence over
unilateralism and division. Just over a month ago, at
the beginning of October, the Foreign Ministers of the
OIC member States adopted a final communique, in
which they unanimously reiterated the need for
evolving common perceptions and agreed approaches
to address both new and existing threats to
international peace and security in the context of
multilateralism.

The OIC has time and again stated the view that
approaching problems solely from the angle of security
cannot lead to lasting and comprehensive solutions.
Short-term solutions must give way to a proper
understanding of the root causes of conflicts, which
often lie in political grievances, backwardness and the
underdeveloped situation of societies and their need for
good governance.

As a mark of the OIC's commitment to address
socio-economic problems that often serve as the root
causes of conflict, our organization has launched a
special fund for poverty alleviation in member States.

The OIC has been mandated by its Ten-Year
Programme of Action to strengthen its role in conflict
prevention, confidence-building, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and post-conflict rehabilitation
through enhanced cooperation with international and
regional organizations. In this regard, the Secretary
General of the OIC has personally taken an active role
with regard to conflict resolution in several countries.
In working actively within the mechanisms of the
United Nations, the OIC attaches pre-eminent
importance to its association with the Peacebuilding
Commission. The OIC will continue to remain actively
engaged as the work of the Commission evolves to
tackle complex challenges.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
reiterate the essential need for effective multilateralism
through political engagement and dialogue, at the
highest level and within an atmosphere of mutual
respect, as a prerequisite for effective cooperation.

