Mr. Menkveld (Netherlands): At the outset, I
would like to express my appreciation to the People's
Republic of China for organizing today's open debate on
an important topic and, together with the Republics of
Angola and Senegal, for providing us with a thoughtful
concept note (S/2016/321, annex).
The threat to maritime security in the Gulf of
Guinea is not only a threat to the security and prosperity
of African States but one that affects seafaring States
such as the Netherlands and others around the globe. It
is therefore essential that we solve the problem, and that
can be done most effectively through close international
cooperation that also addresses the root causes. In the
wake of the important steps that have already been
taken through the Yaounde agreements, it is now time
to move forward.
The Netherlands aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union (EU),
and I would like to add a few remarks in my national
capacity on the problem of maritime security in the
Gulf of Guinea, the response to it and the importance
of an integrated approach.

The situation in the region remains worrying. In
the first few months of 2016, we have seen kidnappings,
theft and violent attacks on mariners. The need to
address the situation is clear. As I said, illegal maritime
activities in the Gulf of Guinea are not just the problem
of West African States; they are our problem as well.
Such activities harm regional trade and economic
development, hinder the flow of commerce between
Europe and West Africa and other regions and thus
do damage to prosperity on a larger scale. Within the
countries of West Africa, a lack of maritime security
poses a threat on various levels to both coastal and
inland communities. Organized maritime crime,
including trafficking in drugs and persons and illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing, is an element of
maritime insecurity that goes beyond the act of piracy
to disrupt societies across the continent, increase
corruption and threaten communities' livelihoods. A
comprehensive approach and response is required.

In June 2014, the members of the Economic
Community of West African States, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the Gulf
of Guinea Commisssion gathered together to express
their commitment to improving collaboration in the
region. The result was the Yaounde' Code of Conduct
concerning the Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery
against Ships, and Illicit Maritime Activity in West
and Central Africa, which is being implemented right
now. We look forward to the rapid operationalization
of the Interregional Coordination Centre. Since most
illegal activities take place within territorial waters,
West African coastal countries have a responsibility
to coordinate their response. As such, we appreciate
the efforts and progress being made on the Yaounde
agenda.

In March 2014, the European Union adopted a
strategy for the Gulf of Guinea, aimed at mapping
threats and stressing the importance of regional and
international action. That initial plan has now been
transformed into an EU action plan so as to support
Governments in the region in taking on the challenges
of combating maritime security on several fronts,
and the Netherlands is an active supporter of that
strategy. In order to tackle the multifaceted challenges
of maritime security in an effective way, we need a
comprehensive approach that addresses the root causes
at various levels. Developing coastal communities and
removing incentives for those communities to resort
to maritime crime is pivotal in a long-term approach.
In addition to a strong response to criminal activities,
we should strive for inclusive economic wealth in
the region. To achieve that, the Netherlands actively
supports the implementation of the aforementioned
European Union Gulf of Guinea Action Plan 2015-2020
and its development activities in the region. Within that
framework, and as part of an integrated approach, the
Netherlands focuses its efforts in the countries of the
Gulf of Guinea on maritime capacity-building, and
we undertake exercises and provide training in the
countries on the prevention of criminal activities, such
as drug smuggling and human trafficking.

In September 2015, we organized, together with
the Governments of Togo and the African Union (AU)
representatives, a meeting in New York on maritime
security in Africa in the run up to the AU summit on
maritime security in Togo this fall. We will actively
contribute with Dutch experts to the seminars at the
upcoming AU summit.

In striving for a safe and secure maritime
environment, cooperation is of the essence. We must
work together. The Kingdom of the Netherlands therefore
aims to continue to be a partner for African countries.
Only through equal and respectful partnerships can we
strengthen the maritime security in the region.

