Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): The
voting that was just concluded fills us with desolation,
and I would like to explain our abstention, which in and
of itselfis a source of great sadness for us.

There were a number of reasons for it. First, our
delegation has dedicated both time and effort in order
to promote more constructive interaction between
the International Criminal Court and the Security
Council. We had believed that both bodies were
multilateral - one legal, the other political - united
by their mission to prevent conflict, fight impunity
and demand accountability for perpetrators of mass
atrocities. The draft text that was put to the vote today
does not contribute to such constructive interaction.
Instead, it erects a barrier of distrust between the two
bodies that is harmful to both and to the community of
nations in general.

Secondly, the submission by some countries of
a draft resolution for the Council's consideration in
the full knowledge that it would not be adopted runs
counter to our vocation to promote consensus and unity
within the Council. In this instance, the contrary was
achieved. The vote put on display a divided Council
when there was neither justification nor need to do so.

Thirdly, and for that very reason, this morning's
exercise has the singular attribute of creating nothing
but losers. N0 country or group of countries has
benefitted; all ofus have lost something. In our View, the
voting was detrimental to the African Union, which has
seen its proposal rejected; to the International Criminal
Court, whose aspiration to universal membership
is under assault; and to the Security Council, which,
as I said, finds itself divided. We were all adversely
affected.

Fourthly, the considerable progress recently
achieved in building a truly fruitful partnership between
the Security Council and the African Union has been
compromised, without any of the parties having sought
such an outcome. The damage may not be irreversible,
but there has clearly been a misunderstanding, and
neither side was able to reverse the regrettable outcome,
which was foreseeable to all.

Fifthly and perhaps most importantly, achieving
peace and security, on the one hand, andjustice, on the
other, frequently raises dilemmas in the short term. We
can all agree that these concepts go hand in hand to the
extent that, ifthere is to be peace, justice is needed, and
justice can be attained only in situations of peace. But
sometimes we sacrificejustice to achieve peace, and the
threshold of how to resolve this dilemma is different in
each of our countries. We understand the reasons being
put forth with the best of intentions by those countries
that have invoked article 16 of the Rome Statute for the
situation that is the object of the draft resolution, and
we trust that those countries will also understand why
some of us do not share their reasoning.

That brings me to my last point. It has been
insinuated that failure to vote in favour of the draft
resolution is somehow an expression of ill will towards
the African Union and its member States. My delegation
most categorically rejects such a suggestion. From our
national vantage point, we frankly find it offensive,
given our long and proven solidarity with all brotherly
developing countries in multiple forums and numerous
cases, as well as our deployment in some African
countries of Guatemalan military observers and troops.
Our principled position regarding the draft resolution
should in no circumstances be confused with contempt
for those who proposed it.

