Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Mali associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier today by the representative of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

I would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for organizing today's open debate on the theme
"Maintaining international peace and security:
strengthening multilateralism and the role of the United
Nations", which is certainly a topical one at a time when
multilateralism is being seriously questioned. It is also
very relevant at a time when the United Nations, which
epitomizes multilateralism and which was created in
1945 to save future generations from the scourge of
war, has never been so assailed by new challenges and
complex threats to international peace and security.

There can be no question that the United Nations
embodies the profound aspirations of the nations of
the world for peace and security, development and
respect for human rights, and that it is therefore the
true incarnation of a better future for the peoples we
represent here in New York. It is undoubtedly an ideal
framework for multilateralism and cooperation among
the peoples of the world. Our shared Organization
offers every nation represented in it, whether powerful
or less powerful, in peace or in crisis, an opportunity to
express itself freely and participate on an equal footing
in debates and negotiations on the major international
issues of the moment. That great achievement in
itself underlines the relevance of multilateralism and
therefore of the United Nations, in that it fosters mutual
trust and understanding, thereby reducing tensions and
even conflicts between Member States.

Secondly, in the face of new threats to the world,
including terrorism and other forms of organized crime
such as trafficking in drugs, arms and migrants, as
well as cybercrime and climate change, Mali continues
to believe that only a multilateral approach, based

on cooperation between the countries concerned, is
capable of sustainably meeting these challenges. It
is no exaggeration in that regard to paraphrase the
Secretary-General when he says that working together
in a multilateral framework is not an option - it is the
only answer. No country can achieve its own security
by fighting alone, and no country can live in peace at a
time when others are mired in instability.

Mali remains a firm advocate ofmultilateralism and
cooperation among nations, with a View to achieving
the triad of security, development and respect for
human rights. Our country's serious commitment has
been manifest in our citizens' participation in processes
aimed at reaching political settlements of tensions
around the world and the deployment of Malian troops
in peacekeeping missions of the United Nations, the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and now the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). That same commitment to
multilateralism and international solidarity explains
why, despite our challenging domestic situation, we
continue to send our sons and daughters to peacekeeping
operations all over the world. Malians are very proud
today to be able to benefit from international solidarity
in return, through the presence of military and civilian
personnel on our territory from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, the African Union, ECOWAS, the European
Union, the G-5 for the Sahel and a number of other
friendly partners working by our side to help Mali
restore its authority throughout its territory.

As much as we are committed to multilateralism,
we cannot ignore the fact that multilateralism is at
a crossroads. We have a collective responsibility
to breathe new life into the multilateral framework
of the United Nations. To do that, we must commit
to addressing international issues in a transparent,
equitable and just manner. Ultimately, we must also
agree to advance reform of some of the principal organs
of the United Nations 4 in this case, the Security
Council and the General Assembly - and including
their composition and working methods. We must spare
no effort in supporting the various reforms undertaken
by the Secretary-General, particularly those concerning
the peace and security pillar and the development
system. We also know that the United Nations cannot
do it all alone, which is why it is important to continue
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations. For its part,
Mali remains committed to supporting all initiatives
aimed at strengthening multilateralism and the primary
role of the United Nations in safeguarding future
generations from the scourge of war.

