Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, allow me to thank you, Madam
President, for your initiative to revisit the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

In that connection, we believe that there is a clear
need to be guided by the 1949 Geneva Conventions in
labelling a situation as an armed conflict. That will
enable us to better focus our efforts and to avoid
counterproductive political interference.

We would also like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, Under-Secretary-General John Holmes
and High Commissioner for Human Rights
Navanethem Pillay for their statements. We highly
appreciate Mr. Holmes' work in one of the most
complex areas in which the United Nations operates.

The subject under consideration today has long
been at the very centre of United Nations and Security
Council attention. At the same time, in spite of the
efforts of the international community, the world
continues to be plagued by armed conflicts that claim
the lives of thousands of persons. That is the sad reality
of our times. The majority of the victims of conflict are
civilians, most of them belonging to the most
vulnerable groups, namely, women, children and older
persons. In addition, we do not find it useful to split the
categories of civilians needing international protection
into additional sub-categories. In that connection, we
propose that we be guided strictly by the relevant
provisions of the Geneva Conventions.

We resolutely condemn both wilful attacks
against civilians and civilian loss of life as a result of
indiscriminate or disproportionate use of force, which
constitute serious violations of international
humanitarian law. Nor is there any justification for
individual armed groups to seize hostages or carry out
terrorist attacks against civilians.

We believe that improving the system for the
collection and analysis of relevant data is necessary to
effectively combat those phenomena. We request the
Secretariat to be mindful of that in preparing future
briefings to the Security Council on the issue of the
protection of civilians.

It is clear that the protection of civilians is a
priority task for all parties to a conflict. Peacekeepers,
whose mandates increasingly include functions in that
regard, have an important role to play in that
connection. We therefore welcome the steps taken by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to train
peacekeeping personnel.

We believe that, in the current circumstances, the
efforts of the international community should be aimed
first and foremost at strengthening national efforts in
this area. In order to enhance effectiveness in that
regard, there is a need to take into account the specific
characteristics of each conflict and to take the
necessary decisions only on that basis, including with
respect to the protection of civilians.

The United Nations should of course respond
swiftly and effectively to instances of violence against
civilians. What is important in that regard is that we
work to prevent and to reduce conflicts and to disarm,
demobilize and reintegrate former combatants. It is
important that efforts in that regard be coordinated
properly, with strict division of labour and
responsibility in line with the Charter of the United
Nations and other international legal instruments and
under the leading role of the Security Council. We also
believe that revisiting the issue of establishing new,
separate Security Council mechanisms on the
protection of civilians is not useful.

In conclusion, I would emphasize that only
steadfast compliance by all parties with the norms of
international humanitarian law and Security Council
decisions, as well as the rejection of selective and
unilateral approaches in interpreting violations, can
promote improvements in conflict situations and
strengthen genuine protection for civilians in armed
conflicts.
