Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Permit me at the outset to carry out
a pleasant duty - that of saying what a pleasure it is to
see you, Sir, presiding over the Security Council during
06-41819
the month of July. I should also like to thank your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Denmark, and to congratulate her on a successful
mandate as Council President last month.

I am grateful to you, Mr. President, for having
kindly agreed to organize this public meeting to
consider the report of the Security Council mission on
the electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2006/434). I also wish to sincerely thank the
members of the Council mission, whom you led on
their recent visit of 10 to 12 June.

Indeed, this year, particular emphasis has been
placed on the implementation of the transition process
begun by the 17 December 2002 Comprehensive and
Inclusive Peace Agreement. The members of the
Council mission were able to evaluate the status of that
process, which is entering its final phase. They were
eye witnesses to the deep desire of the Congolese
people to go to the polls to freely and democratically
choose, for the first time in four decades, men and
women to preside over their destiny during the next
legislative session. From their discussions with their
many interlocutors, the members of the Council
mission undoubtedly understood that an unequivocal
consensus was emerging in favour of continuing and
concluding the peace process as soon as possible.

This last phase is a decisive step in the peace
process. The campaign for the general elections slated
for 30 July has been officially under way for several
days throughout the national territory.

Here, I should like to congratulate the Council
members on the drafting of their excellent report,
which I am sure will enable us to better chart the path
still ahead of us and will lead us together towards the
peace and development to which millions of Congolese
women and men aspire. The members of the Council
mission formulated a series of relevant
recommendations; I agree with all of them. I hope that
the Security Council, which will undoubtedly discuss
the report, can follow it up in concrete terms.

In that connection, the President of the Republic,
His Excellency Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, has
reaffirmed his commitment to do everything possible to
ensure the smooth conduct of the elections, which are a
new rendezvous with history that my country cannot
miss. For the President, these elections are crucial and
sensitive. They are the right path towards
normalization and the resolution of the eternal problem
of governmental legitimacy in my country. The
President believes that nothing else must delay the
holding of the elections. He has always tirelessly urged
the people to turn out to vote in massive numbers and
has asked the political actors to accept the verdict of
the ballot box out of respect for the Congolese people.

The President has also instructed me to express to
the Security Council his appreciation for resolution
1693 (2006). Adopted on 30 June - the anniversary of
the independence of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo - the resolution sends a strong message to the
Republic with a View to the smooth conduct and
success of the electoral process.

I would like to share with the Council some
concerns expressed by the Congolese people regarding
the holding of the elections.

First, with respect to the organization of the
elections, we would like here highly to commend the
tremendous amount of work done by the Independent
Electoral Commission (IEC). Nonetheless, every effort
must be made to ensure that no new political or
technical constraints are allowed to prevent the IEC
from holding the elections in accordance with the
calendar.

Secondly, while reaffirming the importance of
fair access to the media, let me also stress the
importance of doing everything possible to ensure that
messages of hate and exclusion are expunged from the
electoral campaign. Indeed, sadly, certain radio
broadcasts bear a striking similarity to those aired by
Radio-Television libre des Milles Collines. We
welcome the fact that the IEC and the High Media
Authority are currently carrying out a publicity and
awareness-raising campaign on the electoral process.
We remain convinced that the campaign will fully meet
expectations. Let me add that measures have been
taken to enable the international media to cover the
elections.

Thirdly, with respect to new rounds of
negotiations and consultations, let me stress that the
referendum, the Constitution, the electoral law and the
upcoming elections all emanate from a comprehensive
and inclusive agreement that itself was the outcome of
several political dialogues and consultation processes.
The Congolese people have clearly expressed their
wish that an end be put to a seemingly interminable
transition period through the establishment of new
institutions and leaders of their choice. We must ensure
respect for that clearly expressed desire of the
Congolese people and not jeopardize the gains made to
date during the transition by engaging in fruitless
political dialogue.

We in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
believe in the value of dialogue. Along with
negotiations and consultations, it is the very essence of
democracy. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has
been engaged in an ongoing internal dialogue since
well before the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, signed on
10 July 1999, which marked the beginning of active
involvement on the part of the United Nations. That
will certainly continue to be the case before, during
and after the elections.

Fourthly, the security situation in the country in
general and in the eastern part of the national territory
remains a source of concern. We welcome the fact that
the Security Council and the European Union have
agreed - and I thank them for this - substantially to
increase their presence in my country. That will help to
set up mechanisms aimed at ensuring secure conditions
for the people and for the elections. We must also
ensure strict respect for the law and for public order,
without prejudice to efforts to promote national
reconciliation, restore the authority of the State and
rebuild the country. Those efforts must continue during
the electoral process.

Let me assure the Council that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will do everything in its power
to ensure that the elections take place in a calm
atmosphere. The support of the international
community will be crucial and decisive. In that respect,
the support of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC),
of the European Union and of bilateral partners is
greatly appreciated. It is important that together we use
all means at our disposal to ensure the success of the
elections.

Not only must the elections take place
successfully; we must meet, in a responsible manner,
the expectations of the people following the elections.
It should be clearly indicated - and the Council
mission stressed this point - that the elections are not
an end in themselves. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo is requesting additional assistance in the area of
the restructuring and reform of the army and the police
as well with the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants.

The support of the international community will
also be necessary in terms of the promotion of policies
aimed at national reconciliation as well as economic
recovery and the reconstruction of the country. The
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, are invited to consider continuing their
cooperation over the long term, because the peace and
security that the Congolese people desire so
wholeheartedly are prerequisites for the sustainable
development of not only my country but also of the
entire Great Lakes region.

Those are elements of a broader programme to be
developed by the first Congolese Government of the
Third Republic. That programme must include judicial
assistance so as to put an end to rampant impunity and
prosecute all those suspected of having committed
violations of human rights or of international
humanitarian law, particularly with respect to
vulnerable segments of the population, especially
women and children.

Before concluding, allow me to express to the
Secretary-General and to his Special Representative for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo our gratitude for
their tireless efforts to restore peace to my country. I
would also like to thank the Security Council for its
periodic dispatch of missions to my country. Indeed,
we are pleased to note that each visit by a Security
Council mission has led to tangible progress in the
peace process.

Lastly, I cannot but mention the staff of MONUC,
the United Nations system and the international and
national staff, who are paying a heavy price - and
sometimes making the ultimate sacrifice - to restore
peace and dignity to my country.

