Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to join others in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council this
month. At the same time, allow me to congratulate
Nigeria for its excellent work in the presidency in
October.

I wish to thank Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo for
his briefing and to commend his continuous
commitment to the interest of justice. We believe that,
with our joint efforts, such determination can assist
Libya in finding its way to a better future for its
people.

At the same time, accounts from today's briefing,
together with the report on the activities of the Office
of the Prosecutor in the past six months, only
reconfirm the disturbing facts we have heard from
briefing to briefing.

Unfortunately, the present report is only one of
many that evidence serious and continued violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
including systematic violence against the civilian
population in Libya. Findings of the Prosecutor's
investigation, which was conducted in accordance with
his mandate under resolution 1970 (2011), are deeply
unsettling and have reinforced our conviction that the
referral of the situation in Libya to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) was timely and true to our
commitments and obligations.

In that regard, my delegation welcomed the
issuance of arrest warrants for those suspected of
committing those crimes. Bosnia and Herzegovina has
always strongly believed that addressing crimes and
punishing those responsible is the main precondition
for reconciliation and for sustainable and long-lasting
peace and stability.

Given the dramatic way in which things have
unfolded since the arrest warrants were issued, we
hope now to see the people of Libya and the
Transitional National Council (TNC) take
responsibility for their future and their country. We
therefore urge an independent and impartial
investigation into circumstances surrounding the death
of Muammar Al-Qadhafi and his son Mutassim. The
rule of law must become a cornerstone of the newly
rebuilt country. Justice must not become the privilege
ofa few, but a right for all.

It is our hope that the revolution in Libya will
lead to fulfilment of the people's fair demands: a
constitution that preserves the rights of all citizens and
establishes the foundation of a civil State. To achieve
that, it is crucial to address the grave atrocities and
crimes committed. My country strongly supports the
work of the Prosecutor and the ICC in ensuring justice
for Libya's victims. In that context, we commend the
pledge of the TNC authorities to cooperate with and
support the Court.

Finally, I wish to underline Bosnia and
Herzegovina's strong commitment to the ideas and
goals of the ICC. It is our firm belief that through its
work, the ICC can contribute greatly to peace and the
process of reconciliation in Libya.
