Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): I should like to extend my
delegation's sincere appreciation to the Netherlands and
to you, Sir, for organizing this open meeting of the
Security Council on the question of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, which is a useful follow-up to
the Canadian initiative in February this year. My
delegation also wishes to extend its deep appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his presentation this morning
and welcomes his comprehensive report of 8 September
1999, including the excellent recommendations contained
therein. I would also like to thank Mrs. Mary Robinson,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, for her comprehensive, passionate and
enlightening statement.

Internal armed conflicts constitute most of the
conflicts which now come before the Security Council. In
many, if not all, of these conflicts, civilians are the first
and principal target. Women, children, the elderly, the
sick, refugees and internally displaced persons have been

 

attacked in large numbers and driven from their homes. The
protection of civilians has become more difficult because
the dividing line between non-combatants and combatants,
and between peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel, is
often blurred. The sufferings inflicted upon civilians can be
particularly great when the perpetrators of the attacks act
without much control because of weak chains of command,
or when their actions are driven by ethnic factors and are
designed to eliminate the target ethnic group. The problem
is further exacerbated by the eventual collapse of the rule
of law in a number of conflict situations.

Today's meeting reaffirms the imperative of strict
compliance with international humanitarian law on the part
of those involved in violent conflicts. My delegation
condemns in the strongest terms these acts of violence
against civilians. The deliberate attacks and acts of violence
perpetrated by combatants against hapless civilian
populations are a clear and blatant violation of the
principles of international law, including humanitarian and
human rights law. The perpetrators of these heinous crimes
must not be allowed to get away with impunity. Without
doubt, States have the primary responsibility in prosecuting
the perpetrators through their national justice system or,
whenever and wherever appropriate, the relevant
international criminal tribunals. Until a global enforcement
mechanism is in place to address these crimes, ad hoc
tribunals may be required as and whenever necessary.

There has been a disturbing increase in the number
and scale of direct and calculated attacks against
humanitarian and United Nations personnel in the field. We
condemn in the strongest terms these attacks on
humanitarian workers. The security and safety of
humanitarian missions is of paramount importance,
especially in highly volatile and extremely dangerous
conflict areas. The Council has an obligation ensure that
they are able to carry out their missions in responding to
the needs of civilians in armed conflict who should have
unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance. While proper
training about the real situation and risks on the ground
would better equip humanitarian personnel to handle risky
situations in their mission areas, this does not absolve the
combatants of their own obligations and responsibilities
with regard to humanitarian workers who perform their
noble tasks in the name of humanity. My delegation stated
on an earlier occasion that it would be fitting for the United
Nations to pay tribute to the courage and sacrifices of these
humanitarian workers as it honours the Blue Helmets.

My delegation agrees with the Secretary-General that
the widespread availability and use of small arms, light
weapons and anti-personnel landmines have had a
significant impact on the scope and level of the violence
that affects civilian populations in armed conflict. Small
arms have been and continue to be the primary tools of
violence in most of the recent armed conflicts around the
world. Since they are easily available and cheap, require
little maintenance and little training to use, small arms
can be used for long periods and thus affect the duration
of conflict. Small arms encourage a violent rather than
peaceful resolution of differences.

We must redouble our efforts to curb illicit
trafficking in weapons and support the global efforts
towards the implementation of the Ottawa Convention on
anti-personnel landmines. Anti-personnel landmines kill
and maim not only combatants but, more often, innocent
civilians years after the combatants have left the scene of
conflict. They continue to pose a serious threat to the
safety of civilian populations. My delegation therefore
supports the imposition of arms embargoes in situations
where civilians and protected persons are deliberately
targeted by the parties to the conflict.

The issue of children in armed conflict, which was
highlighted in an open Council meeting under the
presidency of Namibia last month, deserves the serious
attention of the international community in its own right.
This was reflected in the Council's resolution last month.
We cannot ignore the issue of children who become
victims of armed conflict, either as instruments of war or
because they are caught up in the traumas and upheavals
of conflict. As a signatory to the 1989 Convention on the
Rights of the Child, Malaysia calls upon the remaining
few countries that have not signed or ratified the
Convention to do so.

We strongly support the Optional Protocol to the
Convention, which calls for a minimum age of 18 for
recruitment and participation in hostilities. However, my
delegation recognizes the additional complication derived
from the fact that the involvement of most child soldiers
in armed conflict takes place within the ranks of
non-State armed groups, where the line of command and
responsibility is often opaque. Bearing this in mind,
Malaysia strongly advocates that specific measures for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants, with special attention given to child
soldiers, be included in peace agreements and, where
appropriate, in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. The elements of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration must be a top priority in

 

any United Nations peacekeeping and peace-building
operation.

When the Security Council takes decisions to resort to
the use of sanctions and, ultimately, military force for the
protection of civilian populations, there is a need to give
careful thought to their effectiveness and their negative
consequences on the civilian population - the very
population it is setting out to protect. The imposition of
Article 41 of the Charter and the use of coercive action
under Chapter VII should be adopted as a mechanism of
last resort.

Given the nature and scope of the matter, there is a
general recognition of the need for a comprehensive and
integrated approach to handling crises, bringing together
political, humanitarian, development and human rights
actors within an agreed framework of action. Malaysia is
favourably disposed towards strengthening the Council's
cooperation and coordination with the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and other relevant United
Nations organs. The Organization would also greatly benefit
from closer cooperation and coordination beyond the United
Nations system with regional organizations, bilateral actors,
Government and non-State actors as well as civil society,
including internationally recognized non-governmental
organizations and the private sector.

My delegation supports the draft resolution on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict that is before the
Council. We believe the draft resolution contains all of the
necessary elements to address the issue. We strongly
support the immediate establishment of an appropriate
mechanism to review further the recommendations
contained in the report and to consider appropriate steps in
the near future.

