I thank you, Sir, for organizing this important debate on pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace during these unprecedented, challenging times for us all. I also wish to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, former Secretary- General Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center on International Cooperation at New York University, for their insightful briefings. My delegation associates itself with the statement submitted by the observer of the European Union (annex 29). Allow me to make a few additional observations. We are witnessing direct and secondary consequences of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic interacting with pre-existing humanitarian crises, adding another layer of complexity to already fragile situations and weak governance and health systems and disproportionately affecting the most vulnerable populations, who experience lack of access to basic services and health care, which impacts their livelihoods and social protection. The pandemic threatens to reverse sustaining peace and development gains made by transition and post-conflict countries. United Nations peacekeeping operations have a special role to play in these difficult circumstances in support of local community efforts to manage the pandemic. Slovakia supports the robust and comprehensive approach taken by the United Nations to ensure that complicated political processes continue, stability is maintained, civilians are protected and the pandemic is contained. I would like to reaffirm Slovakia's support for the Secretary-General's reforms aimed at rendering United Nations peace operations a more effective tool in the promotion of peace and security and enhancing support for political processes in host countries. We highly commend the Secretary-General's leadership in this domain, including through the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which has garnered a strong sense of ownership among Member States. Slovakia has been an active troop- and police-contributing country since its admission to the United Nations. We currently have peacekeepers deployed in the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus and the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization missions, and have participated in military and civilian missions of the European Union, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. Slovakia fully supports the 2020 review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, which offers a timely opportunity for adapting to the immediate challenges posed by the pandemic with regard to sustaining peace. My country underscores the need for stronger partnerships with international and national health and financial institutions and reaffirms the advisory, convening and bridging roles of the Peacebuilding Commission in supporting a coordinated and coherent international response to the crisis. We need to enhance interlinkages between peacekeeping missions for a more effective use of peace, security and stability instruments, including through integrated planning, implementation and assessment to ensure consistency and coherence. The COVID-19 pandemic requires effective, agile and responsive United Nations peace operations. Last but not least, we should keep working to smooth the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and to ensure a joined-up approach across the United Nations system, donors and other stakeholders. All reviews of peacekeeping mandates must consider exit strategies that seek to help lay the foundation for long-term sustainable peace. Member States increasingly view security sector reform (SSR), as embedded in resolution 2151 (2014), as an important priority for peacekeeping, including with regard to the timely conclusion of peacekeeping missions. For years, Slovakia has identified SSR as one of the key elements for effective conflict prevention and successful post-conflict rebuilding and stabilization. The direct experience from many United Nations peace missions and operations clearly shows that nationally led and inclusive SSR is key to developing security sector institutions that are non-discriminatory, representative of the population and capable of effectively responding to specific security needs. As many have said, peacekeeping is a unique tool, but the pursuit of long- lasting political solutions is critical, and the mandates of peacekeeping missions must continue to evolve with the context and needs on the ground. The United Nations peacekeeping architecture needs to adapt to the new types of challenges that the world is facing, such as climate change and environmental degradation. Particular attention needs to be given to how the COVID-19 pandemic is creating new problems and amplifying existing ones, such as socioeconomic divides, gender inequality and increased insecurity for women and girls and other vulnerable groups. Slovakia strongly supports the Secretary-General's call for a cessation of hostilities and the implementation of a global ceasefire, as well as an urgent and coordinated response to the COVID-19 pandemic through three lines of action - tackling the health emergency, focusing on the social impact of the crisis and the economic response to it, and working to build back better. Slovakia encourages a collective response to the COVID-19 crisis, which, if adequately addressed, may also bring opportunities for advancing peace processes and enhancing multilateralism.
