Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): It was a great honour for us to see His
Excellency Mr. Blaise Compaore, President of the
Republic of Burkina Faso, presiding over our Council
and managing our work, following the able leadership
of our colleague Ambassador Michel Kafando. We are
also honoured by the presence of our other
distinguished guests.

Today's meeting adds value and special
importance to our deliberations and falls within the
framework of the efforts and firm determination of
President Compaore and the other leaders of Africa to
achieve lasting security, without which our continent
will not enjoy sustainable development.

The concept paper that the delegation of Burkina
Faso has prepared focuses on mediation as a means to
settle disputes that is given special priority in Article
33 of the United Nations Charter and is reaffirmed by
the Statute of the African Union and many other texts.
The option of mediation offers ideas and proposals to
urge the parties to a dispute to resort to dialogue. At
minimum cost, either before or after a conflict breaks
out, mediation can ensure that the parties find a way to
end it and to build and maintain peace. Mediation that
takes the interests and requirements of local parties
into account is appropriate to the situation in Africa in
particular and the international situation in general,
especially since the end of the cold war and the
subsequent search for consensus solutions.

Moreover, neither the non-binding nature of
mediation, compared to other peaceful means of
settlement, nor the fact that mediation may not achieve
its objectives in all cases undermines its importance,
because mediation allows the parties to re-evaluate or
reconsider their positions and thus to move forward in
their efforts to reach a sustainable peaceful settlement
to conflict.

There is no doubt that the effectiveness of
mediation rests not only upon the impartiality of the
mediator and his skills and knowledge of the
geographical, historical and cultural framework of the
conflict and its root causes, but also on the unity and
coordination of regional and international efforts. That
has been affirmed by international and African reports
and documents on African conflicts and on the
strategies and means for managing them.

Allow me to state frankly nevertheless that we
are still far from implementing our obligations and the
recommendations offered in those documents, nor have
we yet achieved an international African partnership
that integrates resources and capabilities and renounces
circumstantial, partial and expensive approaches in
favour of comprehensive long-term solutions. That has
become bitterly clear from my country's experience
with mediation initiatives over the past decades.

Much remains to be done and there are still
structures and mechanisms that require development.
The noble efforts of the Secretariat and its resources
are still inadequate to the logistical and planning
support needed to enhance African capabilities and in
light of the diplomatic efforts that the African continent
has witnessed from the establishment of the
Organization of African Unity in the 1960s to this very
day.

We must reconsider the existing approach in light
of the lessons of the past and support mediation efforts
that would eliminate or at least alleviate human
suffering and the international system and the power of
the Security Council as the main guardian of
international peace and security. Therefore, the African
Union, with its dynamism and growing capabilities and
the will and determination of its leaders, can be a
model for United Nations ties with regional
organizations and the maintenance of international
peace and security in a regional context. That is what
we hope.

In closing, Mr. President, I would like to thank
your country's delegation for preparing the draft
presidential statement. We support it fully and look
forward to adopting it at the end of this session.
