Mr. Ocaziones (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank Mr. Oshima, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, and the Vice-Minister for
External Relations of Angola for their presentations on
the disturbing humanitarian situation in Angola.

In my delegation's view, we are faced with a
situation that has enormous humanitarian dimensions,
and yet it is a situation that perhaps receives less
publicity than do those in other parts of the world. The
description of the conditions and the figures provided
us here are disturbing: 4 million persons internally
displaced by war, which is almost one third of the
country's population; over 1 million people surviving
on rations provided by humanitarian agencies; 480
children under the age of 5 dying daily; and more than
60 per cent of humanitarian aid being transported by
aircraft because roads are unsafe or have been
destroyed. And what concerns us most is that there are
no signs of improvement.

That is why it is timely that the Security Council
has decided to focus attention on this serious situation.
We have taken note of the fact that 10 United Nations
agencies are already in the country, under the
coordination of Mr. De Mul, working with the Angolan
Government to meet the needs of the most vulnerable.
There are grounds for hope that the appeal issued to the
international community to finance this year's
humanitarian projects will be responded to generously
by donors.

What, then, are the tools available to the Security
Council to respond to the crushing humanitarian
situation of the people of Angola and to try to alleviate
it?

First, we certainly believe that focusing attention
on this situation with urgency is something positive
that we can do. Secondly, we must also continue to
support the initiatives of the Secretary-General and
Ambassador Gambari aimed at facilitating a solution to
armed conflict. Thirdly, we must continue supporting
the international sanctions regime against UNITA until
its fighting capability has been curbed and eliminated.
However, these are medium- and long-term measures.
It is possible that by the time they take effect, many
more people will have died and the path of national
reconstruction will have become more difficult.
Therefore, we are duty-bound to do more. In the
current atmosphere, our efforts will certainly influence
the ability of relief agencies to reach more people and
to meet the needs of vulnerable groups. We feel
profound admiration for the humanitarian staff, and we
wish to contribute to facilitating their work.

Accordingly, my delegation would like to address
two questions to Mr. Oshima about the humanitarian
situation in Angola. The first question is, as you see it,
Sir, is this the right time to explore once again the idea
of agreeing on the establishment of a humanitarian
corridor to facilitate access for humanitarian workers to
persons in need and to facilitate land-based
transportation of aid? It is concerning that there is large
number of people whose situation is unknown because
of the difficulty in reaching them.

The second question relates to the
implementation of the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement. My delegation would like to know how
these Principles, which have already been incorporated
into Angola's domestic legal statutes, are being
implemented in the provinces and how useful they are
proving in providing humanitarian aid, as well as in
protecting the human rights of the Angolan people. I
would appreciate Mr. Oshima's comments in this
regard.

