I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing. We remain deeply concerned about the humanitarian situation in Gaza and other occupied Palestinian territories. The number of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) infections increased by approximately 40 per cent in the first two weeks of August. The Palestinian health-care system has been overstretched since the outbreak of the pandemic. The lack of freedom of movement of patients, medical equipment and health-care personnel has impeded the proper functioning of local health services. The shortage of electricity has made the situation even worse. Last week, the only power plant in Gaza had to shut down after running out of fuel. In this context, we urgently call upon the international community to step up support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in order to provide humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian people. All parties should work closely with one another, coordinate with international relief efforts to slow down the infections and control the spread of the COVID-19. Yet this is not the only concern. We are also alarmed by the escalation of tension in Gaza in the last month. Civilians, including women and children, continue to be killed. The tragedies of the past are likely to be repeated if this cycle of violence is not stopped before it is too late. Meanwhile, in the West Bank, the houses of Palestinian people continued to be demolished. Attacks by Israeli settlers continued to cause dozens of casualties and remained a major security concern. Therefore, we reiterate our calls on all parties to refrain from acts of violence. We call on Israel to lift its closure of the Gaza Strip as an initial step of goodwill to reduce the ongoing tensions. We urge Israel to stop the expansion of settlements, stop the demolitions and seizures of Palestinian property and allow Palestinians in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, to develop their communities. These actions should be undertaken in line with obligations under international humanitarian law and relevant United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). Viet Nam welcomes efforts that contribute to enhancing regional peace, security and stability, including those to promote dialogue and relations among countries in the region. We believe that a fair and sustainable solution to the Middle East peace process can be achieved only through peace talks and dialogue among the concerned parties on the basis of international law and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations. In this connection, we would like to reaffirm our solidarity and consistent support for the just struggle of the Palestinian people for their inalienable rights, as well as the two State solution for the establishment of an independent State of Palestine that coexists in peace with the State of Israel along the pre-1967 lines and with East Jerusalem as its capital. Second statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam, Dang Dinh Quy I take the floor to reaffirm our full support for your leadership, Mr. President. As to the issue currently under discussion, our position is clearly expressed in my letter to the President of the Council. Here, I would like to reiterate the following points. The Charter of the United Nations and international law shall be strictly adhered to. The correlation between the enjoyment of rights and the fulfilment of obligations is fundamental in giving effect to international agreements. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) constitutes an integral part of resolution 2231 (2015). As such, the invocation of processes and procedures under resolution 2231 (2015) shall follow the implementation of the JCPOA. Viet Nam's consistent position is to support the full implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA. We call on relevant parties to continue dialogue and negotiations to find solutions to resolve differences, including by utilizing existing processes and procedures under resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA, and to exercise restraint and refrain from actions that could exacerbate the situation, erode trust and escalate tensions. On our part, Viet Nam is ready to work with Member States to foster an environment conducive to dialogue and cooperation within and beyond the Security Council for peace, stability and development in the Middle East.
