Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I wish tojoin other
speakers in thanking the Chairs of the Committees,
Ambassadors Quinlan, Loulichki and Oh, for their
comprehensive briefings today but, above all, for their
strong leadership of the three important Committees.

Terrorism continues to pose a grave threat
to international peace and security. Since those
Committees last briefed the Security Council (see S/PV.6964), we have seen many attacks by terrorist
groups, including the tragic attack against the Westgate
shopping mall in Nairobi that killed 67 civilians. The
work of those Committees is vital.
As was highlighted in Ambassador Quinlan's
briefing, the threat from terrorism is evolving.
Terrorist propaganda is becoming more sophisticated.
It has now grown so sophisticated that we see the self-
radicalization of individuals and small groups. We
know that in the United Kingdom, and we have seen the
effects of self-radicalization, most recently in London
with the killing of an off-duty soldier by individuals in
May 2013, an act that produced revulsion at home.

Terrorism is an international threat. It transcends
geographic borders and requires an international
response. But it can be disrupted with the right tools
and with a united effort. I believe we have seen evidence
of that here today. The Council must make the best
possible use of the tools available in order to counter
the threat.

Al-Qaida sanctions are vital for disrupting the
activities of terrorist actors. We support the Committee's
effort to improve the implementation of Al-Qaida
sanctions, as outlined by the Chair, and urge Member
States to implement the regimes that we have agreed.
As terrorism evolves, sanctions must also evolve to
counter the threat. The United Kingdom commends the
agreement of the 1267 Committee to engage Member
States of the Sahel and Mahgreb regions next month.
The global reach of United Nations sanctions can be
a powerful tool to strengthen States' own domestic
counter-terrorism efforts.

We think that Ambassador Quinlan is right to
hightlight the importance of clear and fair procedures
within the Al-Qaida sanctions regime. As others have
said, the Ombudsperson process is important to the
relevance and robustness of the regime and it deserves
the support of Member States. I think that there has
been a clear signal here today of the importance of that
role from members of the Security Council.

Next year is the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004). There is much to celebrate. All
but 22 States have reported on their obligations to stem
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons to non-State actors. However, global fears that
terrorists may acquire weapons of mass destruction
persist. Countering that remains a strategic priority.
For States to comply with their obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004) and for that compliance to be
effectively implemented and monitored, all States
must comply with both the letter and the spirit of the
resolution. Evasive answers, such as those given by
Syria on chemical weapons before September this year,
can cast doubt on a State's commitment to effectively
account for and to protect its nuclear, biological and
chemical weapons. We have witnessed the destruction
and suffering inflicted by such weapons. Prohibiting
their use is the responsibility of all. Measurable and
sustained progress in that reagrd is the only way to
establish enduring global confidence.

The last time that we met to discuss counter-
terrorism, the United Kingdom stressed the need
for all relevant components of the United Nations
counter-terrorism system to work together and avoid
duplication (see S/PV.6964). Others have referred to
that today. We welcome the appointment of Jean-Paul
Laborde as Head of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) earlier this year and
of Jehangir Khan as Head of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF). As others have
said, that new leadership must bring with it a new level
of coordination, with a clear allocation of activities
and responsibilities for assistance, reporting and
capacity-building. CTED should focus on conducting
assessments and on facilitating assistance. CTITF
should focus on its role in convening United Nations
entities to deliver capacity-building. There should
also be a more comprehensive and forward-looking
information- sharing matrix for United Nations counter-
terrorism activities. That would assist Member States
in planning their coordination with and support for
such activities.

We support Ambassador Loulichki's statement
that effective counter-terrorism measures and respect
for human rights are intertwined. We welcome the
integration of human rights considerations in CTED's
work and the briefing of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to the Counter-
Terrorism Committee in October. Our work on counter-
terrorism cannot become static nor can it be carried out
in isolation. Only though a unified, complementary and
evolving approach can the international community
effectively deal with the scourge of terrorism. The
United Kingdom urges the Committees to redouble
their efforts to make their work relevant and effective
and to adapt them to meet the challenges of the evolving
threat of terrorism.

