Mr. Wagaba (Uganda): I would like to thank the
Security Council for allowing my delegation to address
it on this important issue of children and armed
conflict.

My delegation has carefully studied and taken
note of the fourth report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict, contained in document
S/2003/1053. The report covers a wide range of
conflict situations in which children have faced grave
human rights violations, including abduction, forced
recruitment into armed groups, rape, maiming and
killing. The report also proposes a number of measures
aimed at addressing those violations and punishing the
perpetrators. The report also contains, in annexes, two
lists of alleged violators.

Uganda is a strong supporter of the rights of
children. Uganda ratified the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on 16 September 1990; the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict on 6
June 2002; and acceded to the Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of
children, child prostitution and child pornography on
18 January 2002. Uganda therefore applauds all
measures meant to ensure the protection of children in
situations of armed conflict. In fact, the Government
signed, on 4 December 2003, a memorandum of
understanding with Save the Children/Denmark's
Uganda Country Programme to implement a project on
strengthening the capacity of the Uganda People's
Defence Forces (UPDF) in the area of child rights.

My delegation wishes specifically to address
paragraph 63 of the report, as well as the list contained
in Annex II to the report, in which references are made
to the Uganda People's Defence Forces and to Local
Defence Units allied to the UPDF. Paragraph 63 reads
as follows:

"The Uganda People's Defence Forces
(UPDF) and its allied Local Defence Units
(LDUs) recruit and use children. UPDF has also
re-recruited children who have escaped or been
rescued from LRA. In a UNICEF/Office for
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs screening,
120 recruits in the UPDF Lugore military training
camp were reported to be children under the age
of 18, some of whom had been demobilized."

It is the policy of the Uganda Government not to
recruit anyone under the age of 18 into the Uganda
armed forces, including the Local Defence Units. This
policy is strictly observed by the UPDF, and this fact is
well known even to the Uganda Office of the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF). In those few cases
in which recruits are discovered to have sneaked in
because of lack of proof of age, such as birth
certificates, they are always thrown out as soon as they
are discovered. That was the case in the incident
referred to in the Secretary-General's report, where, at
Lugore military training camp in the Gulu district, a
screening done in conjunction with UNICEF last
August uncovered a number of underage recruits into
the LDUs. Those recruits were promptly discharged.

However, it should be noted that, with the high
rate of unemployment in the Ugandan countryside,
coupled with the low standard of education, many
people view military service as the easiest way of
getting a job. Therefore, it is common for members of
the community to deceive recruiters about their age in
order to be enlisted. Additionally, in the face of the
constant abductions of children by the so-called Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) in that area, many parents feel
it is much safer to have them join the local militia or
the army rather than the rebels.

The situation in northern Uganda, where the
Government has been battling a bandit outfit, the so-
called Lord's Resistance Army, for many years, is well-
known to the international community. In this regard,
my delegation is grateful to the representatives of the
United States and of the United Kingdom, who, in their
statements this morning, gave graphic and accurate
accounts of the atrocities being perpetrated against
children in northern Uganda by the LRA.

That organization, which has been placed on the
list of terrorist organizations by the United States State
Department, has been carrying out, and continues to
carry out, horrendous and savage acts of brutality
against innocent people in northern Uganda, including
women and children. Over the years, tens of thousands
of children, boys and girls, have been abducted from
their homes or schools and taken into captivity by the
LRA. They are forcibly recruited into fighting. Girls
are forced to become sex slaves by the rebel leaders.
Others have been savagely maimed or brutally
murdered. All of those acts are well known and have
been documented by UNICEF, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and other international agencies and non-governmental
organizations active in the region.

In his statement to the Council on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, Under-Secretary-General
Jan Egeland had this to say on the situation in northern
Uganda:

"For example, on my recent mission to
Uganda, I saw a stark picture of what the absence
of humanitarian access means. Outside the main
northern and eastern towns, access has been
dramatically reduced by the increased activity of
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). Some 1.3
million people have been displaced by the war.
Many of those people are living in 'resettlement
camps' in inaccessible areas, with severely
limited access to their lands, to their livelihoods,
and to humanitarian assistance". (S/PV.4877, p. 3)

This is the humanitarian tragedy that has been
forced on our people by the inhuman acts of the LRA.
The Government of Uganda is dedicated to ending
those terrorist acts, and in fact President Museveni has
been stationed in northern Uganda for more than one
year now to personally oversee the efforts towards
ending the reign of terror of the LRA.

It is therefore right and proper that the LRA
should appear on the list contained in annex II of the
Secretary-General's report. That organization should be
condemned by all right-thinking people, and every
pressure should be brought to bear on it and its
leadership so that it ceases its inhuman actions. Its
leaders should be apprehended wherever they are and
brought to justice to answer for their crimes against
humanity.

However, my Government is outraged that the
Secretary-General's report should purport to mention
the UPDF in the same breath as the LRA. It is
outrageous not only because the allegations against the
UPDF are not true and have been repeatedly denied by
the Uganda Government but also because the author of
the report, the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Under-Secretary-General Olara Otunnu, has been
invited on numerous occasions by the Uganda
Government to visit Uganda or send a team there to
investigate the situation on the ground. On all those
occasions, Ambassador Olara Otunnu did not find it fit
to go to Uganda or to send a mission there but instead
has chosen to rely on hearsay information gathered on
visits to neighbouring countries.

The Uganda Government is baffled by this hostile
attitude on the part of Ambassador Olara Otunnu. This
concern of my Government has been brought to the
attention of the Secretary-General by my President,
President Museveni, when he met the Secretary-
General in May 2002 and by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs in his letter to the Secretary-General in May
2002. The same concern has been expressed by the
former Permanent Representative of Uganda to the
United Nations in his letter to the President of the
Security Council dated 16 January 2003 (S/2003/124),
as well as the current Permanent Representative in his
letter to the President of the Security Council dated 4
December 2003 and circulated as Security Council
document S/2003/1160. In all those communications,
the Uganda Government has reiterated its open
invitation to the Special Representative to visit Uganda
or to send an investigative mission, but the invitation
has been ignored to date.

The Government of Uganda is left with no
alternative but to assume that Ambassador Olara
Otunnu has an axe to grind with the current
Government in Uganda. It must be remembered that
Ambassador Otunnu was born in Uganda and is a
native of the very area in northern Uganda where the
LRA is carrying out those atrocities. Ambassador
Otunnu was, as a matter of fact, Foreign Minister in the
brutal military regime which was removed in 1986
through popular resistance and replaced by the present
Government. Since 1986, Ambassador Otunnu has not
stepped inside Uganda for reasons best known to
himself. Furthermore, he has ignored the plight of the
people of northern Uganda during his tenure as Special
Representative.

If the recommendations contained in the report
were to be implemented against the Uganda
Government, it would certainly weaken the
Government's capacity to protect its citizens against
the attacks of LRA. It is the sincere hope and
expectation of the Uganda Government that the
Council will not allow Ambassador Otunnu to use the
cover of the authority and office of the Secretary-
General to advance his own personal hostile agenda
against Uganda. My delegation strongly urges the
Security Council to reject the listing of the Uganda
People's Defence Forces, as well as the Local Defence
Units allied to the UPDF, in annex II to the Secretary-
General's report. We further urge the Security Council
to demand that the Special Representative send a
mission to Uganda to specifically investigate the
allegations contained in paragraph 63 of the report
before taking action on it.

