Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
joining other delegations in congratulating Pakistan on
its assumption ofthe presidency ofthe Security Council
this month. We thank the delegation of Pakistan for
scheduling this very important open debate. This
initiative reflects the commitment and resolve of that
country on the subject. I also thank the Secretary-
General for his statement this morning.

Terrorism, both in its magnitude and diversity, is
one of the gravest Challenges of today. It is a threat
not only to national security and stability, but also to
international peace and security. Indeed, no country is
immune from the scourge.

The adoption of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy in 2006 was a watershed moment
in the global fight against terrorism. We fully support
the Strategy. Bangladesh made a humble contribution
as the facilitator of General Assembly resolution
64/297, on the review of the Strategy in 2010. We
call for the Strategy's transparent and comprehensive
implementation.

Bangladesh condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. Our Government has been following
and will continue to follow a zero-tolerance policy
towards terrorism and extremism. We feel that the four
pillars of the Strategy and the establishment of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF)
to support its implementation were important steps. In
line with our commitment to counter terrorism, we have
taken some notable initiatives in our national context.

A party to all 14 universal anti-terrorism
instruments, Bangladesh also ratified the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime. Our Government is currently implementing a
national counter-radicalization strategy by promoting
education, women's empowerment and the propagation
of secular and moderate cultural values, and creating
a mindset of tolerance, friendliness and compassion in
line with our flagship resolution, "Culture of peace".

Our Government supports the work of the United
Nations in the effective implementation of resolution
1267 (1999). We have banned all terrorist groups
blacklisted by the Committee established pursuant
to that resolution and are keeping a close eye on any
suspicious activity. The Government enacted the
country's first-ever Money-Laundering Prevention
Act in 2009, which was updated in 2012 to make it
more stringent and to include suspicious transactions
and predicate offences as a way to address terrorist
financing.

Bangladesh feels privileged to have partnered with
the CTITF last year in presenting a regional workshop
on the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in South Asia in Dhaka.

There should be a clear distinction between
terrorism, on the one hand, and the legitimate struggle
against foreign occupation and the right to self-
determination as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, on the other. Attempts to wrongfully associate
terrorism with any religion, nationality, civilization or
ethnic group are unjustifiable and therefore should be
avoided. It is essential that, while countering terrorism,
human rights standards be respected and protected.

If the global strategy against terrorism is to
succeed, its root causes - such as economic disparity
and deprivation, political subjugation and exclusion,
prolonged and unresolved conflicts, unfair treatment
and absence of fairness 4 must be addressed, as
appropriate. In that regard, socioeconomic interventions
for the deprived in a society - such as social safety nets,
microcredit-based livelihoods for women, women's
empowerment, education and job creation, and a strong
legal institutional regime - are of pivotal importance.

Let me emphasize that the United Nations should be
leading the global conversation and action on counter-
terrorism, with the support of all stakeholders. National
capacity-building and the training of counter-terrorism
personnel in developing countries, particularly the
least developed, must remain high on the agenda of the
United Nations for assisting all States in combating
terrorism.

Let us today renew once again our vows to unite
against terrorism and save innocent lives and protect
succeeding generations from the unacceptable scourge
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

