Mr. Ivanov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Iraq problem has many aspects. On the
one hand, we all agree that we must achieve the full
and effective disarmament of Iraq, in conformity with
Security Council resolution 1441 (2002). On the other
hand, it is quite clear that the way in which we resolve
this problem will determine not only the future of Iraq:
in essence, we are now laying the foundations for
ensuring peace and security in our time.

Therein lies the special responsibility that is now
ours and the choice that we shall have to make. If,
through our joint efforts, we succeed in resolving the
Iraqi crisis in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, it will certainly have a positive effect
on our efforts to settle other conflicts. Most significant,
it will be an important step towards a new, just and
secure world order. That is why Russia has consistently
and resolutely sought to solve the Iraq problem on the
basis of international law and of Security Council
resolutions. Today, more than ever before, we have
reason to state that this is not only the proper, but also
the most reliable, way.

The report submitted by Mr. Blix demonstrates
that, thanks to our united, energetic efforts and to the
pressure that has been brought to bear on Baghdad
from all sides, including through the buildup of a
military presence, we have been able to achieve
essential progress in implementing resolution 1441
(2002).

Let us take a look at the facts. There is an
ongoing enhanced inspections regime in Iraq.
International inspectors are being given immediate,
unimpeded, unconditional and unrestricted access to
any site. Active use is being made of helicopters and
aircraft for the purpose of aerial surveillance during the
course of inspections. On the whole, the Iraqi
authorities' level of cooperation with inspectors is
thoroughly different from the practice we saw
previously under the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM).

Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei have repeatedly
pointed out, including in their latest reports, problems
in conducting interviews with Iraqi specialists. We
agree with the View that the Iraqi leadership must more
energetically encourage its citizens to take part in those
interviews without minders. Judging from the latest
reports, such interviews are gradually beginning to
become the norm.

Qualitatively new changes with regard to carrying
out concrete tasks have taken place during the
inspection process. There is a real disarmament process
in Iraq for the first time in many years. Weapons
banned by resolutions of the Security Council are being
eliminated. Those weapons include the Al Samoud 2
missiles, which were officially declared by the Iraqi
side and which are now being destroyed under the
supervision of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC).
Those weapons also include the discovered 122mm
shells, which can carry poisonous chemical substances.
The Iraqis have turned over fragments from R-400
aerial bombs to the inspectors for analysis. The experts
are working on the possibility of analysing ground soil
in areas where VX gas and anthrax growth media have
been destroyed. Baghdad has also turned over to
inspectors several dozen new documents, which are
now being analysed. I repeat that these are two facts
that demonstrate that the inspectors' activities are
developing.

We agree in principle with Mr. Blix's view that if
the latest positive steps taken by Baghdad had been
undertaken earlier, the results would be more
convincing today. But it is nevertheless important that
those steps were taken. As the heads of UNMOVIC and
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) have
pointed out, those steps open up the way to resolving
outstanding problems. I wish once again to emphasize
that they open up the way to resolving outstanding
problems. This is important in principle.

Furthermore, I would like to draw the Council's
attention to yet another aspect highlighted by Mr. Blix,
namely, the long-term monitoring of Iraq's non-
production of weapons of mass destruction. This is yet
another important safety mechanism to ensure that Iraq
will not produce weapons of mass destruction in the
future.

In that connection, the question arises as to
whether it is now reasonable to halt inspections,
thereby halting the momentum achieved in the process
of Iraq's disarmament. Let us take another look.

What is really in the genuine interest of the world
community - continuing the albeit difficult but clearly
fruitful results of the inspectors' work or resorting to
the use of force, which will inevitably result in
enormous loss of life and which is fraught with serious
and unpredictable consequences for regional and
international stability? It is our deep conviction that the
possibilities for disarming Iraq through political means
do exist. They really exist, and that cannot but be
acknowledged. What we need now is not new Security
Council resolutions; we have enough of those. We now
need active support for the inspectors to carry out their
tasks.

Russia is firmly in favour of continuing and
strengthening inspection activities and of making them
more focused in nature. That goal would be furthered
by the speedy submission - in the days to come - of
an UNMOVIC programme of work for the approval of
the Security Council, a programme that includes a list
of key remaining disarmament tasks. Such tasks should
be formulated with the utmost clarity; and they should
be realizable. That would enable us to evaluate
objectively Iraq's level of cooperation and, most
importantly, to provide an exhaustive answer to all the

remaining open questions regarding banned Iraqi
military programmes.

Of course, we all face a difficult choice. Hardly
anyone among us could claim to be in possession of the
absolute truth. It is therefore quite natural for different
points of View to be expressed during the course of our
discussion. But such differences should not lead to a
rift among us. We are all standing on the same side of
the barricade. We all share common values. Only by
acting in solidarity will we effectively face up to new
global threats and challenges. We are certain that the
Security Council has to emerge united and strong from
the Iraq crisis, not weakened and divided. Russia will
continue to work towards that goal.

