Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the mission of Chile for organizing this debate
and Minister for Foreign Affairs Heraldo Mufioz
for presiding over this meeting. I also thank Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and Ambassador
Patriota, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
their briefings.

The reasons for which the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) was established a few years ago
remain as regrettably relevant as they ever were.
Important progress has been made, but significant
challenges remain. With respect to the progress made,
I can state with satisfaction that there are very positive
signs in Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau and
Burundi. With respect to the challenges, those can be
seen in South Sudan and the Central African Republic.
Of course we await the review exercise that should
enhance the efficiency of the PBC and will be based on
the experiences and lessons learned over a short period
of years. We trust that the basic outcome will, precisely,
avoid relapses into conflict. Of course, the process will
be a long one extending over years and decades, because
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, unfortunately, are
tasks that we will always have to deal with.

There are many areas of convergence between the
ideas that have been shared around this table, so I will
just briefly review them and the text of my statement
will be available on my mission's website.

In terms of post-conflict situations, there are
four major ideas that I would like to highlight. First,
it is important that political dialogue processes be
inclusive and that all political movements be involved
in them. Secondly, the State should be endowed with
institutions that are perceived ~ and I would highlight
this - as legitimate, effective and responsible. Thirdly,
it is important for national actors to enjoy ownership.
Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, there is a need
to promote reconciliation, coherence and coordination
among national, international and, most importantly,
regional actors.

Now, as I said earlier, the PBC has a unique role
in achieving three objectives: securing predictable
technical, financial and political support in the short
and medium terms; reconciling the positions of the
various national, regional and international players
involved; and thirdly - and I would like to underscore
this - maintaining international actors' focus on the
peace processes in post-conflict countries. I would
like to mention Africa, in particular the growing
responsibilities being shouldered by African actors,
including regional and subregional entities in Africa.
I think it is important that they continue to focus, as
required, on the terrible impact of Ebola.

I would conclude by saying that Spain has been a
member of the PBC since the beginning. I would recall
that Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson has also
been there from the beginning. We have been there
almost continuously, working on peacebuilding with
the PBC. Now that the United Nations is undertaking
a triple review process - namely of peacekeeping
operations, the PBC and resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security - it is crucial that
those three processes begin interacting now so that we
can avoid overlaps and together achieve the ultimate
objective that we all want, which is to maintain and
enhance the effectiveness of the Organization in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

