Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Nicholas Haysom for presenting the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security
(S/2014/876). I take this opportunity to congratulate
him on his appointment and to wish him the greatest
of success as Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also thank the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, and Ambassador
Zahir Tanin of Afghanistan for their briefings.

When the Council last considered the situation
in Afghanistan, on 18 September (see S/PV.7267), we
were awaiting the results of the second round of the
presidential elections. Since then, an agreement was
reached between the two presidential candidates,
confirming Mr. Mohammad Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai as
the new President of Afghanistan and of Mr. Abdullah
Abdullah as Chief Executive Officer. Through
Ambassador Tanin, we congratulate the Government
and the people of Afghanistan on this important
demonstration of civil democracy. This, the first such
peaceful and democratic transfer of power between two
elected leaders in the history of Afghanistan, is a major
turning point in the political transition in the country.

The challenges facing the new authorities are both
well known and overwhelming, including the widespread
desire for peace on the part of the Afghan people and
cordial relations with neighbouring countries in the
region. In that regard, we welcome the announcement
by the new Government of its commitment to the
launching of a national peace process in Afghanistan.
It is crucial that the political opposition, especially the
Taliban, join the inter-Afghan dialogue so the country
may begin overcoming its violent past, which has
claimed more than 32,000 Afghan and foreign lives,
including those of some 15,000 civilians, in addition to
the thousands of Taliban victims since only 2007, when
United Nations records began.

We note that during the reporting period there
was a reduction in the number of security incidents as
compared to the same period in the year 2013, thereby
reversing the trend that we had been observing. We hope
that this new trend solidifies. While it is a welcome fact
that the Afghan security forces have demonstrated the
capability to control insurgent activities, Argentina
does not believe that there can be a purely military
solution to the conflict without addressing the deep-
rooted causes of the conflict. Acts as abhorrent as
those we saw last Tuesday - when the Taliban killed
127 people, the majority of them children, in a school
in Peshawar - serve to underscore the importance
of regional cooperation when it comes to ushering in
prosperity and stability, not just for Afghanistan but
also for its neighbours in the region.

Argentina is just as worried about the increase in
the number of civilian victims resulting from aerial
operations carried out by international military forces,
including 148 children during the reporting period. In
that vein, we reiterate the obligation of such operations
being made in full compliance with the obligations
arising from international law, including international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.

Argentina supports efforts aimed at preventing the
production and trafficking of drugs in Afghanistan.
In that regard, we know that regional cooperation is
essential, both in law enforcement and criminal justice
as well as in the promotion of a reduction in demand. It
is worrisome that in 2014 there has been an increase in
the opium harvest, and we underscore the important role
that the United Nations plays in monitoring the situation
surrounding drugs in Afghanistan and in supporting
national efforts. It is also important to coordinate the
efforts of the various agencies of the United Nations
system in order to implement a comprehensive approach
on this matter.

The United Nations role continues to be crucial
when it comes to helping the future National Unity
Government meet its obligations in the areas of security
and development as well as in its cooperation in the
coordination of humanitarian assistance and in the
fight against the production and trafficking of drugs.
We fully support the work of the UNAMA and of the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of UNAMA.

