The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of China.

Today, 24 March, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), with the United States in the lead,
mobilized its airborne military forces and launched
military strikes against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, seriously exacerbating the situation in the
Balkan region. This act amounts to a blatant violation of
the United Nations Charter and of the accepted norms of
international law. The Chinese Government strongly
opposes this act.

The question of Kosovo, as an internal matter of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, should be resolved
among the parties concerned in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia themselves. Settlement of the Kosovo issue
should be based on respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and on guaranteeing the legitimate rights and interests of
all ethnic groups in the Kosovo region. Recently, the
parties concerned have been working actively towards a
political settlement of the crisis. We have always stood
for the peaceful settlement of disputes through
negotiations, and are opposed to the use or threat of use
of force in international affairs and to power politics
whereby the strong bully the weak. We oppose
interference in the internal affairs of other States, under
whatever pretext or in whatever form.

It has always been our position that under the
Charter it is the Security Council that bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security. And it is only the Security Council that can
determine whether a given situation threatens international
peace and security and can take appropriate action. We
are firmly opposed to any act that violates this principle
and that challenges the authority of the Security Council.

 

The Chinese Government vigorously calls for an
immediate cessation of the military attacks by NATO
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. China calls on
the international community and on the parties concerned
in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to make concerted
efforts to stabilize the situation as soon as possible and to
defuse the crisis so as to bring peace back to the Balkan
region at an early date.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

