The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Australia.

First and foremost, Australia wishes to thank the
Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing on the
work of her Office in relation to its ongoing efforts to
ensure accountability for serious international crimes in
Libya. I would also like to thank her for her determined
efforts on behalf ofjustice and the rule of law.

The Prosecutor's biannual briefings on both Libya
and Darfur are integral to ensuring that the Council is
fully appraised of the efforts undertaken by the Court
at the request of the Council, to ensure that the Council
is in the best possible position to provide the support it
must to the Court's ongoing efforts. As the Council's
meeting on 4 November underscored, there is reason
to be deeply concerned by the deteriorating security
situation in Libya. There is no military solution to
the current crisis. All parties must commit to an
unconditional ceasefire and to political dialogue.

The Prosecutor's report highlights her Office's
concerns that Rome Statute crimes continue to be
committed. Of particular concern are the reports of
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure in
Tripoli and Benghazi, ongoing unlawful imprisonment
and mistreatment of detainees and the unresolved
situation of forcibly displaced Tawerghan civilians. It
is imperative that all parties adhere to their obligations
under international humanitarian and human rights
law. And the Council must do what it can to prevent the
commission of future Rome Statute crimes.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) also has a
role to play. We support the Office of the Prosecutor's
ongoing efforts to monitor the situation in the
challenging security situation. As the Prosecutor has
said this morning, the present turmoil in Libya makes
the pursuit of justice very difficult. But such challenges
make the rule of law more important. Justice is integral
to public confidence in national institutions and
leaders. Justice provides a pathway to breaking cycles
of violence. And, delivered efficiently and fairly, it has
the potential to have a critical deterrent effect.

In that context, Australia urges Libya to do all
that it can to meet its obligations to cooperate with the
ICC and to ensure that it continues to investigate and
prosecute other serious international crimes committed
in Libya that fall outside the Court's jurisdiction. We
welcome advice from the ongoing discussions between
the Office of the Prosecutor and the Libyan Government
on burden sharing. We hope the discussions will bear
fruit, and we thank the Office for its demonstrated
willingness to work with the Government of Libya in
an effort to ensure that as many cases as possible are
addressed.

In relation to the ICC's share of the burden, we
note the Prosecutor's advice regarding its ongoing
investigations in relation to a second case and its
collection of evidence against other possible suspects
outside of Libya. For our part, Australia will work with
other ICC States parties to ensure that the Office has
the necessary resources under the Court's budget to
progress in those efforts. In turn, we call on relevant
States, including Libya's neighbours, to deny safe haven
to those accused of committing serious international
crimes during the violence in 2011 and to cooperate
with the Court.

The ICC cannot deliver justice alone. We support
the Prosecutor's call for Libya to share its strategy for
investigating and prosecuting serious international
crimes. That will demonstrate that justice remains a
key priority underpinning efforts to ensure peace and
stability in Libya. A key step in the plan must be the
surrender of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the Court,
consistent with the Appeals Chamber's decision of
21 May and resolutions 1970 (2011) and 2174 (2014).
Libya has followed the Rome Statute in challenging the
admissibility of the case. We trust it will now follow the
Court's decision made pursuant to the Statute.

The international community also has a role to
play. Australia notes the call made by the Prosecutor
for Libya to be provided with the necessary support to
deliver justice, including through the possible formation
of a contact group on justice issues. We are interested
in discussing what assistance can be provided to help
Libya create the conditions that will facilitate the
delivery ofjustice in a manner that is consistent with
international standards.

It is essential that the Council also play its part. The
Council's role is not over once it adopts a resolution
to refer a situation to the ICC; a referral resolution is
just one step on the path to justice. As it continues to
consider the situation in Libya, the Council must not
lose sight of the importance of ending impunity and of
the role it is obliged to play in that regard.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I welcome and give the floor to the representative
of Libya.

