Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Let me start by
expressing to you, Sir, the warm felicitations of the
Pakistan delegation on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. This
is a month that will undoubtedly tax your considerable
skills, but we have no doubt that it will be a most
successful, even if eventful, presidency. I would also
like to take this opportunity to thank all of my
colleagues who have made such kind and generous
comments about last month's Pakistan presidency.

It is a signal honour for us to welcome Chairman
Bryant to the Council and to thank him for his
comprehensive statement outlining the achievements of
the Transitional Government. I would also like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, for his report on the activities
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). I
think both of the statements we heard today are
important statements requiring reflection by the
Council and its members.

First, our discussions in the Council on Liberia -
like those on other conflict situations in Africa - have,
I believe, led us to understand that some of the
fundamental requirements for achieving the objective
of sustainable peace are the following: the provision of
credible security; a viable political and peace process;
and, thirdly, economic recovery, reconstruction and
development. In the case of Liberia, it would seem that
we are on pretty sound footing as far as the first two
prerequisites are concerned. We think that UNMIL has
done a remarkable job in difficult circumstances.

We commend Mr. Klein and his team, and indeed
the entire United Nations family that has worked in
Liberia. They have, we think, transformed a very
difficult situation into a manageable one.

As Mr. Klein remarked the other day, UNMIL is
going to be a successful Mission. We welcome the fact
that it will soon be fully deployed. Pakistan's
participation in that Mission is a matter of pride and a
reflection of our strong commitment to the cause of
peace in Africa. We particularly welcome the
cooperation between the peacekeeping missions in
Liberia and in neighbouring countries.

The change in circumstances in Liberia has also
been helped by the improved political climate in the
subregion. That has also had an immediate positive
impact on the way sanctions are implemented. For
example, the current report of the Panel of Experts on
Liberia states that no violation of the arms embargo has
been reported since August 2003. On that issue, we
note the comment made by Chairman Bryant that war
was over in Liberia, that Liberia was at peace with its
neighbours, and that the purchase of arms was not a
priority for the Transitional Government.

Having said that, I must turn to the third major
requirement, which is post-conflict peace-building and
reconstruction. It is clear that Liberia requires
resources and institutional capacity, and there is also
the imperative of bringing the peace dividend to all
sectors of its population, especially the young adult
males, to which both Mr. Klein and Chairman Bryant
referred.

Resources, of course, are the key. To a large
extent, all of this is dependent on adequate and
sustained international assistance. Again, Mr. Klein has
said that there is a future for Liberia if the money
comes in. Worryingly, though, this is not happening so
far. We have been informed that 75 per cent of the
pledges made at the reconstruction conference in
February are yet to be redeemed. The principal option,
therefore, for the Liberian Transitional Government
must be to generate resources, especially through the
use of its own natural wealth. Chairman Bryant has
made an impassioned and credible plea for the lifting
of the sanctions regime against Liberia.

Pakistan, together with several other members of
the Council, has emphasized the clear distinction
between the arms and travel bans, on the one hand, and
the economic sanctions - that is, the sanctions on
diamonds and timber - on the other. There is a need to
approach the two sets of sanctions separately, in our
view. We have heard from Chairman Bryant that the
sanctions have a punitive impact on the efforts of the
Transitional Government to bring peace and stability to
the country, and the Council needs to reflect on that.

Resolution 1521 (2003) implicitly recognizes that
such an impact could happen, and it provides for
regular review of the diamond and timber sanctions,
with a view to terminating them as soon as possible
once the conditions are met, in order to create revenue
for the reconstruction and development of Liberia.

Given the progress made by the Liberian
authorities in the case of diamonds, we can, hopefully,
look forward to utilizing that provision in the
resolution as soon as possible, with a view to the lifting
of the diamond sanctions. We note Chairman Bryant's
assurance that Liberia would not export diamonds until
it joins the Kimberley process, and we construe this as
a positive confidence-building measure.

Chairman Bryant has also outlined the measures
taken to respond to the international community's
concerns regarding the timber sector, and this, too, we
believe, is a positive indication.

In conclusion, let me say that Pakistan looks
forward, in the months ahead, to the completion of the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
rehabilitation (DDRR) programme; and to a
comprehensive review of sanctions, with a view to
lifting them as soon as possible, paired with the full
commitment of the resources which have been pledged
by the international community for the reconstruction
of Liberia. The forthcoming Security Council mission
to West Africa, which will be led by our colleague
Ambassador Jones Parry, will, we hope, strengthen the
commitment of the international community to
Liberia's re-emergence as a stable and prosperous
country and to the realization of the objectives of peace
and stability in the entire region.

