Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): My delegation joins
others in congratulating the Arab Republic of Egypt
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August. We also commend
you, Mr. President, for convening this very important
open debate today on the topic "United Nations
peacekeeping operations: their potential contribution
to the overarching goal of sustaining peace". We also
thank today's briefers for the invaluable insights they
have shared with us on this subject.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

It is the considered view of my delegation that
United Nations peacekeeping operations play a critical
role in building and sustaining peace and international
security. Over the years, peacekeeping has proven to be
the most effective tool employed by the United Nations
to provide transitional support to war-torn countries.
It has also provided such countries an opportunity to
transition from conflict to sustainable peace.

However, we acknowledge that the scope, objectives
and nature of peacekeeping have been highly dynamic
and have evolved over the years, in parallel with the
changes in the nature of conflicts, thereby making the
success of any operation less guaranteed. In that sense,
my delegation welcomes the fact that one of the main
focuses of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres' term of
office has been the review of peacekeeping operations,
peacebuilding and the involvement of women and
children in conflict.

It is our view that the full participation of women
is essential to the success of any peace process. We
therefore agree that it is the responsibility of the United
Nations to ensure that political solutions promote
preventive approaches, mainstream human rights and
foster inclusive engagement and empowerment of
women and girls.

In our support for resolution 2282 (2016) on post-
conflict peacebuilding, we wish to emphasize that in
order to bring about sustainable peace in a society
emerging from conflict, some of the key activities
should be efforts to prevent the escalation, continuation
and recurrence of conflict. We therefore support a wide
range of activities that extend from conflict prevention
to the maintenance of sustainable peace and are included
within the scope of United Nations peace operations.
Addressing the root causes, building the foundations
for peaceful, inclusive societies, assisting parties to end
hostilities, ensuring national reconciliation and working
towards recovery, reconstruction and development
are critical to preventing and resolving conflict. Such
efforts should, therefore, be the number-one priority
for us as the international community. Peacekeeping
in itself should complement existing national, regional
and international efforts aimed at advancing and
encouraging dialogue and national reconciliation and
strengthen national capacities and institutions for
sustaining peace.

As for Botswana, our desire to see peace prevail in
our region and beyond has been one of the key objectives
of our foreign policy. We have and remain actively
involved in efforts to bring about sustainable peace
in countries in our subregion and beyond. Botswana
has in the past provided military and police personnel
to United Nations and other multilateral operations
in countries such as Somalia, Rwanda, Mozambique,
Lesotho and Darfur, to mentionjust a few.

Although Botswana is not a troop- or
police-contributing country, we have, over the years,
faithfully maintained our contributions to the United
Nations regular budget, as well as the peacekeeping
budget, as a testament to our unwavering commitment
to the United Nations system and to contributing, in our
own small way, to the maintenance of international peace
and stability. Furthermore, in view of our own values
and principles relating to democracy, good governance,
accountability and strong institutions, Botswana has
also been instrumental in promoting dialogue. The
country played a leading role in mediation efforts in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mozambique and
Lesotho, to mention only a few.

Botswana also continues to share its experiences
and knowledge on those issues, as is evident in our
involvement in South Sudan. Members of the Council
will recall that our former President, His Excellency
Mr. Festus Mogae, who is a familiar figure in the
Council in his capacity as Chair of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission on South Sudan, is making
a significant contribution to facilitate the resolution
of the conflict in that country. My Government also
provides significant support to election observation
in our region, including supporting political, and
development activities that focus on the smooth transfer
of power and contribute to sustainable peace.

We also recognize ongoing efforts and
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union through the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, which was recently signed by the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission.

Let me conclude by reaffirming Botswana's
commitment to playing its part and to our unwavering
support for efforts by the international community
aimed at the promotion and protection of international
peace and security.

