Mr. Musah: I am honoured to address this body
on behalf of the President of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) Commission, who
is unavoidably absent today, and to be able to present
the point of view of ECOWAS on the disturbing matter
of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. The ECOWAS
Commission thanks the Council for its abiding
preoccupation with the growing threat of piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea to the States in the catchment area,
regional security and international maritime activity.
ECOWAS is most pleased with the personal
involvement of the Secretary-General in finding
solutions to the piracy problem, as it will further
strengthen our existing cooperation with United
Nations agencies in the region.

Members may recall that, at the Council's 6633rd
meeting on 19 October 2011, the ECOWAS
Commission was privileged to present its views on this
matter. Soon afterwards, on 31 October 2011, the
Council reiterated its deep concern about the threats
posed by piracy in the Gulf of Guinea by adopting
resolution 2018 (2011).

Since then, unfortunately, the fragile security
situation in the ECOWAS space has taken a turn for the
worse due to two main developments. The first is the
resurgence of rebellion and banditry, as well as
worsening food insecurity, in the Sahel; and the second
is growing piracy and associated illicit activities in the
Gulf of Guinea. Both these developments seriously
undermine the gains made in the past decade to
stabilize the region and to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015.

Some observers might be tempted to think that
the problem of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has
peaked, wrongly judging by the fact that Benin, the
most affected State in the ECOWAS space, recorded
only 21 piracy incidents in 2011, compared to 45 cases
in 2010. However, the rapid spread of the phenomenon
to other States of the subregion gives reason for
concern. For instance, a total of 18 attacks occurred in
Nigeria, Ghana, Guinea and Cote d'Ivoire last year
alone, while this year one has already occurred off the
coast of Ghana.

Furthermore, piracy is increasingly dovetailing
into other forms of transnational organized crime,
including oil-bunkering, robbery at sea, hostage-taking,
human and drug trafficking, and terrorism. In a region
extremely vulnerable to climate change, these
associated illegal activities are exacerbating
environmental degradation and injecting an incendiary
element into food insecurity and intercommunal
violence. Piracy is thus also encouraging corruption,
the radicalization of young people and political
instability, as well as maritime border disputes. The
Council cannot also ignore the increasing dependence
of the world economy on Gulf of Guinea oil and the
danger piracy poses to that vital sea lane of commerce.

The Gulf of Guinea, as we know, is a reservoir of
precious hydrocarbons and rich fauna and flora. It is
projected that the region will double the production of
its estimated l4-billion barrel oil reserves from 4 million
barrels per day to 8 million in the next decade. Against
the backdrop of the increasing dependency of littoral
and landlocked States of the region on oil exports, the
consequences of unchecked piracy on both their
economies and on the world economy as a whole cannot
be underestimated.

To counter the dangers posed by piracy and
associated crimes to maritime security, States and
organizations in the catchment area have, over the past
few years, embarked on national, regional and
international initiatives aimed at preventing and
controlling the illicit activities, while building their
capabilities to strengthen maritime security.

At the national level, the littoral ECOWAS
States- particularly Nigeria, Ghana, Benin and
Senegal - are taking practical steps to police their
waters, including the enhancement of maritime
awareness capabilities, strengthening coastal fleets and
boosting surveillance. In fact, approximately two
weeks ago, Ghana took delivery of four high-speed
boats. The reality, however, is that those efforts remain
but feeble responses to the threat, as hardly any of the
States concerned can boast enough maritime
surveillance and force projection capability beyond
100 nautical miles off the coast.

Consequently, bilateral and multilateral maritime
security cooperation has been sought to complement
national efforts. As the Council is aware, Nigeria and
Benin have been conducting joint patrols in their
common waters under Operation Prosperity, which is
ongoing. Similar operations exist between other States
and international partners, such as France's roaming
vessel operation off the coast of Benin and the Ghana-
United Kingdom initiative on the national maritime
threat information sharing centre.

At the multilateral level, the United States in
particular - as well as France, the United Kingdom,
Spain and Germany - have been helping to enhance
regional maritime security in the ECOWAS and the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) regions under such initiatives as the United
States Africa Partnership Station, Spain's operation
under the European Agency for the Management of
Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the
Member States of the European Union, and the priority
solidarity fund of France, Benin, Togo and Ghana.

As a consequence of those disparate initiatives,
the incidence of piracy has diminished somewhat in the
waters of the Gulf of Guinea. But it has by no means
been rooted out. The matter is therefore being given
due attention at the political and strategic levels within
ECOWAS. Recent meetings of ECOWAS heads of

State and of Committee of Chiefs of Defence Staff
have devoted much time and effort to piracy and
maritime security.

The extent of concern of ECOWAS heads of State
and Government about maritime security and their
determination to seek a regional solution to it were
reflected in the full consideration they gave to the
matter at their 40th Summit, held in Abuja from 16 to
17 February. In the final communique, the Summit
acknowledged the increasing threat posed by piracy
and other forms of organized maritime crime in the
Gulf of Guinea and stressed the importance of the
political leadership and coordinating role of ECOWAS
in combating that scourge. To that end, it tasked the
ECOWAS Commission to urgently develop a holistic,
strategic maritime policy framework to guide future
actions and cooperation, as well as to strengthen
collaboration with ECCAS, the Gulf of Guinea Council
and all other relevant stakeholders, with a View to
confronting the challenges.

Furthermore, the summit instructed the
Commission to convene an urgent meeting of the
Committee of Chiefs of Defence Staff to review all
emerging security threats in the Sahel region and in the
Gulf of Guinea and propose concrete recommendations
to address them.

That level of concern at the highest level has
been matched by the ECOWAS Commission, which
quickly convened a sectional meeting of the Committee
of Chiefs of Defence Staff, held in Abuja on
24 February, to review the region's evolving strategy
on maritime security. The Committee also decided to
dispatch a mission to the conflict areas in the Sahel and
to the littoral States to gather further inputs to enrich
the regional strategy. A full meeting of the Committee
is scheduled to be convened in cote d'Ivoire in
mid-March to update the strategy and to make
recommendations on the anticipated broader meeting
with organizations outside the ECOWAS space.

As the Council is aware, for several months now,
ECOWAS, ECCAS and the Gulf of Guinea Council
have been exploring modalities for joint action to
combat piracy and shore up the security of
international trade routes in the Gulf of Guinea. To that
end, plans are afoot to convene, as soon as possible, a
wider meeting of regional bodies to harmonize their
various initiatives into a broader and more
comprehensive regional maritime security framework,
in cooperation with the United Nations and
international partners.

The need for such a cooperative approach to
security in the Gulf of Guinea reflects the favoured
policy and strategy of ECOWAS on the matter, namely,
that piracy is a regional challenge that requires a
regional maritime security architecture into which
national and bilateral initiatives would dovetail. It is
also dictated by the challenges confronting States and
subregional organizations. Among other things, those
include a lack of financial and technical capacity at the
national and regional levels to effectively monitor and
project force to protect their waters; a paucity of
binding legal frameworks to enforce compliance with
the law of the sea and to prosecute offenders; and the
multiplicity and duplication of efforts due to the
absence of a coordination mechanism.

Going forward, therefore, while encouraging the
continuation of the ongoing limited initiatives,
ECOWAS urges all parties concerned to scale up
efforts, beginning with the proposed multilateral
forum, to develop a more comprehensive framework
that involves all parties so as to ensure a holistic
approach to maritime security, in close cooperation
with the United Nations. To that end, the Commission
exhorts international partners to buy into the long-term
perspective and to scale up their financial, logistical
and technical assistance to the initiative, which aims to
build and strengthen indigenous maritime security
capabilities. The Commission also urges the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the United Nations
Office in Central Africa to facilitate and support the
realization of the broader regional initiative. In such a
cooperative compact lies the sustainability of our
efforts; in it lies the guarantee of security in the Gulf of
Guinea.

