Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I will deliver a
shortened statement, the full version of which is being
circulated and is available on the Croatian Mission's
web site. Let me begin by joining others in thanking
Lord Ashdown for his comprehensive, substantive and
encouraging briefing.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has been on the Security
Council's agenda for years now, and I would be remiss
not to recognize the significant successes achieved
under the aegis of the United Nations, ranging from the
military stabilization by the Implementation Force and
the Stabilization Force to police reform through the
International Police Task Force and refugee return.
This exemplary record of the international
community's achievements in stability, confidence-
building and post-conflict reconciliation has to be
followed by a similar effort in the field of economic
opportunities.
As a country irreversibly committed to the
European integration process, Croatia understands that
a clear and unambiguous prospect of European Union
membership for all the countries of South-East Europe
is the best incentive for the reform processes in each of
those countries and in the region in general. The direct
result of this is the extension of democratic stability
and the expansion of the European zone of peace,
cooperation and development to Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to the rest of Croatia's broader
neighbourhood. We are aware of the opportunity
unfolding before us and of the responsibility that
comes with it, and we stand ready to act on both.

Croatia wishes to have an integral and unified
Bosnia and Herzegovina for its neighbour and partner:
a stable and prosperous State, with strong institutions
and uniform economic mechanisms, that successfully
cooperates with all other States in the region. Mutual
political relations between our two countries open
promising prospects for the advancement of economic
cooperation. The bilateral free trade agreement
between Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
applied since 2001. Since then, trade exchange has
grown by 30 per cent annually; it totalled $1billion last
year. Croatia is among the largest investors in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and Bosnia and Herzegovina is one
of Croatia's most important markets. Croatia and its
institutions, notably the Croatian Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, will continue to
encourage private-sector investments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to strengthen development and to
increase mutual exchange.

Investments in Bosnia and Herzegovina are much
more than a mere financial operation or the targeted
implementation of a profitable economic strategy. They
are also high-return investments in the stability,
cooperation, development and democracy of South-
East Europe.

Croatia strongly supports the reforms that have
been initiated, particularly in the strengthening of the
judiciary system, reform of the military sector and
creation of a single market.

A new dynamic seems to be emerging within
Bosnia and Herzegovina's political body, one that is
ready to embrace ownership of the reform process.
That is a positive development, which Croatia fully
supports. The process of assuming ownership of one's
own future is a daunting task, but it is the only way to
move forward and create a viable State ready to
perform successfully in the European and global
arenas .

The political commitment of the leaders of all
three constituent nations of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
the implementation of the Dayton Agreement and to
institution-building remains essential. In that respect,
Croatia believes that the issue of constitutional change
through the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina is a
legitimate interest and the genuine right of key political
actors.

Croatia's assistance to the Croatian people in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is transparent and is primarily
oriented towards economic, cultural and social
programmes. The well-being of Croats in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the full protection of all of their rights
remain a strategic interest for the Republic of Croatia.
When it comes to the current position of Croats within
Bosnia in Herzegovina, one must say that there is
considerable room for improvement. In that context,
we hope that the international community will act even
more effectively to ensure the equality of all
constituent peoples. While lending its strong support to
the Croatian people in this neighbouring State, Croatia
will simultaneously continue to support the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the efforts to
pursue all required economic, legal and political
reforms.

Furthermore, Croatia is ready to assist Bosnia and
Herzegovina to succeed in seizing the historic
opportunity of membership in the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) Partnership for Peace in the near
future. Croatia is equally prepared to help Bosnia and
Herzegovina fulfil its ambitions regarding membership
of the European Union. We are confident that Croatia's
own advancement towards the European Union, about
which we feel optimistic, will benefit the well-being of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as well.

In conclusion, let me reaffirm that Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as a neighbouring and partner State,
remains high on Croatia's list of priorities. The
strengthening of the conditions for further economic
development, full respect for the rule of law, attracting
foreign investment and the build-up of civil services
and State institutions are the clear path that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has to follow. Croatia is ready to extend
all available help to make that difficult road as short as
possible for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

