Mr. Blair (United Kingdom): First of all, on
behalf of the United Kingdom, let me thank everyone
for supporting today's resolution.

We should not underestimate what we face. The
terrorism that today again has claimed the lives of
innocent people - this time, queuing for jobs in
Iraq - and has now disfigured countries in every
continent, at every stage of development, with every
conceivable mix of races and religions, is a movement.
It has an ideology and it has a strategy, and the strategy
is not just to kill. It is, by terror, to cause chaos and
instability and to divide and confuse us, its enemy.

It will not be defeated until our determination is
as complete as theirs, our defence of freedom as
absolute as their fanaticism, our passion for the
democratic way as great as their passion for tyranny. It
will not be defeated until we unite not just in
condemning the acts of terrorism, which we all do, but
in fighting the poisonous propaganda that the root
cause of this terrorism somehow lies with us around
this table and not with them. They want us to believe
that, somehow, it is our fault and that their extremism
is somehow our responsibility. They play on our
divisions; they exploit our hesitations. This is our
weakness, and they know it.

We must unite against this ghastly game with our
conscience. There are real injustices in our world:
poverty, which it is our duty to eradicate; conflicts, not
least that between Israel and Palestine, which it is our
duty to help resolve; and nation-building, as in Iraq and
Afghanistan, which it is our responsibility to help
deliver.

But none of this has caused this terrorism.
Around this table two years ago, we were divided over
Iraq, but by June 2003 there was in place a new United
Nations resolution and a new United Nations-backed
political process to give democracy to Iraqis - which
they want, as 8.5 million of them showed by voting for
it. The obstacle is terrorism. The victims are largely
Muslim. How obscene it is, therefore, for these
terrorists to claim that their terror is in response to our
aggression against Muslims in Iraq. They use Iraq to
divide us, just as they use Afghanistan, where, again,
their terror is the obstacle to Afghan democracy; and
just as they use Palestine, where terrorism does not
create progress, but destroys it.

If not those issues, we must never forget that the
events of 11 September 2001, which happened just a
short distance from here, were before Iraq or
Afghanistan and when there was an active attempt to
bring peace to the Middle East. If not those, they will
use Chechnya, they will use Kashmir or Bosnia; and if
none of those, it will be the Western presence in Arab
States. And when all of that fails, those States
themselves will be blamed, or any State that is not
Talibanized.

The root cause, therefore, is not a decision on
foreign policy, however contentious. It is a doctrine of
fanaticism, and we must unite to uproot it by
cooperating on security, as people have said; by taking
action against those who incite, preach or teach this
extremism, wherever they are in whichever country;
and also by eliminating our own ambivalence by
fighting not just the methods of this terrorism, but also
the terrorists' motivation, twisted reasoning and
wretched excuses for terror.

At the same time, of course, by contrast, we
should fulfil our duty to act against injustice. All of us
strongly support the resolution on conflict prevention
in Africa. We should show our own strength and belief
in the values of democracy and tolerance, and, above
all, we should demonstrate that the future, however
hard the path to it is, does not and never will belong to
fanatics, but will be with those who believe that we
should live in peace with each other, whatever our
race, nation, colour or religion.

They do, indeed, have their strategy, but we have
ours, and we should use it to defeat them.

