Mr. Sach: Mr. President, as the Secretary-
General's designated representative on the
International Advisory and Monitoring Board (IAMB),
I should like to thank you for the opportunity to brief
the Council on the work of the Board.
The IAMB, as the audit oversight body for the
Development Fund for Iraq (DFI), was established to
fulfil the mandate set forth in Security Council
resolution 1483 (2003). That mandate has subsequently
been extended under resolutions 1546 (2004), 1637
(2005) and 1723 (2006).

The Development Fund for Iraq was also
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1483 (2003) and holds the proceeds of petroleum
export sales from Iraq, as well as the transferred
balances from the United Nations oil-for-food
programme and other frozen Iraqi assets. From
inception to 31 December 2006, the Board has been
informed that about $70.4 billion has been deposited
from the sale of oil and oil products. Another $10.2
billion has been deposited with DFI from the balance
of the oil-for-food funds held under escrow by the
United Nations, and a further $1.5 billion has been
deposited as proceeds from frozen assets.

The Board helps to ensure that, first, the DFI is
used in a transparent manner for the benefit of the
people of Iraq and that, secondly, export sales of
petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas from
Iraq are made consistent with prevailing international
market best practices.

The Board provides independent and
international oversight of the operations of Iraqi oil
export revenues and of the use of DFI resources. Thus,
the Board functions as the audit oversight board for the
DFI and has as its members representatives from the
Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development, the
International Monetary Fund, the Government of Iraq,
the United Nations and the World Bank. The Board
also involved the Iraqi Board of Supreme Audit in its
work at an early stage to ensure continuity.

I now turn to the work of the Board. The Board
has met 21 times since December 2003 and has
approved the appointment by the Government of Iraq
of independent public accountants as the external
auditors. It has reviewed the periodic audit results and
requested and approved special audits. The results of
the Board's work are available on its website,
www.iamb.info.

In terms of findings, the Board early on identified
major issues in contracting practices and pointed
towards the lack of oil metering as a key element with
respect to the establishment of controls over oil
revenues. The Board promoted the strengthening of
07-65065
controls in Iraq over oil export revenues and their use
and complemented the work of others, including the
Board of Supreme Audit and the United States Special
Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction.

The IAMB has identified significant control
weaknesses related to oil revenues. These have already
been reported in previous reports and briefings, and
they included weak controls in place over Iraq's oil
export revenues and the spending ministries. The major
issues reported include, first, the absence of oil
metering. The Board recommended that a
comprehensive oil metering system be installed to
achieve financial transparency and accountability. The
Government of Iraq has since installed some meters at
some oil terminals, including the Basra oil export
terminal, as part of the project to establish a
countrywide metering system for the flow of oil, gas
and fuel products. Overall progress has been slow, and
there is still no comprehensive metering at oil fields,
storage facilities or refineries.

The second major issue is the use of barter
transactions. Barter transactions of oil for electricity
with a neighbouring country were recorded by the State
Oil Marketing Organization (SOMO) but were not
accounted for in the DFI as required by Security
Council resolution 1483 (2003). While some reduction
in bartering occurred in 2004 following the allocation
of Iraqi budget funds to import light petroleum
products, SOMO continues to undertake barter
transactions.

Thirdly, there are inadequate controls over
expenditures. The external audit reports received by
the IAMB were critical of the financial and accounting
controls put in place by the spending ministries, as well
as the United States agencies using DFI funds. While
the Board welcomed steps already taken by the
Government of Iraq, it remains concerned about
significant unresolved control deficiencies.

Fourthly, some of Iraq's oil resources were not
accounted for in the DFI and were smuggled. Without a
comprehensive oil metering system, it is difficult to
control smuggling. The Board has welcomed a number
of controls that have been put in place and has called
for the Government of Iraq to enhance these measures
to curtail smuggling.

Fifthly, the Board objected to certain contractual
practices using DFI funds. A series of special audits,
commissioned at the request of the Board, revealed a
07-65065
number of exceptions from normal procurement
procedures.

Sixthly, subsequently, other audit reports,
including those produced by the Board of Supreme
Audit, the United States Government Accountability
Office and the United States Special Inspector General
for Iraq Reconstruction, also pointed to similar
weaknesses and confirmed the concerns expressed by
the Board.

I now turn to the Committee of Financial Experts.
The Iraqi Council of Ministers has established a
Committee of Financial Experts to prepare for the time
when the Board's functions will need to be undertaken
solely by the Government of Iraq, upon the dissolution
of the IAMB. The Committee has participated in the
IAMB's activities and has worked alongside the Board
to oversee the 2007 interim audit. The Committee has
also participated in the two most recent meetings of the
Board, held in June and November 2007.

With regard to the ongoing audits, the External
Auditor is acting under the terms of reference agreed at
the June 2007 meeting. Accordingly, it is anticipated
that the Board will receive the results of the 2007 audit
during the first half of 2008 and, at that time, will
review the reports accordingly.

That completes my briefing. I will be happy to
respond to any questions that members of the Council
may have.

