Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): It is an honour and
a pleasure to congratulate you, Mr. President, as your
presidency of the Council is drawing to a close, and to
express my delegation's esteem and appreciation for the
leadership, expertise and efficiency with which you have
conducted the work of the Security Council this month.
My delegation would also like to take this opportunity
to once again thank you and the other members of the
Council for your availability and the unfailing interest
you have always shown in my country's situation.

My delegation takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/655) on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) submitted for the Council's
consideration and thanks Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
introducing it. While we appreciate the value of the
report's content, I would like to take this opportunity
to focus on three points that my delegation considers
particularly important to clarify for the Security
Council. I will therefore discuss the political, security
and humanitarian situations in turn.

As highlighted in paragraph 2 of the Secretary-
General's report, the political situation in my country
continues to be dominated by preparations for the
elections, which are due to take place on 23 December.
In this respect, it should be stressed that the process
is coming along well. After the closing of the audit of
the voter register, the Independent National Electoral
Commission proceeded to clean it up by eliminating
duplicate registrations, reducing the number ofvoters on
the rolls to 40 million. It then made the electoral calendar
public before launching an awareness and education
campaign on technical and operational issues, with the
aim of building trust, removing doubts and maintaining
contact with the various stakeholders in the process for
credible, transparent and inclusive elections.

One of the issues in this campaign has revolved
around the machines that will be used to print the
ballot papers. It is important to point out here that the
machines will not be voting for the voters but will
simply print the ballots that the voters will put into
the ballot boxes themselves. The political parties and
groupings from both the opposition and the majority,
as well as civil society, have all participated in this
campaign. In the same context, Parliament has enacted
various complementary legal provisions associated
with the process, including one on the distribution of
seats. For its part, the International Organization of la
Francophonie audited the electoral register and made
recommendations for its improvement and reliability.
The process is now at the candidacy-filing stage.
Candidacy filings for the provincial elections were
submitted between 24 June and 8 July. So far, the
Electoral Commission has received 19,437 applications.
For the parliamentary and presidential elections,
candidacy filings started yesterday, Wednesday,
25 July, and will continue until 8 August.

While under our Constitution it is the job of the
Independent National Electoral Commission to organize
the electoral process, the success of this undertaking
also depends on the proper handling of disputes by the
courts and tribunals. In order to ensure that the courts are
as well prepared as possible to handle the task properly,
the Superior Council of Magistrates and the Electoral
Commission organized, with the financial support of
the Government, the United Nations Development
Programme/Projet d'appai an cycle electoral an Congo
and the American Bar Association, a capacity-building
workshop for training magistrates on the management
of electoral litigation. The workshop brought together
a significant sample of judges from courts across
the country.

It has always been my Government's desire to
hold good elections in a peaceful atmosphere. That
presupposes the commitment of all political actors
from both the majority and the opposition, who must
refrain from comments and attitudes likely to create
a climate of tension and provoke disorder. Now that
the electoral process is sufficiently advanced and is
in the final stretch, my Government expects all the
country's political actors, from every political wing, to
demonstrate the best possible attitude of constructive
support to the process through positive action. We
also expect the same from our international partners,
who are often conspicuous for their interference from
all sides.

In this regard, my Government appreciates the
support and assistance of such regional partners
as the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), whose Electoral Council has just made a
working visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This visit, a prelude to the SADC Heads of State and
Government meeting to be held in August, enabled the
Electoral Commission and SADC's Electoral Council
to acknowledge the progress made in the electoral
process and discuss the implementation ofthe logistical
prerequisites for the success of the elections, regarding
which we informed the SADC delegation about our
acquisition and deployment of various materials from
China, South Korea and South Africa.

With regard to de-escalating the political situation,
we do not think that it would be useful to repeat
explanations that the Council has already heard many
times. What is important to note, in our humble opinion,
is that the Government has already taken a series of
steps to meet the requirements set out in the political
agreement of 31 December 2016 regarding the release
of so-called political prisoners. Those who were in this
category have in fact been released. The only situation
that is still pending and under the courts' jurisdiction
is that concerning the so-called emblematic cases. As
we have already pointed out in several statements to
the Council, it should be pointed out that the persons
concerned in these cases have all been charged with
offences under ordinary law. The Council will agree
that we cannot ask the public authorities, who are
supposed to promote the rule of law and the equality
of citizens before the law, to interfere in such situations
without violating the Constitution by creating a two-
tier justice system in the country.

Finally, I cannot close this chapter without pointing
out, with regard to the financing ofthe electoral process,
that for the Government of my country, as everywhere
else in the world, elections are a matter of national
sovereignty. As a result, they can be financed only by the
Government, which is why my country has decided to
finance them on its own. As the Electoral Commission
informed the SADC Electoral Council, those of our
partners who would like to help can do so by providing
logistical assistance to the Commission in the form of
aircraft, rolling stock and operational facilities.

With regard to the security situation, the report
under consideration brings up the situation in the
eastern part of the country and, more specifically, in
North and South Kivu, with the ongoing presence of the
Allied Democratic Forces and the Forces democratiques
de liberation du Rwanda, as well as other emerging
armed groups. My Government is concerned about
the situation and has not stood idly by. We remain
committed to ending the insecurity in that part of the
country. My Government's engagement has restored
calm in Tanganyika province, where there were clashes
between Bantus and Pygmies, and Ituri province, where
the violence that had forced people to flee to Uganda
have been defused. However, the Forces armees de
la Republique de'mocratique du Congo (FARDC) are
continuing their operations to eliminate the negative
forces that are still active in North and South Kivu.

As we have always underscored in our various
statements to the Council, combating foreign and
national armed groups in that part of our country
demands the joint efforts of my Government and the
United Nations if we are to eliminate them completely.
In that regard, the Council has always stressed the
importance of cooperation between MONUSCO and the
FARDC. In the same vein, at the MONUSCO mandate
renewal in March (see S/PV.8216), my Government
requested that the Intervention Brigade become
operational. We regret to say that in the four months
since then, the situation has not improved. Besides that,
we all know that the armed groups' get their income,
arms and ammunition primarily through the illicit
exploitation and plundering of natural resources, and we
also all know that those natural resources pass through
neighbouring countries or multinational corporations
based in those countries and elsewhere. Apart from the
measures taken by my Government, it is important that
the Council take appropriate steps not only to deter the
beneficiaries of this illicit trade but also to help break
up and eliminate the armed groups.

With regard to the issue of sexual violence,
without going into it to deeply, I would like to note
that my Government will continue its efforts to combat
that scourge.

Given the sporadic pockets of violence throughout
the country and the consequences of the displacement
of the population, along with the armed conflicts
in neighbouring countries that have brought a
flood of refugees into our country, it is perfectly
understandable that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is experiencing a difficult humanitarian
situation. However, it is not as acute as some have
been led to believe. During its session on 30 March,
the Government registered 231,346 internally displaced
persons in 79 sites spread throughout our country. In
order to address the situation, we have established
a national humanitarian solidarity fund and set up a
humanitarian response programme for rehabilitation
and development. It goes without saying that any
support that international partners would like to give us
to assist people in need is welcome. Also in connection
with the humanitarian situation, we should point out
that our country had to once again deal with an Ebola
epidemic, which has just ended. My Government was
grateful for the assistance provided by the World
Health Organization and non-governmental medical
organizations in responding to the epidemic.

I should not conclude without once again thanking
the Council on behalf ofthe people and the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for its tireless
efforts to restore peace in my country. I would like
to reassure the Council of my country's commitment
to holding elections in accordance with the electoral
calendar. Since the elections cannot be changed, my
Government calls on all stakeholders, in good faith, to
denounce any act, regardless of whether it is perpetrated
by Congolese or foreigners, that could derail the
process, and on those who are still doubters to have a
positive and constructive attitude to the process. The
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
often deliberately exaggerated by the media. It is up
to the Security Council to support us in following
through with the process, which is the only way we can
achieve the peace and stability that are the purpose of
consolidating democracy in my country.

