Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me, at the
outset, thank Judge Meron and Judge Joensen for their
briefings and assessments of the work of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. We also appreciate the briefings given by the
Prosecutors of the two Tribunals. I also want to reiterate
our appreciation for the work done by Ambassador
Rosenthal.

We welcome the progress made by the two
Tribunals in expediting their work. We are reassured
by the assessment of Judge Meron and Judge Joensen
that the preparations for the commencement and the
functioning of the Residual Mechanism are on track.
We have noted that the Arusha branch of the Residual
Mechanism commenced its work on 1 July, and hope
that the Hague branch of the Residual Mechanism will
begin its work on 1 July 2013, as scheduled.

We appreciate the fact that Judge Meron has
undertaken a variety of reforms to improve the
functioning of various sections of the Tribunal. As a
result, all trials will be completed by 2013, except a few
which came before it later.

We are happy to note that the ICTR has completed
work at the trial level with respect to 92 out of the
93 accused persons, and that the one remaining trial
judgement will be delivered before the end of 2012.
While appellate proceedings have been concluded
in respect to 44 persons, the remaining appeals are
projected to be completed by the end of 2014.

We also commend the efforts ofthe two Prosecutors
to undertake outreach initiatives, including training
aimed at strengthening the capacity of national systems
to handle referred cases effectively.

We have listened carefully to the concerns raised by
the Presidents of the two Tribunals in relation to their
ability to keep pace with their work while adhering
to expected timelines. The Judges have pointed out
that trials and appeals continue to be affected by
staffing shortages and the loss of highly efficient
staff members. We share the concerns expressed by
the Judges, especially on the need to retain adequate
and experienced staff. Careful consideration should be
given to the suggestions made by the Judges on how to
address those challenges. Any functional, operational
or institutional issue in the implementation of the
completion strategy or the Residual Mechanism should
be addressed by the Council in consultation with the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.

The Judges have also raised the issue concerning
the relocation of acquitted persons and those who have
already served their sentences. Some ofthem have been
living in safe homes in Arusha for a long time. This
is an important humanitarian issue and needs to be
resolved soon.

We welcome the cooperation extended by all States
concerned with the Tribunals, which is vital to ensuring
the completion of the mandates of the Tribunals, as well
as to the successful implementation of the completion
strategy and the Residual Mechanism. We hope that
the remaining three fugitives indicted by the ICTR
will be located soon and surrendered to the Residual
Mechanism to stand trial.

The two Tribunals should continue to implement
their mandate strictly and in accordance with the
principles of justice, impartiality and fairness. There
should be no political consideration in their work.

In conclusion, while we believe that the support
of the Security Council to the two Tribunals is crucial
at this critical stage, we urge both Tribunals to take
all necessary measures to keep the trial and appeal
schedules on track. In that connection, we support
the extension of the tenures of some of the judges, as
requested by the Presidents of the two Tribunals. This
will pave the way for the completion of trials and appeals
of the remaining accused and a smooth transition to an
efficient Residual Mechanism.

