Mr. Li Junhua (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank Mr. Ian Martin,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste, for his briefing on the most recent developments
in Timor-Leste. We also express our appreciation for
the statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Timor-Leste on behalf of the country's Minister for
Foreign Affairs. In addition, the Chinese delegation
would like to thank the representatives of Australia,
Malaysia, New Zealand and Portugal for their briefings
on the activities of the military and police forces of
their respective countries. At a time of turbulence in
Timor-Leste, those four countries, at the request of the
Government of Timor-Leste, sent in military and police
forces whose swift deployment has played an important
role in helping to restore stability and order on the
ground. We express our appreciation to them for their
efforts. I also take this opportunity to pay tribute to all
the staff of the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
for their continuous work in difficult circumstances.

For more than six years, Timor-Leste has been a
success story and a source of pride among United
Nations operations. However, the continuous turmoil of
the past six weeks has been a source of concern for the
international community. People are asking: has the
United Nations success story in Timor-Leste gone with
the wind? Will the international community's
investment in Timor-Leste go down the drain?

I recall that a representative of the Chinese
delegation, speaking here in this Chamber (see S/PV.5132, p. 21), compared Timor-Leste, the
youngest, least developed country in Asia, to a toddler:
although it has taken its encouraging first step, it may
still fall. Unfortunately, Timor-Leste took a fall with
the recurrence of instability. What we should do, rather
than lament and sigh, is to help Timor-Leste stand up

S/l'V.5457

 

again as soon as possible, heal its wounds and return to
the path of steady and healthy development.

To that end, China wishes to make the following
observations.

First, all political forces in Timor-Leste should
base themselves on the overall interests of national
stability and security, set aside previous differences
and disputes, seek common understanding and
reconciliation, resolve their problems within the
constitutional and democratic framework and renew
the people's hope and confidence in the future of their
country.

Secondly, the international community should
continue to provide Timor-Leste with multifaceted
assistance at this very difficult time in order to help the
Government and the people restore normality at an
early date. At the same time, it is essential to be fully
aware of the sensitivity and fragility of the situation in
the country, to act strictly within the limits of propriety,
to maintain a fine balance and to avoid becoming
involved in Timor-Leste's internal problems and ethnic
disputes or, worse still, imposing one's own views and
demands.

Thirdly, the United Nations should carefully
study the causes of the resurgence of conflict in Timor-
Leste, undertake targeted measures to resolve the
problems thus revealed and make appropriate plans and
preparations for the United Nations presence in Timor-
Leste, taking fully into account the views of the
Government of Timor-Leste. We look forward to the
observations and recommendations of the Secretary-
General in that regard.
Finally, because the situation in Timor-Leste is
not yet fully stable, and so that the Secretariat has
sufficient time to carefully plan and prepare for the
next step, China agrees to another technical rollover of
the mandate of UNOTIL.

There is an old Chinese saying to the effect that a
misfortune may be a blessing in disguise. While Timor-
Leste has suffered a temporary setback, we believe
that, if its Government, its people, the international
community and the United Nations all learn lessons
from that setback, seriously and objectively study and
address the root causes of the problem and become
wiser as a result, then Timor-Leste will not have taken
this fall in vain, the enormous investment made by the
international community will not be lost and the United
Nations will surely write a new chapter in the success
story of Timor-Leste.

