Mr. Von der Schulenburg: Thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to introduce the
seventh report of the Secretary-General on Sierra
Leone (S/2011/554) since the establishment of an
integrated United Nations peacebuilding mission in
2008.

As the country celebrated the fiftieth anniversary
of its independence last April, Sierra Leone continued
its progress towards developing into a stable, peaceful
2

and economically more viable democracy. I feel that
this is the occasion, especially here in the Security
Council, to commend the people of Sierra Leone for
what has been achieved during the past nine years in
consolidating peace and building a stable, democratic
society. These are achievements made not only by two
peacetime democratically elected presidents and
successive democratically elected Governments, but
also by political party leaders, independent
commissioners, local district officials, civil society,
traditional and religious leaders, professionals,
journalists and artists, tradesmen, doctors and nurses,
teachers and police officers - in short, by many
ordinary Sierra Leonean men and women.

However, the recent clashes and skirmishes that
occurred not only between followers of the two main
political parties but also among followers of different
groups within the same political party remind us that
there is still considerable potential for conflict and
Violence. Particularly serious was the attack that took
place three days ago on the presidential candidate of
the main opposition and the subsequent rampage that
left him with head injuries and also left one person
dead, scores injured and a number of properties
belonging to followers of the governing party
devastated.

It is not yet clear who was responsible for the
attack, and we must not jump to quick conclusions; the
President has acted immediately by setting up a public
investigation, and the police has stepped up security
for the opposition leader. However, this brings into the
open the fact that there remains a persistent social
undercurrent that can turn into violence if provoked,
despite all the progress that has been made.

I therefore call on all Sierra Leonean politicians
not to forget what they have achieved, to continue
building on those achievements and to act responsibly.
Elections are still one and a half years away, and this
must not start to embitter the social and political
climate in Sierra Leone.

I believe that the recent incidents do not reflect
the real nature of ordinary, peace-loving Sierra
Leoneans. In fact, the recently held national delegates'
conference of the Sierra Leone People's Party (SLPP),
the country's main political opposition, is probably a
good example of political maturity and showed how
the Government, the governing party and the main
11-49208
opposition party can work together in settling
controversial issues and in making democracy work.

At the conference, the SLPP elected a new party
chairman and its party executive. But, more
importantly, the SLPP also elected its presidential
candidate, Mr. Julius Maada Bio, who had once been a
senior member and later Head of State of a former
military Government, the National Provisional
Revolutionary Council. Mr. Maada Bio will now be the
main contestant to face President Ernest Bai Koroma
for the presidency in the 2012 elections.

The SLPP conference was remarkable for the fact
that it was conducted in such a peaceful and
democratic atmosphere. Although the conference took
place in Freetown, a stronghold of the governing party,
the All Peoples Congress (APC), there were no
provocations or incidents whatsoever. Quite to the
contrary, the APC leadership had called on its
followers in Freetown not to wear the party colours and
to stay away from the location of the conference. As a
precaution, the APC party headquarters, which is
located just across the SLPP conference hall, was also
closed. Police protection for the conference was
professional. In fact, prior to the conference, the
President had met with the then interim leader of the
SLPP - the opposition party - to ensure personally
that the Conference would take place without any
violence or outside interference.

The media coverage of the SLPP conference was
generally lauded as having been fair, balanced and
informative. This was a major test for the Sierra Leone
Broadcasting Corporation, which was newly created
following the agreed closing of all political party and
government controlled radio stations after the 2009
political disturbances.

The SLPP conference was a further positive
example of intra-party democracy. Prior to the
conference, the SLPP had faced a major legal challenge
in the Supreme Court from one of its followers. After
initial hesitations, the party chose to solve this
challenge within the law and its own party constitution
by holding new elections for its party delegates.

At the conference, a total of 19 aspirants had tried
to obtain the SLPP's endorsement as its presidential
candidate for the 2012 elections. In the run-up to the
party conference, this had caused considerable
intra-party controversies that at times spilled over into
violent clashes between the supporters of leading
11-49208
aspirants. However, at the conference all these
differences were managed and respective aspirants
made sure that their supporters did not disrupt the
democratic intra-party election process. In the end, all
aspirants considered the intra-party elections to be free,
fair and acceptable.

However, the re-election of the party Chairman
and the election of the presidential candidate of the
SLPP have raised concerns, as both elected party
leaders played prominent roles in previous military
regimes. I trust that both recognize the need to dispel
such concerns. I therefore welcome Mr. Maada Bio's
recent public statement expressing his regrets and
issuing an apology for the wrongs that were committed
during the rule of a military Government in which he
held high office.

We all must not forget that military coups and the
horrors of the civil war are part of a very recent history
in Sierra Leone. It is therefore inevitable, and even
necessary and welcome, that some of those who have
been involved in previously undemocratic
Governments are now taking part in today's democratic
political life. Against this background, it is important
that all political leaders with links to past regimes,
irrespective of their present political party affiliations,
make it clear that the right lessons have been learned
from the country's violent past. In this context, I
applaud the clear and unambivalent words spoken by
President Koroma in his fiftieth anniversary speech
that Sierra Leone has learned a bitter lesson and will
not repeat past mistakes. I feel that these words could
guide the political discourse in the country.

The 2012 elections must not become hostage to
the past. Instead, we all have the responsibility to give
Sierra Leoneans in 2012 the possibility of looking
forward, of deciding on the future direction of their
country, and of selecting their future leaders
accordingly. All political parties, and above all the two
main political parties that have helped shape
post-conflict Sierra Leone and that were instrumental
in building today's democratic society, must share a
common interest in protecting these national
achievements in 2012 and beyond.

I also hope that, in the same spirit, the
outstanding issues for the 2012 elections can be solved
among political parties. These include reaching
agreements on the legal framework for the next
elections, on a new code of conduct that will govern
3
election campaigning, and on building trust in existing
national electoral management bodies. I therefore look
in particular to the very able and trusted new Chairman
of the Political Parties Registration Commission to take
a lead in holding these crucial multi-party
consultations.

In his speech at the fiftieth independence
anniversary, President Koroma launched the idea of an
all-inclusive and non-partisan national conference to
discuss in a public debate the future direction of Sierra
Leone. I very much welcome such a proposal, as such a
conference would be held at a time when Sierra
Leone's post-conflict reconstruction era is coming to
an end and the country is heading towards a new era of
economic and social development. This would allow
not only experts but above all ordinary Sierra Leoneans
throughout the country to be consulted at a time of
profound economic and social changes in the country.

Such a national debate could be an opportunity
for all political parties to listen to the problems and
aspirations of ordinary Sierra Leoneans before
launching themselves into the 2012 election campaign.
It could be an exercise of consultative democracy that
could help prevent problems in the future. Careful
consultations and preparations would be needed if such
a Conference is to be all-inclusive. I believe that it is a
sign of constructive political leadership that the
presidential candidate of the opposition party has also
indicated his willingness to participate in such a
national debate.

Let me finally turn to some economic and social
issues. The Government has been successful in
expanding the national, inner-city and rural feeder road
networks, in bringing electricity to a wider range of the
population, and in reviving agricultural production. It
has pursued a policy of privatization that includes the
Freetown seaport and national communication systems,
and it is mobilizing international private investments,
especially in extractive industries and agri-businesses.
The new iron ore projects are likely to start exporting
this year, and this could lead to a significant increase in
economic growth and revenue collection, with some
projections showing a possible threefold increase in
domestic revenues by 2015. Sierra Leone's financial
fortunes could therefore change dramatically within a
relatively short time frame.

This will open up much-needed resources to
address the significant deficits in human development
and infrastructure availability. However, it also raises
challenges of the transparency and proper management
of those new resources for the benefit of all Sierra
Leoneans, while maintaining macroeconomic stability.
I welcome the generous international assistance to
Sierra Leone aimed at helping avoid the so-called
resource curse that has affected so many other
resource-rich countries.

The Achilles heel of Sierra Leone's future
development will remain persistent poverty, youth
unemployment and problems in delivering social
services. Although Sierra Leone continues to enjoy
relatively high economic growth rates, it remains one
of the poorest counties in the world. In particular,
persistently high inflation rates for basic commodities
have eroded the purchasing power of low, fixed-
income earners such as public servants, teachers, police
officers and nurses, as well as ordinary, occasional
labourers. This appears to affect more city dwellers and
many of the young people who have gone to the cities
in search for a better life. As we have seen in other
countries, such a decline in living conditions could turn
easily into social unrest, and it may therefore be time
for a more comprehensive review of the impact of all
development programmes on poverty reduction,
irrespective of who finances them.

Much has been achieved in improving social
services in recent years; the free health care
programme that the President launched last year is a
good example. Not surprisingly, however, there remain
persistent problems of delivering such services to reach
the target population. Corruption, bureaucracy, low
capacity and the lack of technical and logistical
facilities are probably at the core of such problems.
Here, there is also a need for the comprehensive
development of the safety nets in the country to protect
the poor from any global shocks. Also here, I feel that
such problems require greater Government-
development partner cooperation, with more attention
paid to making the public sector more effective and
efficient.

A thorny issue remains the high unemployment
rates among Sierra Leone's youth - a difficult
problem not only for countries across Africa, but also,
as we know, in the developed world. Notwithstanding
the creation of the National Youth Commission and the
concerted efforts of development partners, no
substantive success has been achieved in fighting
Sierra Leone's rampant youth unemployment. High
population increases and increased migration to the
cities may even have made the problem worse. In the
short term, better coordination within the Government
will be needed so that the youth are better targeted to
benefit from specific programmes. It would also
require better cooperation among the Government,
development partners and the private sector.

At the end, I would like to recognize the
enormous contribution that Ambassador McNee has
made to peacebuilding in Sierra Leone. As the Chair of
the country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission for Sierra Leone for almost three years, he
Visited the country repeatedly and reached out not only
to the Government and the political opposition, but
also to the wider Sierra Leonean society. For me
personally, he has been a great support and a reliable
partner in New York in discussing various policy issues
that helped shape the peacebuilding agenda not only
for Sierra Leone, but for the United Nations in general.
I would like to thank him profoundly, and wish him all
the best for the future.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome Ambassador Rishchynski, and I look forward
to working with him very closely also in the future -
we have had just one meeting. I think that there is
much to be done for Sierra Leone, and also for
peacebuilding, where we can work together.

I would also like to thank the Government of
Sierra Leone and the leaders - religious as well as
traditional - of the political parties, independent
commissions, local Governments, civil society,
non-governmental organizations and the media for
their continued trust in the work of the United Nations.
However, I would like especially to thank President
Koroma for his leadership, his exceptional openness
and his welcoming of the United Nations family.

Finally, I would like to thank Sierra Leone's
Foreign Minister, His Excellency Mr. Joseph B. Dauda,
for having come all the way to New York to represent
his country. He is probably one of the best witnesses
among us all of the achievements made in Sierra
Leone, as he has played a prominent role in successive
Governments. It is a pleasure working with him.

