Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): First, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open debate on working methods of the
Security Council. This is the fourth open debate on the
topic, which reflects the increased interest on the part
of the entire United Nations membership, as well as the
increased transparency of the Security Council in its
work and its intention to interact with the general
membership when addressing matters of mutual
concern and benefit.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has chaired the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions with great interest and a firm
commitment to further promoting the transparency and
efficiency of the Security Council's work. With that in
mind, we organized a workshop on working methods
for the United Nations membership, in cooperation
2
with Japan, our predecessor in chairing the Informal
Working Group. We also participated in the meeting of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
General Assembly.

The Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions has held four
meetings. Allow me to draw attention to some of the
issues discussed among the members of the Informal
Working Group in those meetings.

With regard to streamlining the summary
statement on matters of which the Council is seized,
we began looking at ways to reduce the list of those
issues under active consideration. The present
guidelines governing the maintenance of the summary
statement are contained in section IX of the note by the
President of 26 July 2010 (S/20lO/507). However, this
is an ongoing process, and further progress is needed,
bearing in mind that paragraph 53 of document
S/2010/507 provides for the Council to review the
summary statement at the beginning of each year to
determine if the Council has concluded its
consideration of any of the listed items. Therefore,
January 2012 might be an appropriate time to take up
this matter.

We also discussed the evenness of the Council's
work, which implies a more even distribution of the
adoption of resolutions pertaining to mandate cycles
and reporting.

During the meeting held on 28 April 2011 on
General Assembly revitalization, we witnessed the
interest of the United Nations Member States in
possible ways of involving them in matters of the
Security Council's working methods. We were asked
questions about their possible involvement in
rationalizing the items on the Security Council agenda,
revitalizing the working methods of the Security
Council, and the review and decision-making processes
related to items on the Security Council agenda.

Mindful of the calls of the general United Nations
membership for enhanced cooperation, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has raised the issue of further increasing
the transparency of the Council's work and has
suggested to the members of the Informal Working
Group that they consider the idea of holding regular
briefings on Security Council working methods for
non-Council Member States. We are of the View that
this exercise could be of common benefit. It could be a
valuable opportunity for the Council to periodically
11-61237
review progress in the implementation of certain
measures, take into account the views of the general
membership, and, if necessary, consider possible
adequate adjustments.

Bearing in mind the primary responsibility of the
Security Council for maintaining international peace
and security, Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that the
Security Council has achieved substantial progress in
recent years regarding the improvement and openness
of its working methods, as outlined in the presidential
note 507. We reiterate our previously stated stance that
the implementation of presidential note 507 should be
based on the need to find a proper and adequate
balance between generally accepted principles or
guidelines on efficiency, transparency and interaction,
on the one hand, and dialogue with non-members, on
the other. In this regard, we welcome the continued
engagement of the group of five small nations in
making constructive and positive contributions to the
improvement of the Council's working methods, both
formally and informally.

Having been a member of the Council for almost
two years now, we must acknowledge the importance
of informal consultations to the decision-making
process. Nevertheless, there must be more balance
between the Council's informal consultations and the
holding of public meetings. Moreover, we cannot
neglect the importance of informal interaction with the
wider membership, including informal interactive
dialogue. This year, the Council has held four informal
interactive dialogue meetings on Burundi, Darfur,
Eritrea and Libya. We are of the View that such
interaction is an added value to the Council's decision-
making process, and has the potential to generate a
sense of common ownership and strengthen the
prospects for effective implementation.

We recognize the improvement made with regard
to continued briefings and consultations by the Council
with troop- and police-contributing countries as part of
the efforts to implement peacekeeping mandates more
effectively. We deem that there is room for the Security
Council to enhance its interaction with other United
Nations bodies, especially the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council. The main
communication tool between the Council and the
general membership is the Security Council's annual
report, which we believe should comprise more
analytical and substantial features.
11-61237

When we speak about the transparency of the
work of the Security Council, we imply not only
interaction with non-Council members, but also
increased transparency concerning the broader public,
non-governmental organizations and the media. Bosnia
and Herzegovina feels that the Arria Formula meeting
is an adequate tool for engaging in a more informal
dialogue with the United Nations membership,
concerned countries, regional and subregional groups,
experts, representatives of civil society, and the media.

Today, the United Nations Member States have
another opportunity to reflect on the successful
working methods of the Council, as well as on those
practices where there is room for possible
improvement. This exchange of experiences and
perspectives can be useful in consolidating the Security
Council's best practices for the common benefit.

