Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): Allow me,
Mr. President, to express my gratitude to your country,
the United Kingdom, for having organized this briefing
on Somalia as well as for the special attention that you
have always paid to the reconstruction of that country.
I would like to pay tribute to you, Mr. Minister, and
thank you for being here among us to preside over
this discussion. Next, I would like to welcome to
the Security Council Ms. Fawzia Yusuf Haji Adam,
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Somalia. Finally, I would like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his briefing.

The current situation in Somalia is radically
different from that which prevailed just a year ago.
The transition period has come to an end. The security
situation has improved and the country has entered into
a new phase, one of transformation with new elected
authorities as well as new institutions that have been
established. Furthermore, the new federal authorities
are undertaking initiatives to implement the six pillars
defined in the Government's programme and to interact
with regional authorities to promote reconciliation and
national unity.

All of those efforts need to be consolidated
and accompanied by appropriate steps, such as the
Council's adoption in May of resolution 2104 (2013),
which established the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM). The same goes for the
appointment by the Secretary-General of Mr. Nicholas
Kay as Special Representative for Somalia and Head
of Mission of UNSOM. and the holding, on 7 May in
London, of another Conference on Somalia, upon the
initiative of the United Kingdom.
Great progress has been made in Somalia in the
political and security fields, but many significant
challenges remain. We were therefore pleased that the
London Conference provided an opportunity to take
stock of the current situation in Somalia and that the
discussions there focused mainly on the country's four
priorities, namely, political stability, security, justice
and the management of the country's public finances.
The importance of the partnership between Somalia
and the international community was once again
highlighted, and participants committed to providing
coordinated and ongoing support for the implementation
of the Federal Government's plans. Everyone must now
play their part to ensure that those plans are translated
into concrete actions on the ground. In that context,
we welcome the European Union's plan to hold a new
conference on Somalia in September in Brussel. We
hope that that conference will lead to decisions and
commitments that will support the relaunching of the
country's development.

Among the challenges the country must face, the
Federal Government will have to resolve, through a
comprehensive approach, the outstanding fundamental
issues concerning Somalia's long-term stability,
namely, political reconciliation, the development of a
federal system and the constitutional revision process,
including a referendum on the Constitution and
preparations for the 2016 elections.

Recent developments in southern Somalia,
particularly the setting up of regional administrations
in Jubaland, have solidified internal divisions and
reflect the magnitude of the challenges facing efforts for
reconciliation and the firming up of the federal system.
It is crucial not to lose sight of the fact that internal
rivalries play into the hands of Al-Shabaab, which still
controls vast rural areas. If the Federal Government
fails to exert its authority over certain regions, such as
Kismayo, it will see its influence undermined in other
parts of Somalia.

In that context, the federal authorities should
develop and promote good-neighbourly relations with
other countries in the region, as their support is vital.
We welcome the efforts that have already been made
to achieve that goal, in particular in the context of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development.

The security situation in the country remains
fragile, as outlined by the Secretary-General in his
most recent report (S/2013/326). The report also states
that targeted killings and attacks are reported on a
daily basis, while incidents involving explosive devices
increased in 2013 as compared with 2012.
We would once again highlight that Somali
forces backed by the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) have made great sacrifices to
promote peace, security and stability in the country.
However, although they have caused Al-Shabaab to
lose significant ground, that group continues to pose a
threat to peace and security in Somalia. It is therefore
important to help Somalia reform and rebuild its own
security institutions with a view to enabling them to
shoulder their responsibilities themselves in the long
term.

Once the arms embargo is partially lifted, the
Government of Somalia must come up with effective
and inclusive security arrangements for the protection
of civilians. In that regard, we support the call for
increased support to AMISOM, especially with regard
to force multipliers, in order that it may, with the
support of Somali National Security Forces, consolidate
the progress made on the ground and bring more areas
under the control of the Somali authorities.

Furthermore, efforts designed to strengthen security
are inseparable from those related to the promotion of
justice and the rule of law. It is therefore crucial that a
credible judicial system in Somalia be set up in order to
allow the State to regain the trust of the population and
bring about reconcililation in the country.

It is equally crucial that, in the fight against piracy
and armed robbery, Somalia take responsibility and
develop a comprehensive approach to security in its
maritime areas, in order to have the means, with the
support of the international community, to itself bring
to account those who commit, benefit from or are
involved in piracy.

I cannot conclude without briefly discussing the
humanitarian situation in Somalia. Due to the ongoing
conflict, the country is still in the midst of an extreme
humanitarian crisis, in which more than 1 million people
are in need of immediate humanitarian assistance. The
international community must pursue its efforts in a
coordinated manner in order to relieve the suffering of
those in need.

Finally, I would like to reiterate my country's
support for Mr. Nicholas Kay, who has just taken on his
new role in Mogadishu. We would also like to pay tribute
to Mr. Augustine Mahiga for having worked with such
determination to achieve a significant improvement in
the political, security and humanitarian situation in

Somalia.

