Ms. Mogobe (Botswana): As this is the first
time Botswana addresses the Security Council since
your assumption of the presidency for the month of
September, Mr. President, allow me to join other
delegations in congratulating you on that and to
reiterate our standing pledge to constructively engage
with the Council on the work before it. We also wish to
thank the United States delegation for organizing this
important thematic debate.

Botswana attaches great importance to the
promotion and protection of the rights of children.
We therefore take this opportunity to reaffirm our
strong commitment to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, as well as to the full implementation of
our obligations under the Convention. We take those
obligations very seriously and continue to establish
national strategies and mechanisms aimed at the
promotion and protection of the rights of children.

As we have on previous occasions shared with
the Council, Botswana has and continues to prioritize
education, which we deem a fundamental constituent in
the promotion and protection of the rights of children. In
that regard, we have succeeded in achieving universal
access to education, and now strive to ensure its quality
and relevance.

We also continue to strive to implement other
programmes intended to safeguard the rights of
children in early childhood, including access to health-
care services and child-health interventions. However,
such interventions are still far from being enough. As
found in most parts of the developing world, there are
still significant challenges to those efforts, mainly due
to resource and capacity constraints.

While we continue to address the challenges with
the means currently available to us, we also look to the
elaboration and adoption of the post-2015 development
agenda to provide clear direction on the means of
implementation on issues relating to the protection
of children. We believe that those should also be
mainstreamed into international security operations.

We wish to acknowledge the support of the relevant
United Nations agencies, in particular UNICEF and
other partners, including civil society organizations and
the private sector, in their facilitation of our national
efforts to uphold both our international and domestic
responsibilities to advance, as well as defend, the safety,
security and general well-being of the world's children.

Botswana welcomed the Secretary-General's report
in May (S/2014/339) on children and armed conflict,
which highlights global trends on the impact of armed
conflict on children, as well as the main activities
and initiatives regarding the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, and other work
on children and armed conflict.

The Secretary-General's report clearly illustrates
the negative and disproportionate impact of armed
conflict on children, and calls on all of us to play our
part to prevent grave violations against children and
to make violators accountable in order to expedite the
promotion and protection of the rights of children.

In that regard, we also wish to commend the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, who
earlier this year delivered a statement (see S/PV.7129 ) to the Council detailing the efforts her Office has
embarked upon to better protect children in conflict
situations. The Special Representative reiterated her
intention to work towards child-free Government
armed forces by the end of 2016. To that end, the Office
of the Special Representative, together with UNICEF,
launched the Children, Not Soldiers campaign, which
aims to end and prevent the recruitment of children by
Government armed forces. Botswana fully supports
those initiatives and it hopes to see some results in the
near future.

Botswana welcomed the Security Council
endorsement of those intentions in its resolution 2143
(2014), and we wish to add our voice to the Council's
support for the initiative and all the other work that the
United Nations carries out in that regard. We believe
that the international community as a whole has the
wherewithal to successfully end and prevent grave
violations against children in armed conflict. However,
action has to be timely and effected in a peaceful
manner and should conform to the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as to established
international humanitarian law.

I wish to conclude by reaffirming Botswana's
commitment to the promotion and protection of the rights
of children and to ensuring the full implementation of
our national obligations under the Convention on the
Rights of the Child.

