Mr. Eiermann (Liechtenstein): Children are among
the most vulnerable individuals in need of protection
from the effects of armed conflict. The recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/465) highlights the large
increase in the number of violations compared with
previous reporting cycles. Thus we continue to often
fail to provide protection when it is most needed. We
reiterate our strong support for the Secretary-General's
Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict
and for her continuous efforts to shed more light on
such violations. Protecting the independence and
integrity of her mandate is crucial to its effectiveness
and credibility.

There are numerous initiatives that enable us to
enhance protection. The Safe Schools Declaration,
supported by 76 States, including Liechtenstein, is
an important commitment to continuing education
during armed conflict, including by protecting
schools and universities from military use. The full
implementation of Security Council resolution 2286
(2016) will also go a long way towards improving the
situation of children in armed conflict by ensuring
the protection of those providing medical services as
well as health-care facilities. Both initiatives are aimed
at counteracting the worrisome trend of increasing
disregard for international humanitarian law. The
Council should follow up on these initiatives and help
enforce compliance by State and non-State actors with
the Geneva Conventions.

We welcome the fact that the list of parties that
have committed grave violations affecting children in
situations of armed conflict has been updated recently.
Evidence-based and impartial listing is a key tool to
put pressure on State and non-State actors alike to
take concrete measures to better ensure the protection
of children. Myanmar's State and border forces were
added to the list for the first time following the
widespread and systematic violence committed against
the Rohingya in Rakhine state, the destruction of their
villages and their forced deportation into Bangladesh.

We share the Secretary-General's deep concerns
about the violations committed against children, such
as killing, maiming, rape and other forms of sexual
violence, as outlined in his recent report.

We were also appalled to hear from the Secretary-
General's Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict about her recent trip to Myanmar and
Bangladesh (see S/PV.8133) and her account of
atrocious sexual and gender-based violence committed
in a systematic manner against children, even babies.
We will continue to support Bangladesh's efforts to host
the large refugee population, but we are also concerned
about the reports of forced disappearances of women
and minors in the camps and incidents of human
trafficking. Unfortunately, the Council has remained
silent on those challenges, even after its own visit to
the region. Accountability for the crimes committed
cannot be treated as an afterthought when it is clearly
a precondition for the stated objective of enabling the
Rohingya refugees to return. We have repeatedly echoed
those who have expressed the View that the Council
should engage in a serious discussion with a view to
referring the situation to the International Criminal
Court, a decision that would be in line with the code
of conduct on mass atrocities of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, supported by
117 States.

Sexual violence against children is one of the
violations most chronically underreported during
situations of armed conflict. United Nations monitoring
and reporting mechanisms often fail to capture many
such incidents, particularly those committed against
men and boys, as has been shown in the research done
by the All Survivors Project in places such as Syria
and the Central African Republic. We encourage all
the relevant United Nations entities to conduct more
effective monitoring, documenting, investigating and
reporting of violations against children, including
rape and other forms of sexual violence. Peacekeeping
and special political missions, as well as fact-finding
commissions and commissions of inquiry, should be
mandated accordingly and given sufficient capacities
and resources to implement those mandates. At the
same time, the United Nations should make better use
of initiatives such as the Justice Rapid Response roster
in order to enable experts to be deployed as quickly
as possible.

