Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): We would like to thank
Sir Kieran Prendergast for his report, which offers solid
grounds for hope that the concerted efforts of the people
of Guinea-Bissau and of the international community have
not been in vain.

We all recall the time of hardship in Guinea-Bissau,
when the country was plagued by political tensions that
sparked a brutal civil war. The United Nations was there
at that time, ready to help the country to create an
environment conducive to the restoration of peace,
national reconciliation and democratic principles. The
political controversy in the country has been resolved, and
credit must be given to the efforts of the people of
Guinea-Bissau, to the demonstrated political will of the
parties involved, to the neighbouring countries, to the
support of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP), and to the
outstanding work of the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS).

The recent political developments in that country
clearly demonstrate the strong will and the ability of the
people of Guinea-Bissau to vote for change and to take
the path of democracy, national reconciliation and unity.

We are most gratified at the fact that the
commitments by the signatories to the Abuja Accord and
other related agreements are being translated into

 

meaningful steps towards restoring democratic rule and
constitutional order.

Following the transitional period, the new Government
of Guinea-Bissau will be facing new and pressing
challenges in various spheres, including the consolidation of
democracy, the promotion of the demobilization and
reintegration of the military into civil society, the
strengthening of a fair judicial mechanism for those
detained following the events of May 1999, and the
energizing of the economy. The creation of social and
economic conditions for the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons should remain among the
priority tasks for the young constitutional Government.

There is no time like the present for the international
community to extend a helping hand to the people of
Guinea-Bissau. The Security Council's approval of the
revision and extension of the mandate of UNOGBIS for a
year, starting from March 31, is an appropriate and
essential step in this direction. However, political support
alone cannot suffice; financial backing is also necessary in
order to focus on the major needs of the country in the
social and economic areas, and in this respect international
donors must play a crucial role.

We sincerely hope that the case of Guinea-Bissau will
vividly exemplify the success of the consolidated efforts of
the people of that country and the international community
at its best, and that the other countries in Africa which have
yet to overcome their political and security difficulties will
follow suit.

