Ms. Johnson: Children affected by armed
conflict deserve protection. Not only that, they have
the right to be protected from all violations of their
rights. The Security Council has shown courage in
leading international efforts to end grave violations
against children in armed conflict. We truly appreciate
that.

On behalf of UNICEF, I would also like to thank
Mexico for its exceptional leadership in driving this
agenda forward in the Security Council. Without
Mexico's support and dedication and that of the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Radhika
Coomaraswamy, progress we have seen in recent years
would not have been possible. And with your continued
commitment and determination, Madam President, and
that of all Council members, we may have the
opportunity to end grave violations against children in
armed conflict.

We must never forget what is at stake. Last year, I
visited a major demobilization centre operated by the
armed forces in Chad. The boys were still in combat
uniform when I met them. Their stories were
horrific - they had witnessed brutal attacks on their
homes and families; they had seen their houses burnt,
their livelihoods destroyed. The boys had been forced
to join rebel groups. When I asked them about their
hopes for the future, all ten had one singular, uniform
ambition: education. They wanted to go to school. That
was the key to their future.

We cannot ignore their stories or deny them the
fulfilment of their dreams. That is within our collective
reach, but it will require sustained engagement at the
highest possible level, stronger partnerships and robust
delivery in the field. Together we can report on
violations and identify violators. We can take action to
ensure compliance with Security Council provisions,
and we can protect and assist those that are the most
vulnerable: children.

The past year has been marked by notable
progress. Action plans to end child recruitment have
been signed by parties to conflict in the Philippines,
Nepal and the Sudan. Thousands of children have been
released from armed groups and armed forces. In 2009,
a little over 9,500 children were removed from armed
groups and armed forces in countries implementing the
monitoring and reporting mechanism. However, that
number does not include the almost 3,000 children who
were released in Nepal - which the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has just
referred to - in January and February this year. It does
include 5,900 children in the Democratic Republic of

the Congo and 1,400 children in the Sudan who have
now embarked on the long and challenging process of
reintegration with their families and communities.

These numbers tell a compelling story: Security
Council resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005)
work. They are making a real difference in children's
lives. Now we need to take our collective efforts one
step further - not a small step, but a major one. We
need to make change happen in the lives of many more
children, as the Special Representative just highlighted
in her statement.

Security Council resolution 1882 (2009) was a
formidable breakthrough. The vision and courage
demonstrated by the Council in passing that resolution
cannot be overstated. It expands the triggers for listing
parties so that more of the grave violations are
associated with the Council's naming and shaming
efforts. Such grave violations also merit strong
reactions and punitive measures against the
perpetrators. We are pleased that the Security Council
is willing to take such action.

With resolution 1888 (2009), on sexual violence
and rape as a weapon of war, the Council provides a
further opportunity to consolidate the framework at our
disposal to hold violators accountable. On our side, we
stand ready to support the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Margot Wallstrom, in her important mission.

UNICEF welcomes the two triggers for listing of
parties who commit rape and other forms of grave
sexual violence and who kill and maim children.
Sexual violence is still regularly used as a weapon of
war with the strategic intent to humiliate and
demoralize individuals, tear apart families and destroy
communities. As many of us have experienced during
visits to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
stories women and girls tell us are just horrific. They
bear the brunt of that violence. The humiliation,
stigma, exclusion and deep physical and psychological
scars remain with them, in many cases destroying their
lives.

Children still account for a considerable number
of war-related casualties. When they are not directly
targeted or used in war, they often fall victim to the
indiscriminate use of force. They are most affected by
landmines, cluster munitions and other indiscriminate
weapons and explosive remnants of war. It is
commendable that the Security Council has decided to
address this most basic grave violation against the
rights of children.

In total, therefore, three of the six grave
violations in conflict are now subject to the Security
Council framework. To be able to list, we need
adequate monitoring and reporting mechanisms.
UNICEF is fully committed to strengthen the
monitoring and reporting mechanisms in relation to all
three violations in all countries concerned. We also
need monitoring and reporting to hold violators
accountable. Indeed, our ambition should be to utilize
the full potential of this framework, holding
perpetrators accountable and bringing them to justice,
and to enforce measures against violators through
existing sanctions regimes.

We also need to focus on other grave violations
against children. The Special Representative has
already expressed concern about the trend of attacks on
schools. That trend must be reversed. In addition, the
continued denial of humanitarian access in situations of
armed conflict, such as in Somalia, Iraq and
Afghanistan, has grave implications for children. Our
colleagues in the field in those situations take
considerable risk when they engage with parties to
conflict, often non-State actors, to reach children in
need of assistance, to provide protection where there is
no rule of law and to safeguard schools as zones of
peace. That is easier said than done. We constantly
look for new approaches to deliver on our promise to
children in the field. Humanitarian access is
imperative, and denying it is unacceptable.

The child protection framework for children and
armed conflict supported by the Security Council spells
out the accountability of perpetrators. At the same
time, it lays out the responsibilities of key
stakeholders, including the Security Council and its
Working Group, concerned national Governments, the
United Nations, Member States, donors and civil
society. Thanks to the monitoring and reporting in
countries listed by the Council and other situations of
concern, we cannot claim ignorance when it comes to
the situation of children. The extent of grave violations
perpetrated against children is known. Never have we
been so well informed. Silence is not an option, nor is
inaction. We have a collective duty to act. We all are
accountable to the children whose stories we hear.

UNICEF stands ready to assist the Security
Council and its Working Group as it utilizes all the
tools at its disposal for clear and determined action. We
look forward to supporting possible missions to the
field to consider the information compiled by our
colleagues, assisting in-country advocacy efforts and
helping mobilize the required resources to improve the
situation of children affected by armed conflict. As
indicated in resolution 1882 (2009), donors must also
ensure that operational agencies have the necessary
capacity to address grave violations and deliver results
for children.

Together with our partners, UNICEF and the
Office of the Special Representative have taken several
key initiatives to strengthen the monitoring of grave
violations in follow-up to resolution 1882 (2009),
including a global roll-out of a new monitoring and
reporting mechanism field manual and training toolkit,
as well as the development of practical action plan
templates. This will lead to a more systematic and
effective implementation of the mechanism, where
UNICEF normally is co-chair in the field.

In UNICEF, we have ensured that the protection of
children and women in armed conflict and other crises
are prioritized in our Core Commitments for Children in
Humanitarian Action. We are scaling up initiatives to
raise awareness and develop capacity across the
board- among our country offices in all countries
listed and situations of concern, in regional offices and
headquarters and among key partners - to improve the
monitoring and reporting mechanism and our protection
programmes. None of that would be possible without
strong partnerships. Cooperation with United Nations
entities - in particular peacekeeping and the child
protection advisers, as my colleague just explained, and
special political missions - and with concerned
Governments, non-governmental organizations and civil
society is essential to all our efforts.

But to be able to take action, the legal framework
must be in place. A couple of weeks ago we
commemorated the tenth anniversary of the two
Optional Protocols of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. UNICEF strongly urges all Member States
that have not yet signed, ratified and implemented the
Optional Protocols to do so as a matter of priority and
urgency. We encourage all Member States to
effectively implement the Paris Commitments and
Paris Principles on Children Associated with Armed
Forces or Armed Groups.
This is also the year of the twentieth anniversary
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Somalia
is the only country in the world where an entire
generation - the two past decades - has known only
violence and conflict and where grave violations are
committed against children every day, by all parties.

As children in Somalia deserve a better future, so
does the boy whom I met in the Central African
Republic a few months back. He was only nine years
old and had been demobilized from the rebel group
Armee pour la Restauration de la Republique et la
Democratie. As tears streamed down his cheeks, he
told me about the horrible pictures that came before his
eyes over and over again. They would never leave his
head. His name was Futur. His only wish was to go
home. Indeed, for Futur and for those 10 boys in Chad,
and for millions of other children, the principles and
values of the Convention stand as a beacon of hope for
a better future. It is our collective obligation to turn
them into reality in their lives.

