Mr. Thompson (United Kingdom): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open meeting. Our
thanks also go to Assistant Secretary-General Kalomoh
for his presentation of the report of the mission
(S/2003/1077).

In my remarks, I will be supplementing and
speaking within the framework of the statement to be
made shortly by the Italian presidency of the European
Union.

A year ago, the Council proposed the inter-
agency mission because we recognized the need for a
comprehensive and concerted approach to the issues of
peace, security and development in Central Africa. The
aim was, and remains, to make effective operational
linkages across the United Nations system and, where
relevant and practical, across borders. We should
continue to pursue that. In my remarks, I want to
address how we do that rather than the particular
problems of the region, which - as previous speakers
have said - are large and urgent.

The mission concluded that, as a result of cross-
cutting and other challenges that transcend national
boundaries in the region, an integrated and holistic
subregional approach is required to complement
national solutions and lay a durable foundation for
solutions. The report offers us a range of cross-regional
issues for consideration, many of which are being
addressed by different parts of the United Nations
system. In our discussion of the Great Lakes region last
week, for example, we all recognized that certain
problems do not stop at national borders, particularly
where those borders are highly porous. Small arms
proliferation is one example. On a more positive note, I
hope we are starting to see the potential, at least, for a
positive cycle in the Great Lakes region in which one
country can positively affect development in its
neighbours.

But, that said, I think there are some important
qualifications to a blanket cross-regional approach.
Clearly, some problems are fundamentally the same on
either side of a national border and need to be tackled
in a coordinated way. But others may be best tackled at
the national level, and some issues - such as
HIV/AIDS - clearly need to be addressed in a much
broader context than just the Central African region.
The New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD) provides a framework for shared progress

across a wide range of areas - including peace and
security, economic governance, and democracy and
good governance - that goes beyond the Central

African region. So, as a first point, we need to be
careful about imposing templates on different kinds of
problems.

Moreover, as a second point, we would not wish
to cut across or duplicate existing regional and
subregional initiatives - for example, the current work
on the potential for an international conference on the
Great Lakes. So it follows that we would not support
the insertion of a new level of bureaucracy into the
region. A better way forward might be to concentrate
on areas that build on existing subregional and region-
wide structures, rather than attempting to create new
ones.

The third point, therefore, is that there is a clear
role for subregional bodies, and they deserve our
support. It is unsurprising that the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community
(CAEMC) have established mechanisms and
approaches to address issues of collective security. The
economic development of the region and security are
fundamentally linked. At the same time we note the
observation of the multidisciplinary mission that not all
of these mechanisms are either fully functional or
delivering as intended. We need to be sure that each
part of the system is playing to its strengths and not
duplicating. The Central African subregional
organizations need to define their role according to
where they can best add value. We note that the report
identifies some blurring between the roles of ECCAS
and CAEMC, for example.
As the Secretary-General moves forward with his
proposed review of the United Nations programmes in
the region, it would be useful to focus on particular
areas where there is the best prospect of identifying
scope for improved coordination. We think it would be
useful to see some specific recommendations - for
example, concerning which of the regional security
structures the United Nations should be supporting, and
how that support could best be provided. We would
welcome a look at what scope there may be to follow
through on the Council's earlier intention to support
ECCAS's new collective security structures. It would
be helpful to have recommendations on whether there
is anything more concrete that the United Nations
could contribute in other areas - for example, tackling
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons.

Finally, in addressing concrete proposals, we
would urge a bottom-up approach, taking account of
the views of those already working in the field in
partnership with Governments in the region. We think
this is key. Any review should be looking at what does
or does not work in the field, and at where there may
be gaps or opportunities for better linkage in the
existing activities of the United Nations system. We
hope that such an approach will deliver progress in
making the Organization more joined up and helping
the countries of the Central African region in their
efforts also to be more joined up.

