Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote
d'Ivoire welcomes the adoption of resolution 2468
(2019), on the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) until 31 October. In that regard, we
commend the excellent work done by the United States
penholders to reach the resolution that the Council
has just adopted. In accordance with the position we
expressed clearly expressed in October (see S/PV.8387),
as well as during the recent negotiations, my country
would have liked MINURSO's mandate to have been
renewed for a full year. We believe that extension would
have enabled us to lay the groundwork for the long-
term planning and organization of the Mission, whose
effectiveness is also crucial to making the progress in
the political process that the international community
so desires.

Resolution 2440 (2018) established a framework
for relaunching the political process on Western
Sahara and urged stakeholders to fully commit to it.
We are pleased that today's resolution confirms this
new momentum, as evidenced by the holding of two
round-table discussions between the parties and the
neighbouring States in order to identify the points
convergence likely to lead to a sustainable political
solution under the auspices of the United Nations. In
that regard, through today's resolution the Security
Council reiterates its full support to the efforts and
dedication of Mr. Horst Kohler, Personal Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Western Sahara. We should
encourage his good offices, which have given the
process new impetus, for which the Council's continued
support will be crucial. It is equally important that the
stakeholders continue to commit to it in good faith in
order to reach a just, lasting and mutually acceptable
political solution based on compromise. In that regard,
Morocco's efforts to contribute to a final resolution of
this dispute, including through the autonomy initiative,
appear serious and credible, as today's resolution
emphasizes, and in our view constitute a good basis
for discussion.

Lastly, my delegation particularly welcomes
the commitment of Mr. Colin Stewart, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Western
Sahara and Head of MINURSO, whose action on the
ground in a difficult environment has made it possible
to ensure compliance with military agreements and
relevant obligations, and to maintain peace in the
region. In conclusion, my country would like to urge
all the stakeholders, the neighbouring States and the
international community to unite their efforts with a
view to finding a definitive solution to the problem
of Western Sahara and ensuring the happiness of the
people of the region.

