Ms. Wronecka (Poland): First, allow me to thank
Mr. Jean Arnault for his very detailed and informative
briefing and the Secretary-General for his most recent
report on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (8/2018/874). I would also like to warmly
welcome His Excellency Mr. Carlos Trujillo, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Colombia.

We are satisfied to see the first promising steps by
the Government, as embodied in the resumption of the
work of the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implemenation of the Final
Agreement and the National Reintegration Council. It is
good to see that the new Administration is shouldering
its responsibility in implementing the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace, with regard to security guarantees and
reintegration. Moreover, we welcome the commitment
made by Vice-President Marta Lucia Ramirez to
maintaining dialogue with women's groups. It is of
vital importance to ensure the effective implementation
of gender provisions outlined in the peace agreement
with regard to security guarantees and reintegration.

We agree that while the peace process is not exempt
from serious challenges and has been marked by
political controversy since its inception, the perception
of the peace agreement's importance for the country's
future has grown. We hope that Colombian institutions
will continue to pursue what is at the core of the peace
agenda: security, development and the rule of law in the
zones affected by conflict; an effective system for truth,
justice and reparation to the victims; and the essential
commitments made by those who laid down their arms.

We cannot fail to mention our concern about
continued insecurity and violence in some conflict-
affected areas, including the assassination of social
leaders and human rights defenders. We welcome the
signing of the national pact for life and the protection
of social leaders and human rights defenders on
23 August and look forward to its prompt and
inclusive implementation.

We cannot stress enough the importance of the
full political, legal and socioeconomic reincorporation
of former members of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP). We are concerned about the current pace of
the reincorporation process, especially in its economic
dimension, as well as killings of former FARC-EP
members. Legal and security guarantees are needed
for former FARC-EP members in order to strengthen
their confidence in the peace process. We continue to
support the work of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
and other transitional justice processes that are playing
a critical role to protect the rights of victims and the
overall success of the peace process.

Political reintegration remains one of the brightest
elements and successful examples of the peace
agreement's implementation. Representatives of the
political party, the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Comun (FARC), are playing a vital role in the newly
sworn-in Congress. However, two out of 10 seats remain
unoccupied. We hope that the issue of allocating the
remaining seats will be shortly resolved by the relevant
institutions. We also hope that the Review Chamber
will have a chance to independently consider the case
of Jesus Santrich, which remains highly divisive in
terms of political opinion, especially when it comes to
former members of the FARC-EP.

We note the Secretary-General's call on the
Government to make the necessary resources
available for critical investments. We also call on the
international community to remain closely engaged to
support and encourage the effective implementation of
the peace agreement.

Unfortunately, widespread coca cultivation is still
one of the looming obstacles. There is an undeniable
connection between drug trafficking and widespread
insecurity in some regions near strategic drug-
trafficking routes. According to the latest report of
the Secretary-General, if it is not properly addressed,
it will continue to be a source of violence and pose a
threat to the peace process. In that connection, we once
again highlight the role of the United Nations Mine
Action Service in Colombia and other efforts aimed
at putting an end to the suffering of people caused by
the widespread presence of landmines and explosive
remnants of war.

We want to express our full, continuous support
for the peace process in Colombia. We must remind
ourselves that Colombia's peace process remains a
source of inspiration for efforts in many parts of the
world to end conflicts and build peace. The most recent
request of the Government of Colombia and the FARC
party to renew the Mission's mandate demonstrates
their commitment to see thie process through to its
successful conclusion and that they trust the Mission
can contribute to this end.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate our support and
appreciation for the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jean Arnault, and the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.

