Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): I wish to start by
welcoming His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadic, President
of the Republic of Serbia, and to thank him for his
statement. I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his briefing on the situation
in Kosovo. I also thank Mr. Skender Hyseni for his
statement.

We welcome UNMIK's continued efforts in the
promotion of security and stability in Kosovo and the
region. We commend the Mission for its work in
supporting minority communities, encouraging
reconciliation and facilitating dialogue and regional
cooperation. We call upon UNMIK to focus more on
promoting security and stability in Kosovo and in the
Balkans by facilitating practical cooperation among
communities, as well as between the authorities in
Pristina and Belgrade.

My delegation is encouraged that the overall
security situation in Kosovo during the reporting
period remained relatively calm. Nevertheless, it is
potentially fragile, as evidenced by inter-ethnic
incidents of violence in the suburbs of northern
Mitrovica, including attacks on convoys of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and the vandalizing of UNMIK vehicles. We
call on all parties to exercise restraint, mutual respect
and tolerance in order to harmoniously live together in
the interest of peace.

We commend the cooperation between UNMIK
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo regarding exchange of information and
coordinating on issues of mutual concern, and we call
for strengthening cooperation in all sectors. We are
pleased to note that EULEX is continuing to operate
under the overall authority of the United Nations and
within the status-neutral framework of resolution 1244
(1999). We also welcome the complementary role
played by Kosovo Force troops in maintaining an
overall safe environment around the cultural heritage
sites.

We salute the efforts of UNMIK, in coordination
with EULEX and KFOR, to continue to encourage both
sides to find a sustainable and peaceful solution. We
also commend UNMIK's coordination and cooperation
with the relevant international actors and its efforts in
engaging with community leaders to address critical
social services needs, especially in the camps for
internally displaced persons.

Given the importance of regional cooperation for
development and stability, it is crucial that UNMIK
continues to facilitate Kosovo's engagement in
international and regional forums, as entailed in
resolution 1244 (1999). Once again, we commend
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zannier and UNMIK staff for their dedicated service.

