Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Let me congratulate
you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
Council presidency for this month and for scheduling
several open meetings, such as today's on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict.

Since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999),
nearly 15 years ago, the protection of civilians under
the imminent threat of violence has become an integral
part of United Nations peacekeeping mandates and a
core function for more than 95 per cent of the current
peacekeeping deployments. Today's briefings addressed
protection issues from the peacekeeping, human rights
and humanitarian angles, thereby giving us a broader
picture of both challenges and opportunities.

By now, the protection of civilians within the
context of peacekeeping is a widely recognized norm.
We need to continue to work on the implementatin
of mandates and to refine them by focusing on the
consolidation and strengthening of the relevant
frameworks and mechanisms, compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights law by all
sides, humanitarian access and accountability.

Civilians continue to bear the brunt of wars and
conflicts. What is euphemistically called "collateral
damage" results in civilian deaths, injury and
displacement. Women and children become the primary
victims of violence and brutalization during conflicts.

We have done relatively better in situations where the
United Nations and the Security Council have invested
political and diplomatic capital and have deployed
peacekeeping resources. Pakistan fully supports the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and, as part
of many United Nations peacekeeping missions, we
have contributed to the efforts to achieve that objective.
Today, peacekeepers are tasked with protection-of-
civilians mandates in increasingly complex and volatile
situations. They are also mandated to do much more
work without the provision of adequate resources.

That reality on the ground has two direct negative
consequences: unmet expectations and heightened
concerns about the safety and security of United
Nations personnel. Both are evident in the recent
experiences in South Sudan and the Central African
Republic. Recent briefings in the Committee of 34, as
well as the statements made today, affirm that there are
limits to which peacekeeping missions can fulfil their
protection mandates within their respective areas of
operation, configurations and available resources. We
should incorporate lessons learned into the planning
and assessment stages that lead to the authorization of
the relevant mandates and resources by the Council.
A capability-driven approach, if pursued earnestly,
enhances the effectiveness of protection mandates.
Credible and feasible rapid-reaction capacities are
important, as are, increasingly, new technologies that
augment the situational awareness and operational
capability of missions. It goes without saying that the
mission leadership is crucial throughout the entire
process. As indicated by other speakers, consultations
with troop-contributing countries are essential in the
formulation of changes in mandates and in all phases of
peacekeeping operations.
Despite the varying views regarding robust
peacekeeping, the consensus remains strong around the
basic principles of peacekeeping. While peacekeepers
cannot be passive bystanders, they should not be
perceived as partisan. That is why the neutrality and
universal character of United Nations peacekeeping
activities are so important. Our experience has shown
that a proactive stance in implementing protection
mandates - such as through effective and frequent
patrolling, disarmament and demobilization - serves
as a credible deterrent and, in many situations, obviates
the need for the use of force.

Lastly, aklthough peacekeeping missions are there
to assist, the primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians remains with the host country. Peacekeeping
missions cannot become an arm ofa country's national
defence force. It is therefore important to continue
to build national capacities in the rule of law and to
bolster security institutions, even as peacekeepers are
deployed in a country.

A clear distinction must also be made, as Under-
Secretary-General Ladsous advised us today, between
the protection of civilians and the responsibility to
protect. The conflation of the two concepts creates
legal confusion. International consensus and legal
opinion support the view that for the protection-of-
civilians agenda, international humanitarian law covers
only situations of armed conflict. That consensus must
be respected. The mandate and discussion on that
item in the Council are also limited to situations of
armed conflict, especially those on the agenda of the
Council. That distinction must be maintained to avoid
the frequent drift into reporting about situations that
do not come under the purview of armed conflicts as
recognized by international law.

In his latest report (S/2013/689) on the protection of
civilians, the Secretary-General draw attention to the
use of armed drones in Pakistan, Afghanistan and the
occupied Palestinian territory. In that context, he raises
concerns regarding compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights law, in particular the
rules of distinction, proportionality and precaution. The
Secretary-General also underlines the related aspects
of the investigation of drone attacks, transparency,
accountability and the ability ofvictims to seek redress.
The Secretary-General also raises concerns about
the impact of armed drones on individuals, children,
families and communities in areas of Pakistan. Those
concerns include the interruption in the education of
children, the undermining of religious and cultural
practices and the fear of being caught in secondary
strikes.

Drone strikes have violated Pakistan's sovereignty,
killed hundreds of civilians - men, women and
children - and radicalized more people. The use of
drones has therefore been counterproductive. In the
past month or so, there has been a pause in drone
strikes. That has given some respite to civilians in the
areas affected. What we have called for and continue to
call for is a cessation in the use of armed drones.

We support the presidential statement on the
protection of civilians adopted today (S/PRST/2014/3)
and, finally, we pay tribute to peacekeepers and
humanitarian actors in the field who, under very
difficult circumstances, are trying to protect civilians.

