Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I wish to note that my delegation associates
itself with the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Uruguay on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti. I would also like to congratulate you,
Madam, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for September and to thank the United States
delegation for the timely organization of this open
debate on the situation in Haiti. Allow me, through
you, to thank the Prime Minister of Haiti, Mrs. Pierre-
Louis; the Special Envoy for Haiti, former United
States President William Clinton; and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. He'di
Annabi, for his very comprehensive briefing.

In addition, I take this opportunity to reaffirm the
importance of frequent open meetings of the Security
Council to allow all Member States to express their
opinions and to interact with the members of this body.

The question of Haiti is of fundamental
importance to Latin America in general, and to my
country in particular. The fact that the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) is the first
peacekeeping operation with a majority of Latin
American participants, among its military contingents
and in its military command, reflects that importance.
The many technical cooperation programmes that Latin
American countries carry out in Haiti, mainly oriented
to strengthening Haitian institutions, are also a
reflection of the importance of the question for the
region. In this regard, allow me to recall that my
country is cooperating with Haiti to strengthen the
Ministry of Investment and Planning and the Ministry
of Economy and Finance, and in the field of food
security through the PRO-HUERTA programme, which
is aimed at developing community gardens.

MINUSTAH has been a decisive factor in the
re-establishment of stability and security in the
country, assisting the Haitian people in its commitment
to democracy. When MINUSTAH was first established
by the Council in 2004, its main objective was to create
a secure and stable environment that would allow the
normal development of the political and constitutional
process in Haiti. The holding of senatorial elections in
April was thus a concrete example of the significant
progress in the realization of the Mission's mandate.

In April, I made a statement before this Council
to stress my country's concern over the lack of
progress in the social and economic development of
Haiti, taking into account that without tangible
improvement in the living conditions of the Haitian
population, progress in the field of security and
stability could be undermined. I take this opportunity
to note the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/439) and the recommendations contained
therein, while regretting once again the grave economic
and social situation in which the country finds itself.
When we consider how things were in Haiti when
MINUSTAH was established, we must acknowledge
that the progress in the security situation and in the
political process is promising and reminds us that we
have a historic opportunity to advance in other fields.
Nevertheless, in order to move forward and launch a
new phase in Haiti, seizing upon the opportunity we
have today, the work of this Organization and the
international community must be more effective and
determined.

At this stage, it is important to recall that the
purpose of our presence in Haiti is to work to ensure
that the Haitian Government assumes its
responsibilities, thereby making the presence of the
United Nations no longer necessary. We understand the
importance of learning the lessons of the past and of
avoiding a hasty withdrawal from Haiti, as
demonstrated by our continued support for
MINUSTAH through the provision of military and
police officers. Nevertheless, we believe that the action
of the international community in Haiti cannot and
must not consist merely in the presence of MINUSTAH
in its current configuration. We understand that it is
necessary to adapt the composition of MINUSTAH to
the situation on the ground. There is an urgent need to
move ahead in strengthening the institutional capacities
of the country and in improving the coordination of
international cooperation in order to align it with the
priorities set by the Haitian Government and enhance
its efficacy and visibility. The United Nations has a
fundamental role to play in that regard.

I cannot conclude without stressing one of the
main conclusions of the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on Haiti, which highlights that,
"[f]ive years into the stabilization process, there is
substantial reason to believe that Haiti is moving away
from a past of conflict, towards a brighter future of
peaceful development" (S/2009/439, para. 83). Given
this unprecedented opportunity, it is essential to ensure
the continued commitment of the international
community in support of the security and State
institutions of Haiti, as well as of its economic and
social development. To that end, Argentina supports the
extension of the mandate of MINUSTAH for an
additional year and will work actively within the
Group of Friends of Haiti in the elaboration of the draft
resolution in that respect.

