Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I would like to thank you
for convening this important meeting, Mr. President,
and for honouring us with your presence. Allow me
also to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
Mr. Fedotov, Mr. Guterres and Ms. Chan for their
statements.

According to the Charter, our Organization was
founded to maintain international peace and security,
and to that end, to take effective collective measures
for the prevention and removal of threats to peace. The
meaning of security can no longer be linked to the
absence of military threats. We are now exposed to an
array of additional areas in which security risks
manifest themselves.

Indeed, in recent decades the Security Council
has been preoccupied with and has held various
deliberations about a wide range of issues that might
potentially constitute a threat to peace and security,
such as drug trafficking, transnational organized crime,
terrorism, HIV/AIDS, the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, the adverse effects of climate change
and so forth. Countries under stress and emerging from
conflict are particularly vulnerable to such challenges,
which too often fuel and prolong existing conflicts and
pose threats to peacebuilding efforts in post-conflict
States.

In fact, risks that transcend boundaries - for
example, pandemics and transnational crime
networks - are not new. However, the dimensions of
the threat they may constitute are novel and changing
in the increasingly globalized world we live in.
Consequently, our response should be collective and
adaptable to such evolving circumstances and
challenges.

Moreover, issues such as the proliferation of
arms, piracy, mass migration and organized crime are
complex and multifaceted. They carry much weight in
their implications for both human and political
development, on the one hand, and for peace and
stability, on the other. They therefore require a
multilateral approach in the security realm and beyond.

Perhaps the only truly effective way forward is
through increased cooperation, greater preparedness
and creative diplomacy that is preventive in nature. No
single United Nations body or agency, no single
country or regional organization has either the capacity
or the jurisdictional reach to effectively address such
contemporary challenges, including their security
dimensions. That is why strong partnerships among all
major international, regional and local stakeholders are
necessary to meet them, and that is why the Security
Council should be prepared to address their potential
security dimensions and effects. We also believe that
development and national capacity-building should be
cornerstones in any comprehensive approach or
strategic framework designed to address security
challenges.
Finally, our Council is constantly facing the
challenge of finding innovative ways to tackle major
economic, political and social challenges having
security dimensions that lie ahead. That is our moral
responsibility towards present and future generations.
