Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I should like to join
others in welcoming you, Madam President. I think
your presence here underlines the importance that
your country attaches to peacekeeping, something
that has also been demonstrated through the concept
note (S/2019/359, annex), on which I would like
to congratulate you. You have also underlined the
importance you attach to this issue. Let me make
five points.

First, Germany is committed to peacekeeping.
We are the fourth largest financial contributor to
peacekeeping and German peacekeepers are currently
deployed in nine missions. We train, prepare and equip
our peacekeepers to meet the required standards.
The Secretary-General noted in his intervention this
morning that training saves lives. We share that view
and in 2018 Germany conducted a military observer
course for female peacekeepers for the first time. This
year, we will conduct a course for United Nations
police commanders in Germany and our Center for
International Peace Operations in Berlin provides
training for civilian experts.

At the Peacekeeping Ministerial held at the end of
March,ForeignMinisterMaasmadethreecommitments:
Germany will send mobile predeployment training
teams, it will train staff officers on mission and it will
support international peacekeeping training centres
such as those in Ghana and Mali.

I would also like to echo what you, Madam
President, said with regard to female peacekeepers,
to the effect that investing in women is investing in
peace. Women are still underrepresented and several
colleagues who spoke before me have said that the
effectiveness of peacekeeping missions is strengthened
by the presence of more women peacekeepers. We
should therefore work on that. We will support the Elsie
Initiative on Women in Peace Operations mentioned by
Mr. Holmberg and, as Defence Minister Von der Leyen
has stated to the Security Council (see S/PV.8508),
we know that such work begins at home and we are
committed to reaching similar targets in Germany.

Secondly, we must protect those whose work
is to provide security. We have more than 100,000
peacekeepers in the field putting their lives on the
line and our British colleague has just reminded us
of the ceremony yesterday at which we paid tribute
to the more than 100 peacekeepers who have lost
their lives on mission. Germany will supply concrete
support, including by providing United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali contingents with protective vests. Much more
needs to be done to provide adequate support to
peacekeepers. They need adequate intelligence on the
ground, they need more information and they need to
able to analyse the information they obtain in order to
improve their performance.

Thirdly, peacekeepers serve the most vulnerable
populations and should lead by example. Therefore,
it is key that they receive training in human rights
law and international humanitarian law and training
in the protection of children. In that regard, I would
like to commend the Force Commander the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), who
gave some very specific examples in his presentation
of how the Mission has taken action successfully to
protect children.

Fourthly, with regard to training to prevent sexual
and gender-based violence, exactly two weeks ago, we
heard from Dr. Mukwege of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, who knows first-hand the meaning of
sexual violence in conflict. Germany was very happy
that the Council was able to adopt resolution 2467
(2019), which asks for peacekeepers to be provided with
training on sexual and gender-based violence as part of
their predeployment and mission training.

Fifthly and finally, peacekeeping should be
embedded in a political strategy. I would like to recall
what was said very clearly by the Force Commander
of MONUSCO - solutions to conflicts are political.
Peacekeeping missions can support political processes
but cannot resolve conflicts by themselves. For example,
in C6te d'Ivoire we found a solution to the conflict, but
in South Sudan we continue to struggle. The Security
Council should promote coherent political strategies
for the crisis situations on our agenda that include exit
strategies, realistic political objectives and strategic
benchmarks. We should adopt timelines and decide on
the size of contingents according to a strategy and not
the other way around.
