Mr. van den Berg (Netherlands): I have the
honour to take the floor on behalf of the European
Union. The candidate countries of Bulgaria, Romania,
Turkey and Croatia; the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and
Montenegro; and the European Free Trade Association
countries of Norway and Iceland, members of the
European Economic Area, align themselves with this
declaration.

The European Union (EU) wishes to express its
appreciation for the briefing provided to us this
morning by Ambassador Konuzin, the new Chairman
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), whom we
greet and congratulate on his election. We are confident
that, with Russia as Chair, effective coordination of the
CTC will continue. Furthermore, we are pleased to
greet the new Executive Director of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, Ambassador Javier Ruperez.
The European Union also thanks Ambassador Arias for
his able chairmanship of the CTC during the 13 months
of its work.

The European Union attaches great importance to
these periodic open debates and we are happy that this
tradition is being continued under the new leadership
and management. The regular open debates help to
maintain and strengthen the general acceptance and
legitimacy of the CTC within the United Nations
family. We are also pleased to note that Ambassador
Konuzin has continued the informal briefings for
member States, the first of which took place on 2 July.
This possibility for direct questions and answers is
much appreciated. The Chairman was perfectly right in
affirming that transparency should continue to be a
hallmark of the work of the Committee.

Today's meeting deals with the Committee's work
programme for the twelfth 90-day period, which covers
the months from July to September 2004. The
European Union welcomes this document as part of the
process of revitalization of the CTC pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1535 (2004).

The Executive Director will soon submit the
organizational plan for the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. It is good to learn
from the work programme that this will happen through
the Secretary-General. That is important to show that
the revitalization process should honour the Secretary-
General in his role as the chief administrative officer of
the Organization.

As the European Union considers respect for
human rights and the rule of law to be a fundamental
condition for overcoming the scourge of terrorism, we
hope to see a human rights expert included in the
Executive Directorate. Furthermore, the European
Union welcomes the further strengthening of
cooperation between the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the Committee established under Security Council
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the
Taliban. We also hope that such a strengthening of
cooperation will extend to other parts of the United
Nations system involved in counter-terrorism, in
particular the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime.

The European Union supports your call, Sir, to all
States that have not submitted their reports on time to
do so as soon as possible. The number of 71 States
missing deadlines means that more than one third of
the membership is lagging behind. We must maintain
the universality and the speed of the response which
resolution 1373 (2001) requires.

We encourage the Committee and its Executive
Directorate to enhance their dialogue with member
States with a View to approaching our common goal to
fully and universally implement resolution 1373
(2001). The European Council is squarely behind those
efforts and has appointed an EU counter-terrorism
coordinator. Combating terrorism is now fully
integrated into the external relations policy of the EU
and a key element in the EU political dialogue with
other States. Particular emphasis is put on ratification
without reservation and effective implementation of the
relevant international conventions and protocols related
to terrorism and preventing the financing of terrorism.
Emphasis is also put on addressing other factors that
may contribute to the fight against terrorism, such as
non-proliferation and arms control. We applaud the
new energy the CTC is willing to put into that effort to
make the relevant conventions and protocols universal
and we look forward to enhancing its results by our
own contribution. The CTC objectives in this field are
our own.

The European Union understands that the CTC is
in transition and that this has led to a slow-down in the
review of reports. We hope and trust that, with an
extended staff of experts, the CTC will be able to
accelerate its work. More staff should also allow for
better assessing the assistance needs of those countries
that have the sincere political will to fully implement
resolution 1373 (2001) but lack the proper tools to do
so. We share the Chairman's View that review and
remedy should be more effectively linked.

In this context, the European Union would
welcome a more proactive role of the CTC in the field
of technical assistance. We would welcome more direct
dialogue and information exchange with both the States
in need of assistance and the donor community,
including close dialogue and cooperation with the
Counter-Terrorism Action Group of the G-8.

Direct dialogue and information exchange on the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) as such are
also essential and we are convinced that such dialogue
and exchange could be enhanced by in-country visits
made by the CTC to States with the concerned State's
consent. The first such visit by the CTC to a State with
its consent, as envisaged in the new work programme,
is important to mention in this respect.

We commend the fact that the League of Arab
States has offered to co-host, jointly with the CTC, the
fourth special meeting with international, regional and
subregional organizations on the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) in Cairo later this year. A
focused and action-oriented dialogue at that event
should provide a useful follow-up to the three previous
similar meetings.

Finally, allow me to make a pitch for the seminar
that the EU presidency is planning to organize on
22 September in Brussels on ways to combat the
financing of terrorism. We will concentrate on various
issues, such as alternative remittance systems, money
laundering and national and regional implementation of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). We stand
ready to inform those interested.

