Mr. Merores (Haiti) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Government of Haiti, 1 thank the Security
Council for having organized the Council mission to
Haiti. Special thanks go to Ambassador Urbina, who
led the mission. We believe that his briefing was
comprehensive and covered all areas addressed by the
mission during its visit to Haiti. As members know, this
visit took place following the visit of the Secretary-
General accompanied by former President Bill Clinton;
it thus enabled the international community, represented
by the members of the Council, to get an exhaustive idea
of the situation that Haiti has been facing for some time.
As aptly stated by Ambassador Urbina, it is clear that
since 2005 the security situation on the ground has
improved considerably. That was clearly stated by the
6
various interlocutors who had the opportunity to share
their impressions with the members of the Council.

Nevertheless, as the country's highest authorities,
starting with the President and Prime Minister, said,
the economic and social remains very fragile. As
Ambassador Urbina said, we are is still suffering the
devastating consequences of the four successive
hurricanes that struck Haiti in 2008. It is important to
underscore here for the Council that the meagre
economic progress achieved in 2007 was battered by
the hurricanes. As a result, the agricultural sector in
particular, as well as basic infrastructure, suffered a
serious blow from which the country is finding it very
difficult to recover.

Nonetheless, on behalf of my Government, I wish
to reaffirm to the international community that Haiti is
resolutely committed to reconstruction and
development. For that reason we attach great
importance to the upcoming donor conference to be
hosted by the Inter-American Development Bank in
Washington, D.C., and we hope that Haiti will again
enjoy the kind support of the international community,
which so far has never failed us.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate my gratitude
to the Security Council for having organized this visit.
I wish again to convey my special gratitude to
Ambassador Urbina, who led the visit. I also wish to
express the appreciation of the Haitian Government for
the Council's constant and continuing interest in Haiti.

