Mr. Negroponte (United States of America):
Thank you, Mr. President, for calling this meeting on
the situation in Haiti. We also want to welcome the
earlier presence of the Secretary-General as well as the
presence of the Foreign Ministers of Jamaica and the
Bahamas, who have come to speak to us this afternoon,
and of our colleague the representative of the
Government of Haiti.

The United States is deeply concerned about the
political crisis in Haiti. We condemn the use of
violence and call on all political actors to engage in
dialogue to achieve a sustainable, constitutional,
political solution. Only by securing such a solution can
the Haitian people build a better future for
themselves - a future that is democratic, prosperous,
respectful of human rights and peaceful. If a
sustainable political agreement in Haiti is reached, the
United States would support efforts to deploy an
international force to support its implementation.

We have worked closely with the Caribbean
Community, the Organization of American States
(OAS), the Group of Friends of Haiti and others to
respond to the crisis in Haiti, and we will continue to
do so.

We also have strongly supported the full
implementation of the Organization of American States
resolutions CP/806, CP/822, and, more recently,
CP/861. Those resolutions remain valid and outline
steps that must be taken if democracy is to take root.
We continue to support the OAS special mission in
Haiti. The Mission can serve as the foundation for an
expanded international presence to professionalize the
Haitian National Police, promote the rule of law,
disarm gangs and encourage a climate of security
conducive to democratic activity.

We urge all democratic elements in Haiti to
maintain active dialogue to reach a lasting political
solution. Naturally, our dialogue with them and with
other elements of Haitian society must continue.

It is imperative that such a solution be reached
quickly, before a serious humanitarian crisis emerges.
The Haitian people have already suffered a great deal
in extreme poverty and precarious living conditions.
And yet, they face the real prospect of an even greater
calamity: deepening crisis, possible humanitarian
emergency and an uncertain political future. Facing
this crisis and the prospect that it may deepen, the
parties must act in the best interests of the Haitian
people.

We have listened carefully to the suggestions and
proposals of our partners in the Caribbean Community.
We will continue to closely consult with them and
other nations regarding the international community's
response to Haiti's crisis.

