Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
I thank Mr. Jan Kubis, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing and presentation of
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/350) on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan's
activities in Afghanistan. I also thank the Ambassador
of Afghanistan for his statement.

The Secretary-General's report notes the most
recent developments in Afghanistan over the past three
months. In the reporting period, significant political
developments have taken place in light of the provincial
and presidential elections, the end of the International
Security Assistance Force's presence in 2014, and the
beginning of a new phase of transformation for the
country. In that regard, the technical and political
preparations for the elections continue, in particular
the adoption of the elctoral budget, negotiations among
the various political parties, and the launch by the
Independent Election Commission of electoral maps
while awaiting the forthcoming appointment of the
head of the Commission.

In order to attenuate tensions in many Afghan
provinces, it is important for UNAMA to organize
workshops on mediation and conflict settlement so as
to raise awareness among local peoples and religious
leaders regarding the importance of using peaceful
means for the settlement of conflict. The Afghan
Government also made efforts during this period to
implement national priority programmes and a number
of actions pursuant to commitments undertaken in
Tokyo.

On the security front, a number of difficulties
remain. The number of incidents affecting civilians
rose compared to the previous period, as did the
sophistication of explosives and methods used in that
context. It must also be noted that between 1 February
and 30 April, UNAMA recorded more than 533 civilian
deaths and more than 800 injured civilians, which also
represents an increase from the same period in the
previous year. At the same time, the Afghanistan Peace
and Reintegration Programme continued its expansion,
which is positive. We welcome the decision taken to
extend from three to six months the assistance provided
under the Programme to ex-combatants.

Afghanistan is part of a region facing significant
difficulties but Where there is also great potential for
regional cooperation. The leaders of Afghanistan
are participating in several such regional initiatives,
including the ministerial meeting on dialogue and
cooperation in Asia. Afghanistan was also on the
agenda at the trilateral meeting between the Russian
Federation, China and Pakistan, and at the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization meeting. Those meetings
can help the parties not only to strengthen the links
between Afghanistan and neighbouring countries, but
also to work together to tackle a number of challenges,
including drug trafficking and terrorism, and strengthen
cooperation in the areas of energy, investment and
infrastructure.

Afghanistan is at a historic turning point, marked
by the presidential and provincial elections of 2014 and
the planned withdrawal of international troops before
the end of 2014. It is important to continue providing
the country with financial assistance to help it meet the
challenges it faces. The international community must
remain committed to that process through UNAMA,
whose crucially important role and activities must be
supported.

