The President (spoke in French): 1 shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Belgium. First, I would like to say a few words on the political situation. Somalia is currently developing its federal system, and we understand how complex that task is. We commend the good technical cooperation between the federal levels undertaken with a view to obtaining debt relief. There is a need now to extend that cooperation to other areas and to add to it constructive dialogue at the political level. Somalia is making progress on several crucial issues, including security-sector reform and preparing for the elections. However, in the absence of a domestic political dialogue, any solutions reached can only be incomplete. Some aspects of the electoral code must be reviewed, as has been noted. Time is of the essence in organizing the presidential elections as scheduled. We would also encourage the Federal Government to expand the democratic space in order to enable everyone to participate, including women, young people and displaced persons. Finally, a just and reasonable solution must be found in order to ease those tensions linked to the regional elections in Galmudug and Jubaland. Turning now to security matters, the insufficient dialogue between the Federal Government and some federal member states has also had a negative impact on the transition plan and the departure of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). Better coordination will enable Somalia to make progress on implementing its security architecture and the Somali National Army to increase its staff numbers. Al-Shabaab remains the main threat to security and stability in the country. The deployment of the Somali National Army is crucial to containing this threat and protecting the population. Thanks to the partial lifting of the embargo, authorities are now able to obtain the necessary weapons. I would also like to recall that the European Union supports Somalia by financing AMISOM, the European Union Training Mission for Somalia and the European Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia, as well as the anti-maritime-piracy Operation Atalanta. The suffering of the population is of concern to us. Humanitarian crises and the displacement of persons as a result of conflicts and climate phenomena such as drought and floods exacerbate one another. The study presented by Mr. Smith highlights the interaction between those phenomena. We believe that if these were better taken into consideration by the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), that would help to improve the effectiveness of the Mission. In conclusion, I would like to commend the work of Special Representative Swan and the staff of UNSOM for their commitment. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
