Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Sir, for convening today's meeting. China listened
carefully to the briefing by Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Honore.

Thanks to thejoint efforts of all parties, the interim
Government of Haiti has been established. The second
round of presidential elections is scheduled to be held
in April, and a new Government is expected to be
formed in May. We hope that this process will create
new opportunities for peace and stability in Haiti.

The recent situation in Haiti has been calm on
the whole, but it is still complex and fragile. The
security situation has deteriorated, and the country
faces difficulties in economic development and a grim
humanitarian situation. It still has a long way to go in
peacebuilding and reconstruction. China hopes that the
international community will focus its assistance on
the following three areas.

First, we must do all we can to facilitate the holding
of elections on schedule. China hopes that all parties in
Haiti will remain united and resolve their differences
through dialogue and consultation in order to maintain
the country's stability and create conditions conducive to
the holding of the second round of presidential elections
and the establishment of the new Government. We hope
that the relevant regional organizations will continue to
provide assistance and support to the electoral process
on the basis of respect for Haitian ownership.

Secondly, we should help Haiti to accelerate its
economic development and improve its humanitarian
situation. The Haitian Government should take the long
view, strive for development - which is the master key
to solving its problems - formulate its development
strategy in the light of the country's situation, improve
infrastructure and the investment environment, step up
its efforts in agriculture, tourism and other important
sectors, enhance its capacities in epidemic prevention
and disaster relief, advance the rule of law, increase its
support for the displaced, and enhance social synergies.
The international community should honour its
commitments to Haiti in a timely manner and disburse
funds for humanitarian relief so that the Government
can achieve development as soon as possible.

Thirdly, proper arrangements must be made for
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). Under the leadership of its Head,
Ms. Honore, MINUSTAH has played an important role
in advancing Haiti's electoral process and maintaining
security and stability in the country, for which China
offers its thanks. Pursuant to resolution 2243 (2015), the
future of MINUSTAH will be placed on the Council's
agenda following the elections. China hopes that, based
on the full assessment of the country's security situation
and enhanced communication with the Government,
the Secretariat and the Council will come up with
reasonable and feasible arrangements concerning the
future of MINUSTAH that will ensure stability in Haiti
and the smooth functioning of the new Government.

