Ms. Shalev (Israel): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your leadership of
the Council for this month, which has been demanding
and complicated. I also wish to thank Mr. Robert Serry
for his informative and important briefing.

As we approach the end of 2008, we look back on
a year that has witnessed substantial progress in the
framework of the Annapolis process. In fact, this year
has been a most constructive year for the peace
process.

Allow me to begin by congratulating the Security
Council on its adoption of resolution 1850 (2008) just
two days ago. This resolution expresses unequivocal
support for the direct bilateral negotiations between
Israel and the Palestinians in the framework of the
Annapolis process. According to the principles agreed
by the parties themselves and presented to the Quartet,
any agreement will be subject to implementation of the

Road Map, first and foremost to the principle requiring
the dismantling of the terrorist infrastructure.

Further, resolution 1850 (2008) includes
additional important principles. The resolution
endorses - for the first time - the three Quartet
principles as the basis for international legitimacy and
support for any Palestinian Government. In so doing,
the international community has delivered a clear
message to Hamas in Gaza.

The resolution supports the moderate elements in
the region. We must not let radicals in the region hijack
the agenda for their extremist purposes. The resolution
rightly notes that lasting peace can only be based on
ending terror and incitement and on a commitment to
the two-State solution. Additionally, resolution 1850
(2008) calls for the States of the Middle East to create
an environment conducive to bilateral negotiations.
That includes promoting mutual recognition and
peaceful coexistence in the region, in parallel with
progress in the bilateral process.

The real test now lies with the parties on the
ground. Let us not forget that Israel is operating on two
major tracks. On the one hand, Israel is trying to
promote peace with the moderate, responsible
leadership on the Palestinian side. On the other hand,
Israel is fighting the extremist Hamas terrorist
organization in the Gaza Strip.

In spite of the efforts by those who promote
incitement, fear and terror, Israelis and Palestinians in
the region have demonstrated increasing courage
during the past twelve months of negotiations. These
negotiations have resulted in important changes on the
ground.

Let me mention several key developments. There
exists growing cooperation between Israeli and
Palestinian security forces. In this regard, Israel has
facilitated the deployment of Palestinian police forces
in Jenin and the area around Hebron, as well as the
opening of 20 additional Palestinian police stations.
The city of Jenin - once a breeding ground for suicide
terrorism - is now a model for security cooperation in
the West Bank.

That progress is important but must be considered
in the wider context of the capacity-building of the
Palestinian security forces. The United States, the
European Union, and certain Arab States play an
important role in this regard. In the past year alone,
Palestinian wages in the West Bank have increased
almost 25 per cent; trade and commerce between Israel
and the West Bank have jumped 35 per cent.

All of these developments are important.
However, much work remains to be done to build the
effective Palestinian capacity to fully implement
Palestinian responsibilities. Ongoing terrorist activity
in the West Bank remains a threat to Israel and requires
us to act accordingly.

Israel remains committed to doing its part to
create a positive environment on the ground, one that
encourages moderates in the region. In honour of Eid
al-Adha and as a confidence-building measure towards
the Palestinian Authority and its leadership -
Mahmoud Abbas and Salam Fayyad - the Israeli
Government has released, this week, 230 convicted
Palestinian prisoners.

Through this latest gesture, Israel seeks to
intensify its continuing dialogue with partners who are
both committed to negotiations and diplomacy and
opposed to terrorism. But confidence-building
measures by Israel must be met by the Palestinians, as
well as by the wider Arab world. The Arab world has a
responsibility, namely, to engage in measures that will
facilitate the negotiations between the parties,
including a clear message against any incitement of
and support for terrorism.

While the efforts of Israel and the Palestinian
Authority have led to some important
accomplishments, serious and dangerous challenges
and obstacles remain. This month has witnessed yet
another onslaught of rockets and mortars fired at
civilians in Israeli towns and cities. This year my
country has been the target of a record number of
attacks; over 2,900 rockets and mortars were fired from
the Gaza Strip into Israel. The same day on which the
Security Council adopted resolution 1850 (2008), 11
rockets were fired at Israel. Yesterday alone, 25 rockets
were fired from Gaza into Israel, one of which landed
at the entrance of a busy supermarket.

The incessant attacks by Hamas also target border
crossings, fuel depots and other vital routes that
normally enable the flow of goods and humanitarian
aid into the Gaza Strip. Nevertheless, Israel
acknowledges the need to provide humanitarian aid to
the Gaza Strip, and we do our utmost to facilitate the
work of the international community.
At this very moment, Corporal Gilad Shalit has
remained in Hamas captivity for 910 days and nights.
As a human being and as a mother, I was appalled to
hear about a rally that took place in the centre of Gaza
City celebrating 21 years of the establishment of
Hamas. 150,000 people gathered and cheered for a
show that mocked the misery of Gilad Shalit, the
suffering of his family and the compassion of the
people of Israel and people around the world. We
expect the international community to do its utmost to
bring Gilad Shalit home safely.

The Hamas terrorists of Gaza who relentlessly
attack Israel do not act alone. Iran remains the
epicentre of Hamas' ongoing terrorist work. Iran, like
Syria, actively trains, funds, and equips Hamas, as well
as Hizbullah to our north, and many other radicals in
the region. Israel also remains deeply concerned by the
rearmament and redeployment of Hizbullah in
Lebanon - both north and south of the Litani River -
in violation of relevant Security Council resolutions.

Israel is fully committed to the peace process. We
hope that 2009 will enable us to further the cause of
peace in our region. Peace remains the salient goal for
the State of Israel. To all of my colleagues at the
United Nations, I would like to offer my delegation's
sincere wishes for the holiday season and a fruitful
New Year.

