Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): Mr. President, allow
me at the outset to thank you for having convened this
meeting. I wish also to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jan Egeland for his comprehensive briefing today,
which is indeed the third one this year on the
humanitarian situation in Africa.

As observed during earlier meetings, millions of
people in Africa continue to bear the brunt of famine,
extreme poverty and pandemics, and they survive each
day in squalor. Children are hungry and suffer from
illnesses that often would cost very little to treat.
Millions living with HIV/AIDS do not have access to
lifesaving medicines.

I should like to touch on a few issues relating to
the humanitarian crisis in Africa. In some situations,
people in Africa also suffer from all kinds of violence
during insurgencies and armed conflicts. It is troubling
that conflict kills more people in Africa than anywhere
else and that the African continent hosts the largest
displaced population in the world. We should not
overlook the devastating costs for countries in conflict
or the impact on their neighbours.

Much remains to be done by the States affected
and by the international community as a whole. The
United Nations, including the Security Council, has
rightly given priority to Africa, which is underscored
by the fact that African issues now constitute more
than 60 per cent of the Council's agenda. However,
most of the humanitarian crises in Africa result, to a
large extent, from a combination of interrelated factors.
We must continue to devise true multidimensional
approaches to address such crises.

It is necessary to recognize that decisive
questions in the humanitarian and development
assistance sphere, such as financing, do not fall under
the purview of the Council. In that respect, it is
encouraging that the General Assembly decided last
week to upgrade the current Central Emergency
Revolving Fund to the Central Emergency Response
Fund, so as to ensure swifter and more predictable
responses to humanitarian emergencies. Let us not
forget, for instance, that, after access restrictions were
lifted in Darfur, it took four months for funds to be
committed to the relief appeal.

It is also encouraging that the Fund will continue
to operate in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 46/182. We hope that this new mechanism
will help ensure that humanitarian assistance is
provided on the basis of existing need and allocated in
a non-discriminatory, balanced and proportionate
manner.

We must continue to work with the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, since
those bodies address humanitarian issues in a
comprehensive manner. At the same time, we hope that
the establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission
will provide for better coordination among United
Nations bodies and other actors, so that deep-rooted
social and economic causes of conflict can be tackled
in order to prevent the emergence, spread or recurrence
of conflict. We need to continue to focus on effective
approaches to break the destructive and vicious circles
in which conflict, banditism, lack of development and
dire social conditions perpetuate one another.

We thank Mr. Egeland for his detailed account of
the humanitarian situation in the region, which
deserves our careful examination.

