Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank the Argentine presidency for having
organized this open debate on cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. The presence of President Fernandez
and the participation of many ministers bear witness to
the importance of the subject we are discussing today.
I thank the Secretary-General and representatives of
the Union of South American Nations, the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States, the African
Union and the League of Arab States for their edifying
opening statements.
Luxembourg fully subscribes to the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.

The Security Council has rightly recognized
the role and contribution of regional and subregional
organizations in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter. It is clear that
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations is not only
desirable but also necessary.

Luxembourg welcomes the long-standing
cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union. This cooperation now covers the
entire spectrum of response to international crises,
from immediate crisis response, humanitarian action,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding to development
beyond the European continent. The synergies between
the United Nations and the European Union in the
theatre of operations where they work side by side
are significant, whether in Kosovo, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Somalia or now in Mali.

It is also on the African continent that cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations is the most developed.
Whether it is to finally pacify the Darfur region of the
Sudan or to normalize relations between the Sudan and
South Sudan, the United Nations and the African Union
are working hand in hand. We attach importance in this
regard to the Security Council's ongoing strong support
for the mediation undertaken by the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel.

On 1 July, the transfer of authority from the
African-led International Support Mission in Mali
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali was the culmination of
a close and fruitful cooperation between the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States and the United Nations. The combined efforts
of these organizations have contributed to stabilizing
the political and security situation in Mali and opened
the way for the holding, on 28 July, of the first round of
the presidential election that is to conclude the political
transition in the country.

On the other side of the continent, in Somalia, the
combined efforts of the United Nations and the African
Union have opened a new page in the history of that
country. With the African Union Mission in Somalia,
significant territorial gains have been made over
the past 12 months. Since 3 June, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia has provided integrated
support to Somalia while strengthening the strategic
partnership and collaboration with the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in all areas related to
the consolidation of peace. In this context, we look
forward to the results of the upcoming joint review of
AMISOM. We welcome the intention of the African
Union to work closely with the Secretariat in the context
of that review.

We hope that the same fruitful cooperation will
soon be established between the United Nations and
the African Union to resolve the crisis in the Central
African Republic, following the decision of the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union to create
an African-led international mission support to that
country.

Before I conclude - while much more could, of
course, still be said with regard to the importance
of United Nations cooperation with other regional
organizations, in particular the League of Arab
States - allow me to address a topic that is close to
our heart, that is, the protection of children in armed
conflict. The contribution of regional and subregional
organizations and agreements to the protection of
children affected by armed conflict is undeniable, with
the regional cooperation initiative led by the African
Union against the Lord's Resistance Army being a good
illustration.

In general, the increasing involvement of regional
organizations in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
missions poses challenges for child protection, in
particular with regard to the rules of engagement and
the conduct of operations. We therefore welcome the
fact that the presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2013/12) reiterates the call made in the 17 June
presidential statement on children and armed conflict
(S/PRST/2013/8) for regional organizations to include
the protection of children in their policies, programmes
and planning activities and to assign child-protection
specialists to their field missions.

In this area as in others, the United Nations and
regional organizations can make a difference by working
together in a complementary manner. As a founding
Member of the United Nations, the European Union
and many regional organizations on the continent of
Europe, Luxembourg is a strong supporter of the cause
of cooperation and regional integration. The Council
can count on us to help to strengthen cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in the field of peace and security.

