Mr. Djani (Indonesia): The delegation of Indonesia
is pleased to join this Security Council open debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.

We thank the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, for his comprehensive briefing.

This year, we mark the fiftieth year of the Israeli
occupation of Palestine. But it is no happy anniversary.
Day by day, the blockade of Gaza, the illegal Wall
in the West Bank, the aggressive illegal settlement
expansions, the collective punishment being inflicted
on Palestinians, the perpetual use of violence, the
rejection of the self-determination of the Palestinian
people, and their lack of access to natural resources
all continue to worsen the situation on the ground.
As a result, the conflict poses a continuing threat
to international peace and security. In that regard,
members of the international community should
commit to pursue a just and lasting solution, one that
the two-State solution envisages.

Today, once again, we reaffirm our faith in
resolution 2334 (2016) of December 2016, and call for
its full and unfettered implementation. One should
recall that, in the quest to eliminate obstacles on the
road to peace, the Council in its wisdom has rejected
Israel's establishment of settlements in the Palestinian
territory occupied since 1967. It has declared the
settlements not simply to be illegal and a flagrant
violation of international law, but also a major obstacle
to the achievement of the two-State solution and to a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace. Regrettably, not
only has Israel continued to defy the Council, but we,
as Member States, have yet to receive the substantive
published report of the Secretary-General concerning
the implementation of the resolution. We join all
those who believe that this is a minimum standard in
moving forward.

It is matter of record that just three months after
the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), the Government
of Israel announced the construction of the first new
settlement in two decades in Emek Shilo in the West
Bank, as ifto challenge the Council. Nonetheless, as we
marked the fiftieth anniversary of the occupation here
at the United Nations last month, it was remarkable to
observe the increased interaction among stakeholders,
particularly between Palestinian and Israeli youth,
and greater support not only from the younger Jewish
community within the United States and Israel. We
believe this is a good sign for the future. We strongly
believe that Palestinian children deserve the same right
to be free in their own land, no less than the Israeli
children in their land.

We need to continue our support for the Palestinians
so they are not left behind, hence the importance
of supporting the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and its
work, including ensuring continued resources.

It is a matter of great significance that this debate
follows yet another unmasking of a new face of Israeli
aggression on Palestinians in the occupied territory,
in the form of the closure of the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
Essentially, any attack on the Al-Aqsa Mosque is to be
considered a very dangerous red line. The Government
and people of Indonesia strongly condemn it, as we do
any act of aggression capable of harming any holy site.
The closure of Al-Aqsa not only worsens the situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory, it signals to the
world how strongly Israel wishes to distance itself
from the two-State solution. The closure of Al-Aqsa
constitutes a blatant move of Israel in its continuing
effort to alter the geographic and demographic character
of Jerusalem.

The international community must prevail over the
attempts by the occupation force to alter the status quo
in the Holy City, in violation of its international and
humanitarian law. The closure is a flagrant violation of
the freedom of religion and the right to pray. Continuous
efforts to curtail and hamper the ability of worshippers
to enter the mosque not only contradict all the basic
tenet of decency, but will also worsen the situation,
not only in Jerusalem but in the rest of the world. It
will create more division and mistrust and further
animosity that will lead to radicalism and extremism.
My delegation therefore urges all sides to make an
honest effort to reduce tensions, restore calm, end the
crisis and seek a solution that would ensure public
safety and the security of the site, while maintaining
the status quo of the Holy City.

If need be, the international community could
explore the possibility of ensuring that the holy
Mosque of Al-Aqsa remains under United Nations
international protection and supervision so as to ensure
that all worshippers are able to conduct their religious
activities in peace and harmony. We have to ensure
that an international mechanism exists to forestall any
recurrence of impulsive actions by Israel, such as the
closure of the holy Mosque.

Although my delegation will not condone the
use of violence, but we also cannot - and I repeat,
cannot - tolerate the systemic violation and abuse
of the fundamental rights of the Palestinian people,
including their right to observe their religious practices
and the very existence of their dignity as human beings.
No human rights are human rights, unless and until the
occupying Power yields to the Palestinians their human
rights. In that regard, I once again say that enough
is enough.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing the message
that, unless there is a genuine intention by Israel to
find a lasting two-State solution, we will continue to
have countless crises on our hands. The world cannot
survive ever-more crises. Do we have to wait another
50 years to see a free and independent Palestine? Like
any peace-loving country with a conscience and a
measure of humanity, Indonesia will remain relentless
in its support for the Palestinian cause.

Finally, it is sad to see the reality of Palestinian
lives in Jerusalem. People have lost children, families,
belongings and lands. Now, they have lost the right to
pray in the most holy of mosques. What more is left of
human dignity?

