Mr. Lancry (Israel): Mr. President, at the outset,
I wish to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council, and I wish you
much success in this capacity. I wish also to thank your
predecessor, the Ambassador of Tunisia, for his most
able leadership.

Yesterday, the Council heard a statement by the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Israel, Mr. Shimon Peres. I believe that Minister
Peres clearly described the position of the Israeli
Government on all issues pertaining to the situation in
the Middle East and specifically to the deliberations at
hand, those regarding an international presence in the
territories. I wish to thank the members of the Council
for yesterday's constructive dialogue and for their
obvious concern for peace and security for all the
peoples of the region.

Mr. Peres articulated a vision of cooperation and
coexistence between Israel and the Palestinians, one in
which economic cooperation has transcended territorial
conflict and facilitated its resolution. He spoke of the
primary importance that the new Israeli Government
attaches to the pursuit of peace. Indeed, he observed
that the current crisis in the peace process is not
exclusively territorial, but emotional as well. Though I
do not wish to be redundant, I do wish to add my voice
to Mr. Peres' voice in cautioning the Council, at this
extremely sensitive time, when tensions and emotions
are running high, not to add a new, complicating factor
to an already difficult situation.

At this point, I should like to recall a statement
made by that late, great statesman, French President
Francois Mitterrand, commenting, in a context that was
not totally similar, on the need to enhance international
intervention during the Bosnian conflict. He said, "Let
us not add war to war".

Today's meeting comes as no surprise to us. The
recent actions of the Palestinians, including
pronouncements in the media and documents circulated
by the Permanent Observer of Palestine - my
colleague, Ambassador Nasser Al-Kidwa - have made
no secret of the fact that the Palestinians wish to see
the Security Council intervene in this matter. This
initiative was prepared weeks ago and has been
undertaken without even giving the new Israeli
Government a chance to reassess the situation.

Thus, we believe that the initiative under
discussion today is part of a larger strategy. The
Palestinians often speak - as my dear colleague,
Ambassador Al-Kidwa, just did - of their strategic
choice for peace. This, we believe, is a genuine
Palestinian aspiration. Where we part ways, however,
is in how we seek to achieve such a peace. Do we wish
to make peace through dialogue and negotiation, or
through violence and terror?

A prominent European statesman put it this way:
one cannot search for peace with a pen in one hand and
a bomb in the other. Now the Palestinians want a pen in
one hand, a bomb in the other, and an international
shield in between.

The Palestinian intifada, as it has existed for
nearly six months now, is incompatible with
international protection. Not once, in a confrontation
that is almost half a year old, has Chairman Arafat, as
the leader of the Palestinians, called for an end to the
violence. Are the Palestinians, by asking for an
international protection force, now implying a
renunciation of violence?

The situation as it exists in the Palestinian
territories today is not one of a threatened people who
are in dire need of protection. Indeed, the only thing
the Palestinians need protection from is the
consequences oftheir own actions.

Since the last time the Council met to discuss this
issue, it has become widely acknowledged that the
responsibility for the violence lies with the
Palestinians. This has been Israel's contention all
along, but developments in recent months have made
this truth incontrovertible. I should like to mention just
a few brief points that serve to illustrate this assertion.

First, it is important to ask, as did Cicero in
ancient Rome, "Qui bono?" Who is benefiting?
Without question, the Palestinians have benefited
tremendously from the international attention that they
have attracted. Since September, the international
media have trained their lenses squarely on the
Palestinians, and the Palestinians themselves have been
enormously successful at manipulating that attention to
their maximum advantage. Yesterday, Minister Peres
described an intercepted message in which Palestinians
were instructed not to begin throwing stones until CNN
reporters, who were caught in traffic, could arrive on
the scene.

Secondly, despite Chairman Arafat's
commitments to control terror and violence, as
enshrined in his letter to Prime Minister Rabin of 9
September 1993, and despite the understanding reached
at the Sharm el-Sheikh summit in October, Chairman
Arafat has still not called upon his people to stop the
intifada. Just this week, Chairman Arafat had such an
opportunity when he spoke to the Palestinian
Legislative Council in Gaza City, an address that was
carried on Palestinian radio. Had Chairman Arafat
issued such a call - as he had previously agreed - it
would have been an important first step towards the
immediate relief of the suffering of the Palestinian
people and would have made today's meeting
completely unnecessary. His failure to issue such a call
is a strong indication that the Chairman does not really
wish to see the violence brought to a close.

Thirdly, the Palestinian leadership has, over the
course of the past few months, consistently acted to
encourage rather than to quell the confrontations. In
this regard, I must recall the continuing incitement to
violence on television, on the radio, in newspapers and
in the mosques, as well as the release of convicted
terrorist prisoners from Palestinian Authority
prisons- an action that directly contributed to the
recent rise in terrorist attacks inside Israel. Besides
being a blatant violation of signed agreements with
Israel, these actions clearly demonstrate the central role
of the Palestinian leadership in perpetuating the
conflict, and they make it impossible to pursue a
dialogue with our Palestinian partners under the current
conditions.

Fourthly, there are the statements of Palestinian
officials themselves, who have admitted to the fact that
the Palestinian leadership made active preparations for
the outbreak of the hostilities as early as last July. The
Palestinian daily newspaper Al-Ayyam, on 6 December
2000, quoted Imad Al-Falouji, the Palestinian Minister
of Communications, as saying that the Palestinian
Authority had begun preparations for the outbreak of
the current intifada from the moment the Camp David
talks concluded, in accordance with instructions given
by Chairman Arafat himself. Mr. Al-Falouji went on to
state that Mr. Arafat launched this intifada as the
culminating stage of "Palestinian steadfastness" in the
negotiations, according to Al-Ayyam, 6 December
2000. More recently, Mr. Falouji reiterated the
involvement of the Palestinian leadership in
orchestrating the violence in a statement quoted by
Reuters on 4 March 2001.

The Oslo peace process was based on the
fundamental commitment of the Palestinian leadership
to renounce the use of violence and terrorism and to
settle all outstanding claims through peaceful bilateral
negotiations. This commitment was expressly stated in
the letter of Chairman Arafat to the late Prime Minister
of Israel, Yitzhak Rabin, on 9 September 1993. In the
letter Mr. Arafat stated,

"The PLO recognizes the right of the State
of Israel to exist in peace and security The
PLO commits itself to the Middle East peace
process and to a peaceful resolution of the
conflict between the two sides and declares that
all outstanding issues relating to permanent status
will be resolved through negotiations. The PLO
renounces the use of terrorism and other acts of
violence and will assume responsibility over all
PLO elements and personnel in order to assure
their compliance, prevent violations and
discipline violators."

It was only in response to these cardinal
undertakings that the Government of Israel recognized
the PLO as the legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people and agreed to formally negotiate
with it in the context of the Middle East peace process.

These letters of mutual recognition, to which we
have so often referred in past statements before the
Council, and which were exchanged just prior to the
signing of the Declaration of Principles in September
1993, constitute the underlying basis of the Israeli-
Palestinian peace process and of all subsequent
agreements concluded between the parties. As such,
any violation of the commitments contained in these
letters undermines the very foundation of the peace
process and imperils the achievement of its noble
objectives.

The new Israeli Government, under the leadership
of Ariel Sharon, wants nothing more than to achieve a
just and lasting peace settlement with the Palestinians.
The Government has frozen settlement construction
and has decided against any acts of collective
punishment, not because it was forced to do so, but out
of a real and genuine desire for peace. As Minister
Peres said yesterday, peace is the chief objective of the
present Government. To that end, we must quickly
resume negotiations, though in an atmosphere of calm
and tranquillity, not through a vicious cycle of
violence.

The current Palestinian initiative requests that the
Council send a mission of international observers to the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip. This is an initiative that
is completely unnecessary.

Chairman Arafat has the ability to protect the
lives of his people himself. All he needs to do, and
indeed all we are asking of him, is to publicly call upon
his people to stop the confrontation. Though he has
promised us repeatedly that he would take such a step,
he has ignored his many opportunities to do so.

Moreover, the current Palestinian initiative
represents a blatant attempt to obscure their strategic
choice, and as such, the Security Council must not be a
party to it. The United Nations cannot be called upon
to put out fires on behalf of the same party that has
kindled the flames. Such a precedent would be
disastrous since it would effectively send a message to
the Palestinians - not to mention every other
aggrieved people of the world 4 that violence and
aggression will lead to sympathy and international
protection.

The Council must also recognize that sending
United Nations personnel to the territories while the
intifada continues has the potential to actually escalate
the violence and further destabilize the region. The
Palestinians have, at least for the time being, elected to
pursue the path of confrontation as a means to achieve
their political goals. An international presence would
be interpreted as sanctioning this strategy, and would
therefore solidify the Palestinians' refusal to put down
their weapons, negotiate with Israel and reach a
compromise agreement. And, as I have already
mentioned, the mere presence of international
observers would, as has occurred in the past with
regard to the international media, lead the Palestinians
to provoke further confrontations. Indeed, the presence
of United Nations personnel would create a significant
incentive for the Palestinians to continue the violent
struggle. More significantly, it would not succeed in
ending the violence, since observers are unable to stop
terrorism.

Thus, peace and security would not be enhanced
by an international force. A peace agreement would not
be brought closer; it would be moved farther away. The
Security Council, as the body charged with maintaining
international peace and security, would be highly
inspired if it would refrain from any action that would
undermine this objective. If the international
community wishes to see a return to dialogue and
negotiation and the ultimate realization of the
legitimate aspirations and needs of both parties through
a peaceful process, it must insist that the Palestinians
stop the violence, which they have initiated, and refrain
from actions that may be construed as endorsing
violence. Palestinians and Israelis working together:
this is the only way to end the spiral of violence and
move towards a more peaceful future.

It is also worth reminding the Council that there
is already an international delegation that will be
arriving in the region next week. The Mitchell
commission, with which the Government of Israel has
expressed its willingness to cooperate fully, will report
to the President of the United States and the Secretary-
General of the United Nations on the nature and causes
of the current violence.

Contrary to allegations and gross mistranslations
and misrepresentations of Israel's policies in the face
of continuous terrorist threats, our armed forces are not
seeking to suffocate the Palestinian people. As Minister
Peres said, we seek the advancement and prosperity of
the Palestinian people and are willing to work harder
towards that goal together with other nations of the
world. The present security situation in Israel,
however, is real and dangerous. Just this week, police
sappers thwarted a car-bomb attack outside the town of
Beit Shemesh. In recent weeks we have seen terrorist
bombings in Netanya, Jerusalem and the Mei-Ami
junction. As far as I understand, at least Netanya and
the Mei-Ami junction are not places where illegal
settlements are located in Israel. I say this because
there has been an attempt by my Palestinian colleague
to plant some confusion about the terrorist activities
that occur in Israel itself, not in the territories.

We have experienced abductions and murders.
Our citizens are being shot and killed as they drive to
and from their homes, including inside of Israel, not
only in the territories. This has become a daily aspect
of life in Israel that cannot be tolerated by any Israeli
Government. It is completely wrong and irresponsible
to portray Israel's response to this constantly looming
threat as a punitive action taken against the Palestinian
people.

Israel has never, and will never, initiate conflict
with the Palestinians. They are our neighbours and our
partners in peace. A concerted effort on the part of the
Palestinian leadership to control violence and terror
would enable Israel to ease restrictions in the territories
and work again, as we have in the past, to improve the
quality of our coexistence. It is the encouragement of
confrontation, and the lack of will to bring it to an end,
that have brought needless hardships to the civilian
population.

It cannot be emphasized enough: peace and
violence are mutually exclusive; you must abandon one
in order to get the other. What is needed from the
Security Council is not intervention, but support for the
parties and their bilateral efforts to achieve peace. The
Security Council must encourage all relevant parties to
be careful with their words, to refrain from language
that will incite.

I would urge Council members to consider, above
all else, whether an international presence will truly
advance our common goal of peace and reconciliation.
I believe that the deployment of such a force - and I
stress this - while the intifada is still being employed
as a strategic tool for political gain would, rather than
bringing calm and quiet, be a recipe for long-term
instability in the region.

I wish to conclude by calling out in peace to the
Palestinian people on behalf of the Government and
people of Israel. Let us strive to rejuvenate the spirit
embodied in the letters of mutual recognition, broaden
the channels of communication and enhance the sense
of goodwill and brotherhood between our two peoples.
Let us join together in creating an environment of
peace and coexistence that will serve as a model for the
entire region. Our hand is extended, our leadership is
willing and our people are eager.
