Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I wish to express our
honour and pleasure that you, Madam President, are
presiding over the work of the Security Council today.
We are thankful to you for the initiative taken by the
delegation of the Philippines in proposing for debate an
issue as important as the role of civil society in post-
conflict peace-building. We are also thankful to
Ambassador Rasi, President of the Economic and
Social Council, Mr. Caillaux, Secretary-General of
CARE International and Mr. Martin, Vice-President of
the International Center for Transitional Justice, for
having so ably introduced the item on the Council's
agenda.
Governments and the United Nations system do
not deal in isolation with the complex challenges of
post-conflict situations. Indeed, the success of peace-
building efforts requires political wisdom, the
mobilization of a wide range of actors and the ability to
make full use of the expertise, resourcefulness and
other comparative advantages of non-State sectors of
society. Organized civil society may play a central role
in relieving governmental structures strained by peace-
building efforts. It should be seen as an effective
partner in reconstruction efforts, and its work in the
field, such as humanitarian assistance, poverty
alleviation and the protection of human rights, can
make post-conflict management considerably easier by
helping diffuse tensions that have the potential to
rekindle conflict. Moreover, its work tends to be very
cost-effective in times of tight budgets.

In order to take full advantage of civil society's
contribution to post-conflict peace-building, we should,
in the first instance, consolidate the active dialogue and
cooperation between it and the Council. The non-
governmental organization (NGO) Working Group on
the Security Council, established in 1995, is now a
useful forum for debate, equally beneficial to Council
members and NGO constituencies, providing a two-
way flow of information and expertise.

In addition, dialogue can be furthered by
resorting in a more systematic way to meetings under
the Arria formula, which allow the particular
experience and insight of NGOs to help in the
Council's debates. Civil society and NGO
representatives should have a greater opportunity to
brief Council members, provide answers to their
questions and be fully updated on Council activities.
The particular role played by the representatives of
civil society at the national and local levels cannot be
dispensed with, as they usually have the benefit of life-
long knowledge of the characteristics and realities of
the local economic, cultural and social environment.
The Council can benefit from that knowledge when
assessing the needs on the ground. The Council's
missions, one of which is taking place now in West
Africa, offer unique opportunities for such an
assessment through unobstructed exchanges with civil
society, free from constraints.

However, the contribution of civil society to
peace-building is not limited to the exchange of ideas.
Inclusion of a significant number of sectors of civil
society in peace-building has increased chances for
stable and lasting peace. Assessment by independent
actors closer to the field can provide crucial inputs to
peace-building. Research networks, for instance, can
interpret information, thus strengthening early-warning
capabilities with respect to problems in post-conflict
peace-building. In a similar way, local civil society
leadership, which has strong ties to communities, can
detect tensions, unrest and sources of imbalance long
before Governments or peace-builders perceive them.
Their expertise and contact with society can also be
useful in the elaboration of exit strategies, as they can
help avoid premature counterproductive withdrawals
that would jeopardize the results of the international
effort.

In addition, peace-building efforts already rely on
the participation in post-conflict situations of NGOs as
members of a larger partnership. NGOs have been
called upon to provide assistance and a wide range of
services. Humanitarian organizations in particular have
been a key factor in supporting and protecting victims,
especially women and children, in situations of conflict
when other forms of protection are not available. Their
voice should continue to be heard during the peace-
building process. The ability of community leaders and
NGOs to provide creative solutions for fulfilling a
community's needs can help increase complementarity
between governmental efforts and civil society
initiatives. Creative solutions, including the sharing of
limited resources, shelter and information, can
sometimes fill gaps in peace-building.

As is well known, civil society is not monolithic
and uniform. In this composite of very diverse and
dissimilar groups, we must be able to identify the
representatives of true public interest that can be active
in helping to promote peace. Authentic representatives
of civil society must not be confused with pressure
groups, lobby groups and others, whose purposes do
not necessarily reflect the legitimate aspirations of the
people.

Governments must use regulations to balance
conflicting interests. Thus, State regulation and
coordination are fundamental to enhancing synergy
among the various partners in peace-building. The
Security Council must keep in mind the need to
encourage civil society actors to behave responsibly
and constructively in the promotion of peace, tolerance
and reconciliation. In that regard, special attention
should be paid to the role of the media in post-conflict
situations. As the world saw in Kosovo last March, the
media's power of penetration and influence can be
misused to sow hatred and incite violence. The same
ability to reach the masses, though, could be put to the
service of the cause of democracy and human rights
standards, which are key to the success of peace-
building and to preventing the recurrence of conflict.
The positive contribution of the media to the peace-
building process is therefore particularly valuable.

The Panel of Eminent Persons on United N ations-
Civil Society Relations, established by the Secretary-
General to review the guidelines in practices regarding
that field, concluded that we need constructive
engagement with civil society in order to be able better
to identify global priorities and to mobilize all
available resources to address the complex challenges
of today.

The Panel, chaired by former Brazilian President
Fernando Henrique Cardoso, sees this opening up of
the United Nations not as a threat but as a "powerful
way to reinvigorate the intergovernmental process
itself." Let me add that the Panel seeks to correct the
representational imbalance at the United Nations
between non-governmental organizations from the
South and those from the North.

We consider dialogue, positive participation and
partnership as cornerstones of a strategy of
empowerment that will allow civil society to become
an even more active partner in peace-building and no
longer be only the main, passive victim of conflict. We
are convinced that supporting a strong, participative
civil society amounts to supporting the cause of peace
and stability.

