Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Jamal Benomar, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Yemen, for his
briefing, as well as Mr. Abdul Latif Bin Rashid Al
Zayani, Secretary General of the Gulf Cooperation
Council, and Mr. Abubaker A. Al-Qirbi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Yemen, for their statements.

The process of political settlement in Yemen is in
a crucial phase. The National Dialogue Conference is
close to completion and is meant to lay the basis for
addressing the country's political, social and economic
challenges. It is a lengthy and difficult process, but it
is important that it is being carried out by the Yemenis
themselves through substantive negotiations and
consensus-building. On balance, it is adhering to the
timetable set forth in the implementation mechanism of
the Riyadh agreements.

We support President Mansour's efforts to bring
about broad reform of Yemeni society. We call on
all Yemenis to assist in these efforts and to do their
utmost to prevent any recurrence of civil confrontation.
Together with political assistance, measures need to
be taken to provide the country with effective social
and economic assistance. The priorities should be
determined by the Yemeni Government itself based
on the priority requirements of the reform agenda.
Interference in internal affairs is unacceptable
and the primary responsibility for improving the
socioeconomic situation in the country lies with the
Yemenis themselves.

One cannot say that the political process and
comprehensive reforms have been successful while
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula and the affiliated
Ansar al-Sharia are operating in the country and efforts
to sabotage infrastructure sites and attacks against
Government representatives continue. We are disturbed
by the spate of attacks perpetrated by terrorists against
military and police in the province of Shabwa on
21 September. All such manifestations and threats must
be fought relentlessly.

In conclusion, we commend the efforts of the
Secretary- General andhis SpecialAdviser, Mr. Benomar,
in seeking compromises between representatives from
across the Yemeni political spectrum. We also thank
the humanitarian agencies of the United Nations system
for their assistance in addressing the complex social
and economic challenges of the country.

It is important that the collective efforts of the
Yemenis and the world community bear fruit. Despite
the challenges, the country has been able to avoid sliding
into full-scale confrontation. Overall, civil peace has
been upheld in areas of ethnic and religious diversity.
Yemen has provided an example of how domestic crises
can be overcome through the National Dialogue and
diplomacy with reasonable outside assistance. For its
part, Russia will continue to provide the Yemeni people
the assistance they need in the political transformation
process and in addressing the critical economic, social
and humanitarian challenges.

