Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me thank Under-
Secretary-General DiCarlo and Mr. Lamberto Zannier
for their contributions to today's briefing.

We strongly believe that the Russian aggression
against Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity
is a direct threat to international peace and security.
At the same time, the Ukrainian legitimate authorities'
adoption of a law is not. We would like to use this
opportunity to underline a few facts about the current
crisis in and around Ukraine, which has been provoked
and deliberately fuelled by the Russian Federation
since 2014.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission regularly
reports about ceasefire violations, explosions and
incidents. The Monitoring Mission's observers are
recording hundreds of ceasefire violations each day,
including the deployment of weapons prohibited under
the Minsk agreements. The overwhelming majority of
ceasefire violations, illegal deployments and movement
restrictions are committed by Russia-backed and
-controlled illegal military formations in the areas
of Donbas that are not controlled by the Ukrainian
Government. We regret that the Russia-controlled
armed formations continue to undermine the efficiency
of the Special Monitoring Mission by restricting its
freedom of movement, intimidating monitors and
attacking the Mission's assets.

No one should ever doubt that Russia's attack against
Ukraine in 2014 and its illegal annexation of Crimea
was an act of aggression and a flagrant Violation of the
prohibition on the use of force. It was Russia that used
a sham referendum to take over a part of a sovereign
country, not Ukraine. Russian ships attacked vessels
and captured their crew in the Kerch Strait. Again, that
was not Ukraine. In that regard, Ukraine has the right
to promote its national language.

The list goes on and on: illegal elections in
non-Government controlled areas of Ukraine in 2018,
the introduction of the ruble zone and the official
recognition of documents used by the illegal military
bodies of certain parts of Donbas. How can one still
try to equate the actions of both sides and call on both
parties to show restraint and goodwill?

In May, the International Tribunal for the Law of the
Sea ruled that Russia must immediately release vessels
captured in the Kerch Strait and free the 24 servicemen.
It has been nearly two months since the ruling and
Russia continues to ignore the legally binding decision,
offering instead to have the servicemen transferred and
tried on Ukrainian soil according to Russian law, which
is obviously unacceptable.

Despite Russia's failure to implement its security
commitments, the Ukrainian Government has met a
number of its political commitments - the President
has signed a law on special status for Donbas, the
Verkhovna Rada has passed an amnesty law and
Ukraine has repeatedly called for an exchange of
detainees. Lately, the Ukrainian side demonstrated its
commitment to a constructive approach to achieve the
conflict's resolution by initiating a withdrawal of its
forces near Stanytsia Luhanska.

The response remains grim. Despite the progress
achieved on disengagement in Stanytsia Luhanska,
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission still observes a
Russian military presence in areas where there should be
none. Moreover, the Russian Federation did not support
the so-called harvest ceasefire suggested by Ukraine at
the Trilateral Contact Group meeting. Further political
steps - including local elections in Donbas, held under
Ukrainian law - are impossible while parts of eastern
Ukraine remain under Russia's control.

Russia continues its policy of flagrant disregard
for the fundamental principles of international law
with respect to Ukraine. Russia's actions continue to
undermine the peace process, particularly the Minsk
agreements of2014 and 2015, which define the modalities
for a permanent ceasefire and provide for Ukraine's
reintegration of temporarily occupied territories.

During the previous Council meeting on this crisis
in April (see S/PV.8516), Poland condemned Russia's
decision to provide expedited Russian citizenship to
Ukrainian citizens living in the Russian-controlled
areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine.
It was the first and - most certainly - will not be
the last challenge the Russian authorities pose to
the new President of Ukraine. It is disappointing to
see that Russia is not able to respond positively and
constructively. Moscow can only continue its tactics of
throwing logs to trip up other people.

Russia's continued fuelling of tensions in Donbas
remains a direct challenge to international security,
with grave implications for the international legal order
that protects the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
all States. The international community should neither
accept nor recognize such a cascade of disregard for
the fundamental principles of international law and
should respond accordingly to Russia's unacceptable
and illegal behaviour.

Last, but not least, I would like to draw the
Council's attention to the upcoming fifth anniversary of
the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, which
claimed the lives of 298 victims from 17 countries. We
pay tribute to those who lost their lives and reassure
the families of the victims that we will support the
efforts of investigators to establish truth, justice and
accountability for the downing of Flight MH-17. We
call on all States, including the Russian Federation, to
fully cooperate with efforts to establish accountability
for the downing of Flight MH-17, in line with resolution
2166 (2014).

In conclusion, I once again underline Poland's
unwavering support for Ukraine's independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity within its
internationally recognized borders.

