Judge Meron: It is my privilege to appear before
the Security Council once again in two capacities, as
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and as President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. During
my remarks today, I shall endeavour not to repeat the
content of the written reports for those two institutions,
but will instead highlight a few of the key issues
contained therein.

Before doing so, however, I would like to
congratulate Ambassador Vitaly Churkin of the
Russian Federation on his country's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. The Russian
Federation, as a permanent member of the Council,
has a continuing and critical role to play in relation to
matters of international criminal justice, and I wish to
extend to the Russian Federation my best wishes for its
presidency.

I would like to underscore my appreciation for the
work and dedication of the members of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, and to
warmly welcome Chile and Ambassador Cristian
Barros Melet to their new leadership role in the Working
Group. Finally, I wish to recognize the continuing
support and assistance provided to the ICTY and the
Mechanism by the Office of the Legal Counsel and by
the Legal Counsel himself, and to extend my deepest
gratitude to all concerned.

Since its establishment by the Council, the ICTY has
been the subject of diverse and ambitious expectations.
For some observers, the Tribunal is the means by which
victims and witnesses of horrific crimes have had
and continue to have an opportunity to be heard and
to obtain a sense ofjustice. For others, the Tribunal's
judgements, as well as the extraordinary quantum of
evidence presented in its proceedings more generally,
provide an avenue for understanding the tragic events
that devastated families and communities across the
region of the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s. Some
observers and commentators also believe that bringing
peace and reconciliation to the affected region is a core
part of the Tribunal's mission.

I need not tell the members of the Council that
these different hopes and ideals for internationaljustice
can often be in tension, if not outright conflict, with
each other. Nor need I tell members how the varying
visions that shape observers' perceptions of the roles
of international criminal courts invariably impact
the understanding of the courts' work and of their
achievements and failings.

Whatever different perceptions and expectations
there may be about what it is that courts like the ICTY
should achieve, however, I believe that all will agree
that as a court, our mandate is to apply the law to the
facts in a neutral manner, thereby ensuring the fair
trials and appeals of those who have been accused of
individual criminal responsibility for atrocities. And I
believe that all may also agree that the establishment of
the ICTY more than two decades ago demonstrated a
profound commitment on the part of the Council, acting
on behalf of the international community, to ensuring
accountability for widespread and flagrant violations of
international humanitarian law through procedures and
proceedings that reflect an abiding respect for fairness
and due process of law - that reflect, in essence, a
commitment to the rule of law.

The significance of this expression of commitment
should not be underestimated. It is a devastating truth
that the mere existence of the law cannot stop all
conflict or all brutality. Murder and rape, theft and
destruction - these acts have occurred since time
immemorial and, tragically, they continue to this day.
But it is through the law, I would suggest, and through
our respect for the rule of law that our shared values are
expressed and our moral imperatives articulated. It is
through the law and respect for the rule of law that we
affirm our own expectations about the kind of world in
which we wish to live.

More than 20 years ago, the Council unanimously
affirmed the importance of ensuring accountability and
respect for the rule of law when it established the ICTY.

In 2010, the Council renewed its commitment to these
same principles by creating the Mechanism. In the six
months since I last appeared before the Council (see S/PV.7073), the principals and staff of the Mechanism
have continued to carry out the mandate entrusted to it
with both care and commitment. As described in greater
detail in my written report (8/2014/351, annex I), the
Mechanism is providing Vital services to vulnerable
victims and witnesses, supervising the enforcement
of sentences across two continents, and addressing a
wide range of requests for assistance from national
jurisdictions, among other tasks.

During the reporting period, the Mechanism has
handled a significant amount and range of judicial
work, involving everything from allegations of false
testimony to requests for review and the variation
of witness protection measures. The hearing in the
Mechanism's first appeal from judgement will be
conducted soon, and ajudgement in the case is expected
before the end of the year.

The Mechanism's archives section also continues
to work closely with the staff of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the ICTY on
the preparation and transfer of records to the custody of
the Mechanism, and progress is being made in relation
to the construction of the Mechanism's permanent
premises in Arusha. My colleagues and I are most
grateful to the Government of the United Republic
of Tanzania for its ongoing, excellent cooperation in
relation to the preparations for these new premises.

The dedication and talents of the Mechanism's
excellent staff, hailing from more than 45 different
States, have played an invaluable role in making all
of this possible. However, I would be remiss ifI did
not note with gratitude the tremendous support that
the Mechanism receives from valued colleagues at the
ICTR and the ICTY. As those two Tribunals complete
their own work and downsize their operations, the
Mechanism is relying less and less on their support.
But even as this occurs, the principals and staff of the
Mechanism will continue to work closely with their
counterparts at the ICTR and the ICTY to ensure a
smooth transition of remaining functions and services
to the Mechanism.

I would be likewise remiss ifI did not stress how
vital the continued support and cooperation of Member
States are to the fulfilment ofthe Mechanism's mandate.
The Mechanism relies on States to enforce sentences
pronounced by the ICTR, the ICTY and the Mechanism
itself, and it is actively seeking to establish new
enforcement agreements with States. The cooperation
of States is also particularly vital when it comes to the
apprehension of the remaining fugitives.

When the Council established the Mechanism in
2010, all States were urged to intensify cooperation and
render all assistance necessary to achieve the arrest and
surrender of all remaining fugitives. Just a few months
ago, the Council renewed its entreaty in resolution
2150 (2014), calling upon all States to cooperate in the
arrest and prosecution of the remaining nine fugitives
indicted by the ICTR, three of whose cases remain with
the Mechanism. Such cooperation is imperative if the
international community's commitment to ensuring
accountability is to have meaning.

I would now like to turn to discuss the ICTY,
the first ad hoc tribunal created by the Council and
a ground-breaking institution that is currently in the
process of finishing its final few cases.

As regards the Tribunal's remaining trials,
three of them - those of the late-arrested accused
Messrs. Hadiie, Karadzie and Mladie - are
continuing in line with earlier forecasts for judgement
delivery, although all three are expected to continue
past 31 December, as I had previously informed the
Council. The fourth and final case still at trial - that
of Mr. Seselj - presents a situation sui generis, as
described in my written report.

Since my last appearance before the Council,
judgements in two appeals have been issued, and two
more are expected by the end of this year. As previously
reported to the Council, it is currently anticipated that
despite the Tribunal's continuing efforts, it will have
difficulty in completing the appeals in the remaining
three appeal cases by 31 December, and the projected
schedule of one of those cases has suffered a setback.
Details on all of these matters and other updates
regarding the Tribunal are contained in my written
report.

Even as the Tribunal's judicial work advances, the
ICTY continues to move towards closing its doors and
is taking active steps to downsize its operations. A
variety of factors, many beyond the scope of the case
management process, continue to pose challenges as
we strive to maintain previously forecast judgement
delivery dates. I can assure the Council, however,
that the committed judges and staff of the Tribunal
are making every effort to ensure that the Tribunal's

nine remaining cases are speedily concluded while still
respecting all necessary procedural safeguards.
International courts cannot resolve long-running
historical conflicts on their own. Courts must be part
of a panoply of transitional justice measures, including
broader societal efforts spearheaded by community
leaders, focused on history, memory, responsibility
and respect for the rule of law. The need for a broader
approach such as this should not, however, detract from
our appreciation for the Tribunal's groundbreaking role
and the valuable contributions of international criminal
justice more generally.

Ensuring accountability for the worst of crimes
and respect for the rule of law is sometimes not easy,
and it is certainly not cost-free. But it is essential. For
the protection of men, women and children, and for the
preservation of our common values, the commitments
made by the Security Council more than two decades
ago, and renewed in 2010 and again this very year, must
not be forsaken. It is because of this that the Mechanism
was created, that the ICTY is diligently and carefully
completing its final few cases before it closes, and that a
successful conclusion to the remaining work entrusted
to both institutions is still so tremendously important.

I am, as ever, deeply grateful to the members of
the Council and the international community for their
continued support as my colleagues and the dedicated
staff of the ICTY and the Mechanism carry out the
mandates the Council has entrusted to us.

