Mr. Somavia (Chile)(interpretation from Spanish):
First of all, I wish to welcome the representatives of Zaire,
Rwanda and Burundi to the Council as it considers an item
that affects their national realities so directly in a debate
that I am sure they would all have preferred to be
unnecessary.

Faced with a humanitarian tragedy like the one
unfolding in eastern Zaire, the decision the Security Council
is about to adopt is, as others have said, of the utmost
urgency. It seems important to begin by expressing thanks.
My delegation would first like to thank the Secretary-
General, who has kept us constantly abreast of the situation
in the region and has even proposed the formula we will
adopt today. We would thank Mrs. Ogata, who only three
weeks ago, as the Ambassador of Guinea-Bissau has
reminded us, visited the Council and, just before leaving,
spoke a few words that still echo in my mind. She said,
"Do something. Do something so that my people will not
have to leave eastern Zaire." We thank the Government of
Germany, which initially proposed that the Security Council
discuss this subject, and the Government of France, which
submitted a concrete initiative and was a sponsor of
resolution 1078 (1996).

Most especially, my Government wishes to thank the
Government of Canada for taking the initiative of
coordinating the efforts leading to the creation, deployment
and conduct of a multinational force for humanitarian
assistance in Zaire. Also bestowing honour upon Canada is
the Secretary-General's appointment of Ambassador
Raymond Chretien of Canada as Special Envoy to the
region. We also wish to thank all the countries that have
clearly shown interest in contributing to this mission -
important countries with means, some of which have
operational capabilities not possessed by all Members of the

 

United Nations. It does them honour that they are ready
to risk their people - officials and soldiers - in this
operation. Countries that have indicated the desire to
participate in the mission include those from Latin
America and the Caribbean, such as Argentina and Brazil,
a fact that I should like to highlight.

Finally, I cannot fail to recognize the heavy burden
that Zaire has had to bear in recent years as a result of
the number of refugees in its territory for reasons beyond
its control.

The Security Council is today shouldering its
responsibilities. With resolution 1078 (1996) and the draft
resolution that will be adopted today, the Security Council
is moving from being an interested observer to becoming
a direct participant, using its powers under the Charter to
deal with a humanitarian crisis of great magnitude, for
which it has the means to act. Those means are now
being put into action.

The tragedy faced by the displaced persons and
refugees who have fled the camps and the confrontations
in eastern Zaire obliged us to act as soon as possible. The
truth is that today we do not know how many are dead
and wounded, or whether, as the Secretary-General said
a few days ago, we are confronting a new genocide, this
time provoked by starvation and disease.

After welcoming the offers of Member States
concerning the establishment of a multinational force for
humanitarian purposes, the draft resolution that we are to
adopt states that, acting under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter, the Council authorizes Member States
cooperating with the Secretary-General to carry out the
humanitarian operation. This draft resolution has the
potential to be a historic one. It tries not to repeat the past
inaction of the Council with regard to Rwanda or the
errors made in the case of Somalia. The draft resolution,
we will adopt today could have been adopted earlier -
not only last Friday, but even last month or last year. The
draft resolution is timely and necessary today because of
the crisis being experienced now. However, this is a tardy
draft resolution, which demonstrates again the
international community's great difficulty in dealing
preventively with the items on the Security Council's
agenda.

My delegation believes that it is very important to
reiterate the references in resolution 1078 (1996) to the
costs of the operation. They will be met by the
participating States and through other voluntary

 

contributions. This, together with a trust fund of voluntary
contributions, will enable the African States to participate
in the multinational force, participation that Chile considers
absolutely indispensable.

Furthermore, in adopting this draft resolution we will
be responding to the request made to the Security Council
by African leaders meeting in Nairobi under the leadership
of President Moi of Kenya. Accordingly, its implementation
should be carried out in close coordination with the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the Governments
of the countries of the Great Lakes region. For us, the
Government of Zaire's agreement with the mission that is
being authorized has been especially decisive, as it will be
deployed on its territory.

The delegation of Chile reiterates that the most urgent
part of the mission will be to prevent the humanitarian
situation from deteriorating further and provide security to
the thousands of people who are in flight so that they can
have access to protected areas where they can find food,
water and medicine. It will thereby enable the humanitarian
agencies - those of the United Nations and of
non-governmental organizations - to help these people
meet their most essential needs.

However, as previous speakers have said, it is obvious
that the massive presence of refugees in eastern Zaire is
one of the main causes of the crisis in the region. That is
why the draft resolution also seeks the further objective of
facilitating a voluntary, orderly repatriation of refugees. If,
as the representative of Rwanda said, this has already begun
under conditions of security, so much the better. That can
only satisfy the goals of the international community. In
that way, the citizens of Rwanda can begin to come
together again, which is what we all want.

We should recall that resolution 1078 (1996) has some
very important provisions in this connection, which
supplement those we will be adopting today. It calls upon
the Secretary-General, in consultation with his Special
Envoy, to draw up a conceptual framework of the
operations and structure of a humanitarian task force with
the objective, among others, of assisting the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
in the voluntary repatriation of refugees to their countries
of origin, including through the establishment of
humanitarian corridors.

It is well known that the current crisis in eastern Zaire
is not an isolated event, but is intrinsically connected to
situations in other countries of the Great Lakes region. The

 

problem of refugees may be the main element linking
them together. A lasting solution to the situation of the
refugees will be possible only when the political and
security conditions - in Rwanda, Burundi, Zaire or other
countries where they may choose to stay - are such that
they can return to their places of origin. This makes it
necessary for all the regional leaders, together with the
international community, to study jointly the various
problems in the region and find a means of achieving a
definitive and agreed solution. This will be possible by
convening an international conference on peace, security
and development in the Great Lakes region, as proposed
to the international community by France some time ago.
One of the most urgent tasks of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General is to determine, together with the OAU
and regional leaders modalities for convening it.

Along with the aspiration, desire and will for a
useful regional conference, question comes to mind.
When we note the internal situations in the countries, we
can legitimately wonder whether the faction leaders want
a political solution to the problems in the region, or
whether they are simply talking about peace while
preparing final solutions through force and violence.

I believe that a genuinely political solution will be
found only if the leaders have the courage to shake the
hands of their so-called enemies. Without moral courage
on the part of the leaders fighting within each country,
there will be no political solution. That is what history
teaches us, and without such moral courage discussion on
the issue will continue in the Security Council. There can
be no doubt that the international community wants to
help the Great Lakes region, but it can help only those
who wish to take history by the hand and lead it
forward - not reliving the misgivings, anxieties and
mistrust of the past, but believing in the possibility of
envisaging a Great Lakes region in which there is peace
for all. That would not be a mere continuation of the
current situation. It would require a level of courage that
we have not yet seen from the leaders.

In conclusion, I should like to say that Chile feels
close to Africa and to the countries of the Great Lakes
region, as we have shown through our interest in Burundi.
Despite our geographical distance, there is no distance in
our feelings, no distance in our solidarity and no distance
in our political interest in seeking a regional solution.
Although we have only modest means, we nonetheless
wish to make a humanitarian contribution to the
implementation of the draft resolution before us because
we believe that our contribution is a symbol of our sense

 

of closeness with the region. It also indicates how we
understand our responsibilities in the Security Council.

