Mr. Menelaou (Cyprus): At the outset, I would
like to commend the Polish presidency for convening
this timely open debate on upholding international
law within the context of the maintenance of peace
and security.

Cyprus aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union and
wishes to make some additional remarks in its
national capacity.

International law and the Security Council are
inextricably linked. The United Nations is founded
on a legal instrument, the Charter of the United
Nations, and all of its activities are based on the legal
authority that instrument provides. The action of the
Security Council itself has important international
legal implications, such as those related to resolutions
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter. Despite being
legally binding, Council resolutions are unfortunately
not always upheld. Council resolutions on Cyprus, for
example, continue to be systematically violated.

It remains our conviction, particularly when
dealing with matters of peace and security, that the
obligation to act in accordance with the Charter, and
with international law in general, has the power not
only to prevent conflict but also to resolve it. In the
case of Cyprus, if the rules of international law had
not been violated by Turkey, the Cyprus problem
would not have arisen. If those rules were applied
today 4 in other words, if Turkey had implemented
what it preaches 4 the main aspects of the problem,
especially the international aspects, which form the
heart of the issue, could be resolved fairly for all parties
concerned and in the interest of international peace.

The Republic of Cyprus remains unequivocally
committed to the principle of the peaceful settlement
of disputes. Two examples of that are its steadfast
commitment and continued support to the United
Nations-brokered peace process in Cyprus and its
acceptance of the compulsory jurisdiction of the
International Court of Justice. That commitment is also
the cornerstone of our policy of trilateral partnerships,
which we have established with our neighbouring
countries 4 Greece, Israel, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon
and Palestine 4 founded on our adherence to the
need for stability and good-neighbourly relations as
the bedrock for peace and prosperity for all countries
and peoples in the extremely volatile region of the
Eastern Mediterranean.

Turning to the maritime domain, the same
adherence to international law, as reflected in the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS), has the potential to both prevent and
to resolve maritime conflict. With its universal and
unified character, the Convention effectively regulates
all activities in the largest space on the planet by setting
out the legal framework within which all activities
in the seas must be carried out. Considering that the
UNCLOS provisions reflect customary international
law, and are therefore binding on all States, we urge
States to act in conformity with the Convention and
refrain from actions in violation of Article 2, paragraph
4, of the Charter 4 prohibiting the threat and the
use of force and promote the peaceful settlement of
maritime disputes.

Turkey's actions in the Eastern Mediterranean have
escalated to the threat of use of force. They interfere
with the authority of Cyprus to exercise its inherent
and inalienable sovereign rights to explore and exploit
its offshore natural resources, and they constitute
a striking example of Turkey's gunboat-diplomacy
methods, thereby endangering the peace and security
of the region.

While acknowledging the role of the veto as a
tool that can provide the needed checks and balances
among major international actors, Cyprus reiterates its
unequivocal support for the code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. We also welcome the
historic activation of the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) over the crime of aggression as
of 17 July, thereby allowing ICC action following a
referral by the Security Council. It is significant that by
virtue of its mandate, the Council will be able to do so
without restrictions and with respect to all States. We
see that development as eventually contributing to the
suppression ofacts ofaggression, cited in Article 1 ofthe
Charter as a primary purpose of the United Nations. We
also seize this opportunity to encourage the ratification
and implementation of the updated version of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court.
Moreover, with regard to recent developments, we
are seriously concerned about attempts to open the door
of Article 51 of the Charter to the threat of terrorism
in response to armed attacks perpetrated by non-State
actors, which carries the potential for escalating
violence and abusive invocations of self-defence.

Lastly, the Republic of Cyprus is concerned
with the serious escalation of the situation in Gaza,
resulting in loss of life. The situation puts into even
sharper focus the imperative need for the two sides
to resume negotiations for a peaceful resolution to
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict in the framework of
the two-State solution, which will be to the benefit
of both Palestinians and Israelis and will contribute
significantly towards peace and security for the
whole region. Cyprus maintains the position that the
final status of Jerusalem is to be determined through
negotiations on the basis of Council resolutions.

