Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would
first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April, and to thank you for having
convened this meeting to discuss a conflict whose
developments and specific implications are within the
purview of the entire world. I should also like to thank
the presidency of Norway for its excellent work last
month.

Our country associates itself with the statement
that will be made by Costa Rica later in the meeting on
behalf of the countries of the Rio Group.

Chile vigorously condemns both the horrific
suicide attacks against the civilian population of Israel
and the military actions being taken against Palestinian
cities at intolerable costs to their inhabitants. We also
condemn the attack against the headquarters of
President Yasser Arafat, the legitimate leader of the
Palestinian people. We consider these events an affront
to the civilized conscience of mankind and a threat to
international peace and security. Chile joins in the
overwhelming outcry of the international community
resolutely denouncing and repudiating the spiral of
violence and demanding its immediate cessation.

My country looks with concern and unease at the
fact that the violence affecting us is moving
dangerously and proportionately away from the efforts
of the international community to achieve peace. The
refusal of the parties to comply with Security Council
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002) has a serious
impact on the credibility of the United Nations and its
ability to act as an indispensable tool in the search for a
solution to the conflict. It thus also has an impact on
Member States and, accordingly, on our own ability to
comply with the principles and objectives set out in the
Charter in this regard.

As the Council has frequently indicated, only the
implementation of the Tenet plan and the speedy
realization of the measures contained in the Mitchell
report can create avenues towards peace. However, my
country understands that, in the light of the seriousness
of the current situation, we must focus on creating a
minimal degree of trust between the parties so that they
can set aside rigidity and retaliation and immediately
and simultaneously move forward towards
implementing a real ceasefire and a withdrawal of
Israeli forces from Palestinian cities, including
Ramallah. We call upon the President of the Palestinian
Authority to condemn terrorist acts and to call for a
cessation of all violent action. For its part, the
Government of Israel must put an end to the bellicose
actions against the Palestinian Authority and people.
That is the only responsible course of action.

Chile believes that those measures cannot be
carried out without the presence of a third party in the
field with a clear mandate bestowed by the Security
Council to verify compliance with the provisions to be
agreed once a ceasefire has been agreed. The Council
must continue to do its utmost to promote this
initiative, in keeping with the responsibility incumbent
upon it with regard to the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Chile reiterates the fact that there must be a just,

lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East on
the basis of resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and 1402 (2002), as well as the Madrid
principles. Likewise, we would like to stress the
essential role of the Palestinian Authority, which
continues to be the legitimate and indispensable partner
in the peace negotiations. We appeal for preserving the
physical integrity and restoring the freedom of
movement of its President. It is once again necessary to
reiterate the inalienable right of the Palestinian people
to establish an independent, viable and democratic
State, and Israel's right to live within secure and
internationally recognized borders.

Chile is proud to have large communities of
Palestinian and Jewish citizens. For over a century they
have made a rich contribution to our culture and
development. That is why Chile is experiencing great
sorrow at this conflict. We fervently wish that an end
be put to the bloodshed in a thrice holy land. We hope
that the Security Council, as a result of this debate, will
adopt unanimous and decisive measures leading to the
implementation of its resolutions in such a way as to
strongly encourage the end of the occupation of
Palestinian territories, as the only lasting solution to
the conflict.

