Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I wish to thank Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, for her briefing, all the more
valuable as it was informed by her recent visit to
Mali. I would also like to welcome the Malian Foreign
Minister, Ms. Kamissa Camara, who is participating in
a Security Council meeting for the first time.

I would like to begin by paying tribute to the
memory of Malian and foreign staff and soldiers who
lost their lives in Mali, whether they were civilian
victims or died while deployed on mission.

The implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, signed in Bamako in May and
June 2015, is the cornerstone for a sustainable solution
to the crisis in Mali. That commitment undertaken
by Malian parties, supported by the international
community, must lead to a comprehensive, good-
faith implementation of the various provisions of
the agreement. Belgium is greatly concerned about
the delays in its implementation, which undermines
peace, stability, development and reconciliation
in Mali. Worse still, it allows violence to spread, be
it in central Mali or the subregion. In accordance with
their own commitment in the road map of last March,
I therefore solemnly call on the three Malian parties
to the agreement, but also all stakeholders, to redouble
their efforts and show courage to ensure that the
provisions of the agreement become a reality, despite
the difficulties and obstacles, which, I am aware, are
sometimes significant.

At the same time, I would like to welcome all
the progress made since 2015, including the most
recent, such as the establishment of the accelerated
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process and the redeployment of part of the territorial
administration in the north of the country. I also
welcome the establishment of a working group on the
participation of women in the peace process, under
the leadership of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
which is a step towards more inclusive implementation
of the agreement. It is also essential to ensure that
the measures taken in implementation of the peace
agreement are sustainable and receive the necessary
funding to ensure their sustainability.

Finally, given the centrality of the peace agreement, I
would like to stress that Belgium welcomes the sanctions
imposed on those who hinder the implementation of the
agreement. Belgium will not oppose new sanctions in
the future if they prove necessary.

Let me stress two essential conditions for the return
of lasting peace: respect for human rights and, more
specifically, the fight against impunity.

Part of the Mopti and Segou regions, in central
Mali, remain affected by violence that shows no signs
of waning. In addition to terrorist acts, intercommunity
violence appears to be on the rise. That phenomenon
is worrisome in a country such as Mali, which is
historically a country of diversity and peaceful
coexistence. Terrorists and aggressive militias must
not be allowed to take root. I therefore encourage the
Government to exercise its sovereign authority by
ensuring the security of its population with the strictest
respect for human rights, as Mali undertook to do in
January 2018 during its Universal Periodic Review
before the Human Rights Council.

With the courage and responsibility they assumed,
which deserves respect, the Malian authorities publicly
acknowledged, on 19 June 2018, the existence of mass
graves involving certain members of the Malian armed
forces and announced the opening of a judicial inquiry.
We call on Mali to continue its efforts to open and
conclude the investigation. I also welcome the fact that
the International Commission of Inquiry has begun
its activities, and I encourage all parties involved
to cooperate fully with its work. I also hope that
MINUSMA - within the limits of its mandate - will
act in support of the authorities and also protect civilians
from the violence.

More generally, as the Council regularly points out,
the solution cannot be related only to security, although
that is essential. The aspirations expressed in terms of
governance and social services deserve to be heard.
Living together, the refusal to stigmatize specific
ethnic groups, local mediation and combating impunity
must all support the security response. Only Malians
hold the key, and MINUSMA must support them in
those efforts.

Belgium welcomes the development of an
integrated strategic framework by MINUSMA and
the United Nations country team. We call for its
finalization as soon as possible. It is essential that the
resources available to the United Nations as a whole in
Mali be used to the fullest and in the most efficient and
integrated way possible. Similarly, Belgium remains
attentive to the integrated nature of MINUSMA and
encourages all pillars to work together closely. Finally,
allow me to commend the efforts of all Mission staff,
and in particular Special Representative Annadif.

