Mr. Rishchynski (spoke in French): I thank you,
Sir, for this opportunity to express the opinions of
the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and its States members. In response to the
Security Council's letter of 6 September, I intend to
focus my remarks on the path forward for Sierra Leone
and the anticipated contribution of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC).

Sierra Leone faces an important moment in
its history. The elections scheduled for November
represent a crucial test and are widely viewed as a core
benchmark for peace consolidation. The Peacebuilding
Commission has monitored developments over the past
year, including through regular contact with Freetown
and by inviting the Chair of the National Electoral
Commission to New York to brief on preparations. As
Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen has just outlined in greater detail,
the necessary logistical and financial arrangements
are largely in place. There is good reason to expect
technically sound and well-managed elections.

(Spoke in English)

But the greatest challenge is political. All national
stakeholders must fulfil their responsibility to create an
environment conducive to successful elections. In each
of the Commission's previous visits, interlocutors have
raised concerns about persistent tensions between the
major political parties, the role of unprofessional media
willing to exacerbate political divides, and the risk that
irresponsible actors will encourage young people to
engage in politically-motivated violence. The United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra

Leone (UNIPSIL) deserves great credit for addressing
these challenges, particularly by following up on the
2009 joint communique, supporting non-State actors,
and facilitating the Declaration agreed by political
parties in May. These efforts have helped to establish a
common understanding of the parameters of legitimate
electoral competition, and it is now up to Sierra
Leoneans to exercise their democratic rights and accept
the resulting outcome.
With respect to the PBC, we intend to travel to
Freetown in late October to take stock of the situation and
engage with all relevant stakeholders, with a particular
focus on the political parties, civil society and media.
While there, we intend to stress the need to maintain
open, inclusive dialogue and to abide by outstanding
commitments made in the 2009 joint communique and
the political Declaration of May 2012. We shall share
the conclusions of that visit with the Security Council
upon our return, including with respect to any areas
requiring the attention of the international community.

While elections will remain the primary focus in the
near future, Sierra Leone also stands poised to transition
out of the immediate peacebuilding phase. This will
involve a number of important processes. A successor
to the Agenda for Change is under development by the
Government, the United Nations presence is likely to
change significantly, and Sierra Leone is piloting the
New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States. Given this
context, I would like to offer three general points that
merit consideration during the post-elections period.

(spoke in French)

First, several of the outstanding peacebuilding
challenges are long-term in nature. Addressing youth
unemployment, fighting corruption and combating
transnational crime will take sustained effort over a
substantial period of time. Progress in these areas will
also depend on developments outside Sierra Leone,
both in terms of the global economy and with respect to
the transnational threats plaguing West Africa. Even as
Sierra Leone increasingly prioritizes socio-economic
development, these issues must continue to be addressed.
In that regard, it is promising that the Agenda for
Prosperity will likely include pillars on employment,
natural resources management and governance. It will
also be especially important to ensure sustained support
for those areas of UNIPSIL's current engagement that
will require continuing attention in the context of a
reconfigured United Nations presence in Sierra Leone.

(spoke in English)

Secondly, as the configuration's consideration
of the second joint progress report on the Agenda for
Change has demonstrated, Sierra Leone has developed a
clear, coordinated and nationally owned approach. The
United Nations has played a key role in helping to align
international actors behind the single national strategy.
It can and should continue to play that role, even as
strategic priorities and institutional arrangements
evolve.
Thirdly, transitions inevitably risk producing
strategic and funding gaps. The Peacebuilding
Commission could, and stands ready, to play a potentially
useful role by helping to ensure overall coordination.
Sustained multilateral and bilateral assistance will be
especially important in the period before revenues from
the extractive sector reinforce Sierra Leone's budget
position. The configuration intends to engage more
extensively with those issues in the coming months.

Let me conclude by noting that much has been
invested and much gained in Sierra Leone in the
past years. The forthcoming elections and transition
period present risks, but also constitute an opportunity
to further consolidate peace, deepen democratic
governance and lay the foundations for a prosperous
future. Sierra Leoneans have demonstrated tremendous
determination in rebuilding their country after a
devastating civil war. The international community
needs to continue to standi shoulder to shoulder with
them in the years to come.

