Mr. Hashi (Somalia): Mr. President, let me join
my colleagues in expressing my profound thanks to
you for chairing this meeting of the Security Council.
This is indicative of your personal commitment and
that of your government to African issues. Let me also
express our appreciation to Ambassador Mahbubani for
his stewardship of this Council for this month. My
highest regard is also extended to Ambassador Koonjul
for sowing the idea of a Security Council ad hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa. I also take this opportunity to thank Ibrahima
Fall and Ambassadors Kebe and Simonovie for their
very enlightening contributions.

Today's meeting is timely because it is taking
place on the eve of the anniversary of the founding of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and of its
coming transition to the African Union. More
particularly, and in view of the fact that conflicts
continue to be a major obstacle to Africa's economic
and social development, for us, who have come from
countries where conflicts continue to prevail, this
meeting has a singular significance.

It is our hope that the ad hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution will be an
important engine for the search for peace and stability
in Africa's areas of conflict. In this regard, we will
welcome the establishment of the Economic and Social
Council's ad hoc Advisory Group on African Countries
Emerging from Conflict. That new vehicle will no
doubt enable African countries emerging from conflict
to embark on the necessary road of recovery and
reconstruction.

We believe that, while the mandate of the ad hoc
Working Group is comprehensive enough to cover
many areas, it should also cover the broader spectrum
of conflict management, including enhancing early
warning systems, timely sharing of information
gathered at the early warning stages, peacemaking,
peace-building and post-conflict peace-building and the
prevention of recurrence and relapse into conflict. That
holistic approach would enable the ad hoc Working
Group to engage more proactively in the quest for
conflict management in Africa.

Let me say at this juncture that subregional
organizations have been successful in conflict
resolution and management. I have a number of them
in mind. For example, the Community of Sahel-
Saharan States has taken steps to resolve conflicts and
crises in the Central African Republic and in Chad and
continues to search for a resolution to conflicts in
Sudan and in Somalia.

Likewise, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) has been successful in that
regard. The success in ending the conflict in Sierra
Leone should be lauded. The experience gained will be
invaluable to the ad hoc Working Group; it is essential
to tap into these positive experiences with a View to
exploring whether they can be useful models to be
emulated in future conflicts. For that purpose, we
submit that the ad hoc Working Group from time to
time should invite leaders of these subregional
organizations and other eminent personalities to share
their experiences with the ad hoc Working Group.

In our view, it is equally important that the ad hoc
Working Group should continuously monitor other
initiatives aimed at national reconciliation that may
have stalled or faltered; this is in order to examine the
reasons for such lack of success with a View to
preventing the recurrence of stalled or faltered attempts
in future conflict management in Africa. In that regard,
I have in mind the Somalia peace process mandated by
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), which my Government fully supports. The
obstacles to that process need to be removed, and the
ad hoc Working Group could use its good offices to
give an urgently needed boost to the process.

As members are aware, conflicts result in massive
destruction of life and property. Large groups of people
are dislocated. Some become displaced, while others
seek refuge in safer havens. The ad hoc Working Group
needs to see first hand the plight of people in conflict,
particularly the most vulnerable in society: the elderly,
women and children. It may therefore be useful for the
ad hoc Working Group to undertake field visits to areas
of conflict where circumstances permit.

In the work programme of the ad hoc Working
Group, only some areas of conflict are mentioned. We
understand that this is not to the exclusion of other
areas in conflict. While all conflicts demand due
attention, the ad hoc Working Group has to set
priorities within priorities. The conflict in Somalia is a
case in point. The ad hoc Working Group should give a
special focus to forgotten conflicts in Africa.

In order to move the national reconciliation
process forward, Somalia needs the unqualified
attention of the ad hoc Working Group and of the
international community at large. While we appreciate
all of the efforts that have been undertaken, Somalia is
reaching out to the international community to ask it to
re-engage more vocally and energetically. For our part,
we are willing to cooperate with the ad hoc Working
Group in any manner that can accelerate peace
throughout Africa.

