Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Security Council has again been
compelled to return to the consideration of the question of
Iraq as a result of Baghdad's decision to introduce
restrictions on the work of the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM), including prohibitions on the
participation of American citizens in the work of its
inspection teams and on flights of the Special
Commission's U-2 aircraft.

We have consistently sought Iraq's full compliance
with its obligations under the pertinent Security Council
resolutions and we support the efforts made by the
Special Commission to that end. The decision by Baghdad
to place restrictions on the work of the Special
Commission runs counter to the resolutions of the
Security Council, the principles of the United Nations and
the obligations of Iraq, and should be rescinded
unconditionally.

Throughout recent days Russia has been working
intensively in coordination with a number of other
countries in order to de-escalate the situation around Iraq.
Unfortunately, our diplomatic efforts - including those
made in Baghdad and New York over the last 24
hours - were ineffective. Nor did the mission that was
sent to Iraq by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations with the support of the members of the Security
Council achieve the desired result.

In this situation the Security Council has no other
way out than to adopt concrete measures on the basis of
the consensus already established in June this year in
Security Council resolution 1115 (1997), which was
confirmed today in the resolution we have just adopted.

However, we are convinced that any complications
that arise, including the current complication, should be
resolved exclusively by political means and strictly within
the framework of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. Any other approaches, particularly actions
involving force or the threat of the use of force, could
nullify all our achievements so far in reaching a post-
crisis settlement in the Persian Gulf and take us all a long
way back from the goal, already coming within our reach,

 
of eliminating the threat to peace and security in that
region.

This consistent position was clearly set forth in the
recent joint statements at the meeting of the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Russia and France, and also during the
Russia-China summit. This position is reflected in the
resolution that has just been unanimously adopted by the
Security Council.

The resolution puts into effect limited, well-adjusted
measures to restrict foreign travel by Iraqi officials, the list
of which will be further determined. Here, the restrictions
automatically exempt all travel involving the discharge of
diplomatic functions. The resolution is aimed not at
punishing Iraq but at ensuring Baghdad's immediate return
to unconditional cooperation with the Special Commission.
All the humanitarian shipments to Iraq will continue. The
resolution rules out the possibility of using the authority of
the Security Council and the United Nations to justify any
attempts to use force.

We sincerely hope that the resolution will be properly
understood by the Iraqi leadership and that it will resume
constructive interaction with the Special Commission. This
will lead to the automatic rescission of the restrictions
imposed on foreign travel. But the main thing is that it will
open the way for the logical closure of the disarmament
dossier in keeping with resolution 687 (1991), the lifting of
sanctions and the easing of the plight of the Iraqi people.
The members of the Security Council are acutely concerned
about this. It is up to Iraq.

The resumption of the work of the Special
Commission in Iraq at full capacity will make it possible
specifically to look at ways to speed up its work in strict
compliance with its mandate, so that this work can be
carried out without artificial delays and the Security
Council can objectively assess the progress made. Here the
Council cannot and should not abdicate its responsibility for
the full compliance of all of its disarmament resolutions on
Iraq.

Russia is firmly convinced that Iraq should see the
"light at the end of the tunnel", and if the switch is in the
hands of the Iraqi Government then at least some electric
current should pass along the wires.

The Council recently considered the comprehensive
joint reports submitted by the Special Commission and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the
significant work they have done to clarify the remaining
blanks. The many inspections have confirmed that Iraq
has no proscribed activities going on involving nuclear
weapons, and the facilities and dual-use equipment are
being reliably monitored. In this connection, the nuclear
dossier can be deemed to be closed. The balance sheet is
virtually completed on proscribed missiles. All capacity
and components for the production of chemical weapons
have been eliminated.

Such serious results cannot pass by without adequate
evaluation by the Security Council. We intend to revert to
this question immediately after the current crisis situation
around Iraq has been resolved.

We again call upon Baghdad to resume its
unconditional cooperation with the Special Commission.
We are convinced that this would conform to the vital
interests of Iraq and its people and to the goal of
integrating Iraq into the international community insofar
as it complies with the decisions of the Security Council.

