Mr. Lucas (Angola): We would like to thank
Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative ofthe Secretary-
General in Kosovo, for his briefing, and we welcome
the participation in today's debate of Mr. Ivica Dacie,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Hashim Thaci, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo.

At the outset, and as a matter of principle, we would
like to reiterate that resolution 1244 (1999) continues
to be the applicable legal framework for reaching a
comprehensive settlement of the question of Kosovo
through dialogue and negotiations on the basis of the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant Security Council resolutions.

We are encouraged by the fact that the overall
security situation in Kosovo remained generally stable
and relatively calm during the reporting period. We
would like to emphasize the fundamental role that the
United Nations plays in Kosovo, through the United
Nations Interim Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), by
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights in cooperation with the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, the Kosovo Force and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission.

We have been following the situation in Kosovo with
interest, and in that regard we welcome the resumption
of the dialogue led and facilitated by the European Union
on implementing the 19 April 2013 First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations
between Belgrade and Pristina. We hope that the
parties will continue to take the steps necessary for
them to move forward in implementing the outstanding
provisions of the Agreement, particularly the
establishment of a community of Serb municipalities,
which remains a main point of contention. We call on
the political leaders of Serbia and Kosovo to address
that issue as a priority.

The consolidation of the new Government and the
adoption of its ambitious programme for the period
2015 to 2018, which focuses on sustainable economic
development, employment and social welfare, the
rule of law, the fulfilment of all criteria linked to
Kosovo's integration into the European Union, the
reforms in the education and health-care systems and
the agreement on the integration of judiciary structures
of northern Kosovo, are important political measures
we want to highlight. We also look forward to the next
steps in Serbia's and Kosovo's European integration
processes. The adoption by the Assembly of Kosovo of
a law prohibiting Kosovo citizens from joining armed
conflicts outside its territory, as a measure to counter
the recruitment of individuals from Kosovo to fight
in conflicts abroad, primarily in Syria and Iraq, are
important measures that we and the Security Council
warmly commend, in the framework of the fight to stop
foreign terrorist fighters.

Despite important political developments in
Kosovo, we remain concerned about the security
incidents that still occur, such as those in North
Mitrovica. We hope that such incidents can be
promptly and properly addressed, so as to keep them
from affecting intercommunity relations. The political
actors in Kosovo must refrain from using violence
as a means to achieve political ends. The announced
regional cooperation in addressing irregular migration
from Kosovo is a measure susceptible to contributing
to stability in Kosovo, while further long-term efforts
should be undertaken to improve the social and
economic conditions in Kosovo as a means of putting
an end to such detrimental population flows.

On internally displaced persons, we regret the high
number of internally displaced persons from Kosovo
and the reduced number of voluntary returns during the
reporting period registered by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. We call for
a rapid resolution of the property rights issue and for
guarantees of security, identified as a main impeding
factor to voluntary returns and intercommunity
relations in Kosovo. The "self-defeating" statistics,
as the Serbian Minister characterized it, should be
overcome as a fundamental element for genuine
reconciliation in Kosovo.

We remain concerned about the question of missing
persons from the Kosovo conflict, and we encourage
the Working Group on Missing Persons to continue its
efforts in pursuing new sources of information on such
a painful issue.

We fully share the view expressed by some members
of the Council on previous occasions that these public
meetings on Kosovo should take place at more extended
intervals, such as every six months, since it is doubtful
whether they make a tangible contribution to progress in
relations between the contending parties. In fact, these
debates reveal a paradox: while the members of the
Council, in general, praise the positive developments
taking place in Kosovo and take stock with satisfaction
of the mediation efforts being deployed by the European
Union, the parties to the dispute, in their statements
to the Security Council, on the contrary, reveal sharp
differences and quite often uncompromising language
not in line with the negotiations they are conducting
in good faith, we believe, for a final settlement of the
Kosovo question.

In conclusion, we commend UNMIK's active
role in facilitating dialogue between the communities
in Kosovo, among officials and with international
organizations, and its efforts aimed at preventing and
reducing tensions and promoting cooperation between
local authorities. We also greatly value the work being
carried by UNMIK in promoting security, stability, the
rule of law and respect for human rights in accordance
with the Mission's mandate. As the authorities of Serbia
and Kosovo have requested a review of the UNMIK
mandate, we are ready to consider such a review in due
time.

