Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We congratulate
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zerrougui on her assumption of her post and we thank
her for her substantive briefing. We welcome the
Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Regional Integration of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, to the Chamber.

We are deeply concerned about the increasing
tensions and the rift between the ruling majority and
the opposition forces with regard to implementing
the 31 December 2016 Political Agreement.
Confidence-building measures will therefore be
essential throughout the electoral process to ensure free
and credible elections. We also note the considerable
divergence within the opposition, which impedes the
political negotiations. The closing of the political
space for opponents and other stakeholders is causing
greater unrest.

In the light of the current situation, the role of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
is critical to creating an environment conducive to fair
elections. The international team of electoral experts,
working together with the dedicated senior United
Nations adviser, should quickly be operationalized. It is
therefore necessary to support MONUSCO in providing
technical and logistical assistance for the electoral
process. Parliament should also promptly adopt the
electoral law and the legislation on the distribution
of seats.

We remain concerned about the deteriorating
security situation across the country. Despite the efforts
of the Forces armees de la Republique democratique
du Congo (FARDC) to combat foreign and Congolese
armed groups, the latter continue with their attacks and
to destabilize the situation, which is further aggravated
by intercommunity violence. At the same time,
FARDC military operations against the armed groups
are displacing hundreds of thousands of the local
population. It is also clear that the unstable situation
in the neighbouring countries of the Central African
Republic and South Sudan has had a negative impact
on the northern territory of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. That has resulted in large refugee flows,
further escalating the humanitarian crisis, which must
be addressed with greater funding and support by the
international community. The Government must also
facilitate unhindered humanitarian access and protect
the human rights of the vulnerable populations, in
particular women and children.

Perhaps most alarming are the attacks on
peacekeepers, which have taken a tragic toll in human
lives. MONUSCO, together with troop-contributing
countries, should be assisted in enhancing its position
and in training its personnel for more offensive strategies
and responses appropriate to asymmetric conflicts. That
must be accompanied by a greater engagement with
regional political leaders and stakeholders to tackle the
threat posed by armed groups. We further encourage the
measures taken by the Mission to adapt to the current
security situation in the country by implementing the
protection-by-projection strategy, reorganizing its
military component, streamlining civilian tasks and
setting up early warning and response mechanisms.

We would also like to express our deep concern
about the lack progress in the investigation of the
murder of two members of the Group of Experts, Zaida
Catalan and Michael Sharp. We need to further support
and encourage senior officials and technical experts
to pursue the exhaustive investigation to bring the
perpetrators to justice.

