Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): We, too,
would like to thank the Assistant Secretary-General,
Mr. Annabi, for his outstanding briefing on the end of
mandate report on the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET), established by the
Secretary-General. We are grateful for the information
that he has provided with regard to the setting up of the
United Nations Office in Timor Leste (UNOTIL). We
welcome the speed with which arrangements were
made to bridge the withdrawal of UNMISET and the
establishment of the follow-on special political
mission.

Although UNOTIL's strength is below the level
requested by the Timorese authorities and
recommended by the Secretary-General in his report in
document S/2005/99, its creation and its mandate as
defined in resolution 1599 (2005) give concrete
expression to the will of the international community
to ensure a smooth transition and continuity of the
international presence in the new phase that is just
beginning - the transfer of powers and the
consolidation of what has been achieved since the
independence of Timor-Leste.

We pay tribute to UNMISET and to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
excellent work that has been done in support of
reconstruction and the strengthening of the human and
institutional capacity of Timor-Leste. We share the
pride expressed by the Secretary-General at the
invaluable contribution made by the United Nations to
the building of the Timorese State. We pay tribute to
the determination of the people and the Government of
Timor-Leste to consolidate peace and stability in the
country. We welcome the many important actions taken
recently with a view to strengthening the country's
legal framework and to stabilizing the political climate,
such as the promulgation of the law of the Superior
Council for Defence and Security, the drawing up of
the penal and criminal codes and the confirmation by
the parliament of the nomination of an Ombudsman for
Human Rights and Justice for Timor-Leste, and to deal
with the issue of religious education. We pay tribute to
the great maturity that the Timorese parties have shown
in dealing with those delicate issues.

The ongoing improvement of the political, social
and economic situation in Timor-Leste and the
commitment of the Timorese Government to achieve
the Millennium Development Goals are very
encouraging, as is the ongoing strengthening of good-
neighbourly relations with Indonesia and Australia. In
this regard we particularly welcome visit of the
President of Indonesia to Timor-Leste and the signature
on that occasion of the Provisional Agreement on the
Borderline. We hope that the demarcation of the border
will be completed very soon. The deadline established
by the two sides shows that both want this dossier to
make progress, and we encourage them in that.

All of those positive aspects convince us that
Timor-Leste has turned a decisive corner in its march
towards establishing democracy and sustained
economic growth and sustainable development. That
significant progress augers well for the future of the
country.

In conclusion, Benin would like to join all those
who have called on the international community to
maintain its commitment to Timor-Leste to find the
resources to respond to the major needs that remain
and for which the Secretary-General has indicated that
appropriate international support is needed. The
following areas, we feel, should be given particular
attention: strengthening the legal system, particularly
with regard to serious crime; building up the
professionalism of the national police; and setting up
an alternative arrangement to compensate for the non-
deployment of the auxiliary security force
recommended by the Secretary-General to deal with
border infractions and the withdrawal of military
group - the only unit responsible for maintaining the
roads from Dili to the border - and for the departure
of the medical group.

All those elements will have a decisive impact on
the future of the young Timorese nation and on the
consolidation of what has been achieved. We urge the
United Nations to assist the Timorese authorities in the
mobilization of resources to provide an optimal
solution that will be commensurate with the vital
interests and legitimate aspirations of the Timorese
people.

