The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Peru.

We would like to thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, for his informative briefing. I also wish to
specially commend the participation of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes
Trujillo Garcia, in today's meeting and, through him,
convey to President Ivan Duque Marquez and his
Government our profound gratitude for having invited
and received members of the Security Council in his
country. We consider that our visit allowed us to gain a
more precise understanding ofthe situation in Colombia,
in particular with regard to the implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace and the challenges it
entails, as well as the efforts, progress and unwavering
commitment of the Government and the people of
Colombia to achieve peace.

That there is no turning back in bringing about
peace in Colombia is the message that has resonated
loud and clear, and we trust that the Security Council
will echo this message and stand united, together with
the international community, in supporting this process,
which is an example forthe world. We highlight the efforts
of the "peace with legality" plan to comprehensively
address the implementation of the relevant agreements,
such as those related to comprehensive rural reform,
crop-substitution programmes, the strengthening of
State presence so as to improve access to services and
security, and the social and economic reintegration
of former combatants. In particular, we commend the
notable progress made in the area of the reintegration
process, for example, through the territorial areas for
training and reintegration that we saw first-hand and
which play a fundamental role in constructive collective
and individual projects, access to land and the effective
integration within local communities.

We acknowledge the outstanding work and the
enormous resources that are being dedicated to
the creation and development of job opportunities,
disbursing monthly incomes, setting up a health-care
and pension system and reinforcing security measures
both inside and outside the territorial areas. These
efforts reaffirm the Government's commitment to and
the former combatants' confidence in reaffirming their
decision that violence cannot be the way forward. In
this regard, we underline the measures adopted by the
Government, such as the Action Plan for the Protection
of Social and Community Leaders, Human Rights
Defenders and Journalists, to improve the security of
communities, social leaders, human rights defenders
and former combatants confronted by the threat of
criminal groups exploiting the vulnerability of rural
areas. Together with the Government, the Security
Council and the Colombian people as a whole, Peru
is concerned about the killings of social leaders and
ex-combatants whose only crime is their commitment
to peace, and we express our full support for the
Government's efforts to address that situation, in
particular through stepped-up cooperation between the
security forces and local authorities on the ground.

We are well aware of the need to redouble our efforts
in combating illicit drug trafficking and illegal mining,
which threaten the peace and sustainable development of
our countries. In this regard, in the light of our positive
experiences in Peru, we stress the importance of crop-
substitution programmes as an alternative source for
providing economic and commercial opportunities to
rural areas with the participation of local communities.
In this regard, the peace agreement contains an
important human component that takes into account
the specific needs of rural communities, indigenous
and ethnic groups and women and young people,
who are called upon to play a fundamental role in the
implementation of the agreement and to promote and
strengthen the reconciliation of the Colombian people.

As part of the reconciliation process, we must pay
tribute to the victims whose commitment also made it
possible to achieve peace. There is a moral duty owed
to the victims beyond civil reparations, and we believe
that the components of the Comprehensive System
of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition are
helping achieve this purpose.

Finally, I acknowledge and welcome the role played
by the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
and thank its outstanding team for the dedication,
professionalism and excellence with which they are
carrying out their mandate. We fully support the efforts
of the Mission in Colombia and welcome the request
of President Ivan Duque Marquez on behalf of the
Government and the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Comun to extend its mandate for another year.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming in the
Security Council the commitment of Peru to the peace
process in Colombia, which i we will never tire of
saying it - serves as an example and model not only
for Latin America, but for the whole world.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia.
