The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Luxembourg.

I thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
and Mr. Ivan Simonovie, Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights, for their briefings. I also thank the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the United
Nations, Ambassador Yuriy Sergeyev, for his statement.

It cannot be emphasized enough - the referendum
held on 16 March in the Crimea violated the Constitution
of Ukraine, which provides that the territory of Ukraine
is indivisible and inviolable. In addition, the election
was held in conditions that forfeited all legitimacy.
Crimea was occupied and cut off from the rest of
Ukraine, journalists and members of civil society
were intimidated, and media freedom was severely
hampered. Representatives of the United Nations and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) who had been invited by the Ukrainian
Government were denied access to the Crimea.
The international community in no way recognizes
the result of this illegal and unconstitutional
referendum. Similarly, the international community
does not recognize any measure to integrate the
Ukrainian Autonomous Republic of Crimea within the
Russian Federation via the referendum. We welcome
the very broad convergence of views on this issue in
the Security Council.

Russia's actions on Ukrainian territory over the
past three weeks flagrantly violate international law,
particularly the Charter of the United Nations and the
Helsinki Final Act. They contradict the commitments
made by Russia regarding Ukraine in the framework
of the 1994 Budapest Memorandum and the Treaty
on Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership signed in
1997 between Russia and Ukraine.
Luxembourg is deeply concerned about the rising
tensions in Crimea caused by the illegal presence of
armed Russian forces outside their authorized area. It is
urgently necessary to defuse the crisis through military
de-escalation, starting with the immediate withdrawal
of Russian forces to their pre-crisis permanent areas of
deployment. We welcome the calm and restraint shown
by the Ukrainian authorities to date in the face of the
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of their country. However, we consider the death of a
Ukrainian officer killed yesterday by bullets during
the attack on a military base in Simferopol of greatest
concern. Today, there are reports of attacks on Ukrainian
armed forces bases, including the headquarters of the
Ukrainian navy in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea.
In the present context, every incident could become the
spark that ignites the fire.

To address the crisis, we believe that the United
Nations has a role to play in close cooperation with the
OSCE, the Council of Europe and other organizations.
We regret that it was not possible for the Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights to visit Crimea.
Nevertheless, Mr. Simonovie's briefing, based on the
evidence he collected, tends to confirm the observation
made two weeks ago by the OSCE High Commissioner
on National Minorities. The main reason given by the
Russia to legitimize its actions - threats to the rights of
Russian speakers and communities in Crimea - have
turned out to be unfounded. It was not the actions of
the Government in Kyiv or the Ukrainian authorities
but Russia's military escalation that fostered a climate
of impunity and an increase in human rights violations
in Crimea. The situation threatens seriously to disrupt
the balance between the various communities that have
coexisted peacefully until now in Crimea.

We welcome the efforts of the Office of the United
NationsHighCommissionerforHumanRights to quickly
deploy observers, under the "Rights up front" action
plan of the Secretary-General, to monitor the human
rights situation of throughout Ukrainian territory. The
observers can establish the facts and report objectively
in order to halt the spread of unfounded allegations
geared to exacerbate tensions. We hope that the team
of observers will soon be fully operational and that it
will also go to Crimea and eastern Ukraine. In the same
vein, we hope that the presence of the international
community throughout Ukraine will be reinforced as
soon as possible by the establishment ofa special OSCE
observer mission. Its implementation should be delayed
no further.

In general, we encourage the United Nations to
pursue its good offices in the crisis between Ukraine
and Russia. In that respect, we applaud the visit planned
by the Secretary-General to Moscow and Kyiv in the
next few days. Even if they have not yet borne fruit,
diplomatic efforts must continue intensively to achieve
a solution that respects the political independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked to make a further statement.

