Mr. Tadmoury (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Sir,
we are pleased to see you preside over this meeting,
and we are confident that your wisdom and skills will
ensure the success of the work of the Council.

Once again the Security Council meets to discuss
dangerous and bloody events in Al-Quds Al-Sharif and
the other occupied Palestinian territories. Once again
the world witnesses the appalling behaviour of an
Israeli official, the head of the Likud party. He is
known to the Lebanese because of his role in the Israeli
invasion of Lebanon in 1982. The Lebanese people can
never forget the images of the massacres and tragedies
he inflicted on Lebanese and Palestinians alike. This
man, on 28 September last, carried out an act of
provocation - the violation of Al-Haram Al-Sharif -
in the framework of an orchestrated scenario, with the
goal of undermining hopes for peace. He was fully
aware of the consequences of his actions, which were
carried out in coordination with the Israeli authorities
and under their protection. He has carried out bloody
campaigns of repression, which continue to victimize
many innocent people, children in particular. All of us
were shocked by those murders.

Lebanon condemns Israel's continuing bloody
campaigns of aggression against the Palestinian people
and appeals to the Council to force Israel to respect the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and the relevant
protocols, as well as the Hague Convention of 1907.

I should like to remind all present that Israel has
no right to act as it pleases with respect to Al-Quds and
the occupied Arab territories. It cannot impose its will
in contravention of the provisions of internationally
binding resolutions and the framework of peace
specified at the Middle East Conference - disrupting
peaceful negotiations by staging internal disputes,
preferring the logic of force to that ofjustice and right,
and ignoring human rights, which are being flagrantly
violated, in an unprecedented manner, in Al-Quds Al-
Sharif and other occupied territories.

Al-Quds Al-Sharif has a special significance in
our country. Its holy places are ancient, dating far back
in the history of civilizations. We are sad to see Al-
Quds Al-Sharif bloodsoaked and awaiting a just peace
in the framework of international legitimacy. Today
more than ever before the Security Council must
endeavour to halt the deliberate provocations that are
taking place in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, to put an end to
Israeli violence, to create the necessary conditions for
both co-sponsors of the peace process and the
European Union, to bring the parties to the Arab-Israeli
conflict back to the negotiating table in order to
achieve a just and comprehensive solution on the basis
of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and to
realize the right of the Palestinian people to return to
their homes, in keeping with the provisions of
resolution 194 (III).

The requisites of peace are well-known now. The
opposition and the Government of Israel would do well
to realize that persisting in the use of violence will
never lead to the peace and security we all aspire to.
They must learn from recent experiences.

