Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia): I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the African States members of the Security Council - the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia - and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. We would like to thank Mr. James Swan, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), and Mr. Dan Smith, Director of the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. As Somalia embarks on a crucial year, the Niger, South Africa, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Tunisia commend the Federal Government of Somalia for its ongoing efforts and the progress it has made in stabilizing the country, including strengthening State institutions, improving the security situation and creating an enabling environment for pushing the political process forward. We hope that the Federal Government and the leaders of the federal member states will continue to engage so as to reach the necessary political agreement and build consensus and unity on key national priorities. A constructive and inclusive dialogue would certainly enable the Somalis to adequately address the political, security, humanitarian and development challenges the country is facing. We therefore echo the call by the Secretary-General for the Somali leaders to consider instituting a mechanism for dialogue and consensus-building in order to advance the aspirations of the Somali people. We hope that such a dialogue will also help pave the way for the preparation and timely organization of peaceful national elections in 2020. We believe that the timely organization of peaceful national elections in 2020 as identified in the Mutual Accountability Framework is of the utmost importance for progress to continue to be achieved towards stabilization and the building of a functional federal State in Somalia. We underscore the importance of engaging women and young people in the country's political life. Building a democratic and inclusive State will require their fulland meaningful participation in peacebuilding and State-building processes. On the security situation, we appreciate the close cooperation of United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and AMISOM in support of the national security architecture agreement and transition plan with a view towards devising an inclusive security- sector approach that responds to the needs of the Somali people. However, we remain deeply concerned by the persistent terrorist threat that Al-Shabaab still poses, and we reiterate our strong condemnation of the attacks and all acts of terrorism and violent extremism perpetrated by that terrorist group. We are steadfast in our support for the Somali National Army, and we appreciate the support of AMISOM and other partners to continue working to reduce the capacities of Al-Shabaab and other terrorist groups operating in Somalia. We welcome the threat assessment of security conditions on the ground undertaken jointly by the United Nations, the African Union and the Federal Government and call on the international community to continue to provide the necessary security assistance to Somali authorities at both the federal and state levels, including in force-generation and capacity-building. In this respect, we reiterate our position that any reconfiguration or drawdown of AMISOM should be conditions-based and not lead to a security vacuum that will be exploited by terrorist groups and undermine the gains made in Somalia so far. We commend the gains made during the military operations undertaken jointly by the Somali National Army and AMISOM in Lower Shabelle, resulting in several strategic areas recovered from Al-Shabaab. We urge the Federal Government to continue building the structures and capabilities of the Somali National Army to be effective and well-resourced in accordance with the transition plan in order to take over their responsibilities from AMISOM. We are convinced that these achievements will help create conditions favourable to Somalia being able to effectively assume the security responsibilities by 2021 and facilitate the holding of democratic elections in the country by the end of the year 2020. We appeal to the international community and partners to mobilize resources and replenish the Trust Fund for AMISOM, and we call on the Trust Fund to support the Somali security forces. We express our concern about the humanitarian situation affecting millions of Somalis as a result of adverse climatic conditions and terrorist threats. The climate has created propitious conditions for the locust invasion that is having a devastating impact on the agriculture sector of Somalia, leading to the declaration of a state of emergency this month. In this regard, it is imperative to take into consideration the impact of climate change. Urgent assistance is needed to develop adaptation and resilience measures in the country, and we call on the international community of donors to support Somalia to this end. Finally, we commend the sustained efforts by the Federal Government over the years to ensure that Somalia becomes eligible for debt relief from the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. This is a significant achievement that we hope will pave the way for further economic development in Somalia.
