Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon, for his statement. I
associate myself with the statement to be made by the
observer ofthe European Union. I will talk briefly about
the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, the situation in
Iraq, Syria and Lebanon, and the crisis in Libya.

The two-State solution must be revived. This
summer, war again devastated Gaza. That crisis was
the third in six years. Even more violent than those of
2008-2009 and 2012, it has had tragic consequences, of
which we are aware - more than 2,100 people dead,
including hundreds of children, 11,000 people wounded
and unprecedented destruction. The Cairo Conference
made it possible for the international community to
express its solidarity towards Palestine and its support
for the reconstruction of Gaza, with the announcement
of the mobilization of $5.4 billion. We hope that those
pledges will be promptly translated into action.

However, we cannot continue to agree to endlessly
participate in the cycle ofreconstruction and destruction
while the perpetrators of the destruction are not requested
to contribute financially to the reconstruction. It is our
responsibility to put an end to that spiral of violence.
That requires going well beyond the ceasefire agreed
on 26 August, which does not provide a lasting solution
for Gaza. Today, as in 2009 and in 2012, nothing has
truly been settled. The parties are expected to resume
their talks in Cairo soon. We encourage them to do so
without delay. A lasting agreement must be concluded
so as to achieve both a complete lifting of the blockade
and a response to Israel's legitimate security concerns.

However, Gaza is only the symptom of a deeper
problem: the impasse in the peace process. We must be
clear: the lack ofa political horizon for the Palestinians
and the threat weighing heavily over the two-State
solution led to the initiative of President Abbas,
announced in the General Assembly (see A/69/PV.12).
Speeding up colonization in particularly sensitive areas
such as Givat Hamatos - which created a new settlement
in East Jerusalem for the first time in over fifteen years
- makes the emergence of a Palestinian State on the
ground more difficult with each passing day. We will
have to bear the repercussions.

Heightened tensions in the Haram al-Sharif are also
very worrying. France reaffirms its commitment to free
access to the holy sites for all religions and emphasizes
that any challenge to the status quo of those sites could
carry risks of major destabilization.

Nevertheless, the parameters for a solution to the
conflict are known: an independent State of Palestine -
democratic, contiguous and sovereign, living in peace
and security side by side with Israel, based on the 1967
borders, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States.

France believes in the possibility of a definitive
settlement, but we do not have unlimited time to find
a lasting solution. The time has come to implement the
two-State solution, before it is too late. To do so, we
must provide ourselves collectively with the means
to reach that end. We need to start thinking about
developing a method to reach a conclusion, not just
to negotiate. Fresh negotiations will come to nothing
unless they start with clear parameters and a programme
of work. The successive failure of negotiations for the
past twenty years reminds us of that. Security Council
action making it possible to establish a framework for
negotiation would be timely. International partners
must commit themselves further to support the parties
in the negotiation of a comprehensive and permanent
settlement.

The role of the United States is decisive and
remains central. The role of Europe and the Arab
League is equally important. Both have made proposals
to encourage the conclusion of a permanent agreement
and open the prospects for regional peace. Europe and
its international partners must be prepared to use the
leverage they have on all parties so that the negotiations
can succeed.

In fact, we can no longer settle for simply trying.
We must succeed. France is prepared nowto contribute
to that collective effort. Without rapid progress and
without success, we will have to recognize a Palestinian
State at some point.

The region is facing the emergence of a regional
terrorist scourge that extends from Iraq to Lebanon,
via Syria. In Iraq, the fight against Daesh calls for
an unprecedented mobilization of the international
community, alongside the Iraqi Government. That
response rests on three pillars.

First is a lasting political strategy to support the
Iraqi authorities with regard to reconciliation and
national unity. Daesh has thrived on the weaknesses
of Iraq, a country torn by divisions and sectarian
conflicts. The resolution of the crisis must above all be
political, taking the path of redress and reconciliation.
The recent appointment of the Ministers of the Interior
and Defence, as well as the swearing-in of the Kurdish
Ministers, have completed the formation of an inclusive
Government. We must encourage that approach.

Secondly, humanitarian assistance and reconstruction
efforts must be enlarged.

Thirdly, the fight against Daesh must be coordinated
with regard to military support, drying up financial
resources and extinguishing terrorist networks. In
terms of military support, France is engaged in air
support operations for the Iraqi armed forces and the
Pesh Merga. We encourage all our partners to join our
efforts.

In Syria, it is the regime of Bashar Al-Assad that
has deliberately fostered the development of Daesh to
block the moderates, who are now fighting two barbaric
elements - the regime and Daesh. Syria does not have to
choose between these two barbarities. Daesh's heinous
crimes should not cause one to forget that the Syrian
regime, which continues to bomb civilian populations
on a daily basis, is primarily responsible for the current
tragedy, which has left 200,000 dead. It thus feeds
extremism and the rejection of its own people and can
in no way represent the Syria of tomorrow.

The Syrian crisis calls for two responses. In
the medium term, a political response to the crisis
needs to be worked out. France will give its full
support to the initiatives of Staffan de Mistura to
relaunch negotiations and give durable responses to
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. On an
immediate basis, the capabilities of Daesh, which has
eastern Syrian as its rear base, must be reduced. France
supports the coalition strikes against Daesh. France
actively contributes to the fight against terrorism in
the framework of task-sharing. We also continue our
support for the democratic opposition of the Syrian
National Coalition, led by Hadi Al-Bahra. That support
is, and will be, political, financial and logistical.

In Lebanon, the situation has Clearly deteriorated.
The fighting by various terrorist groups, including
Daesh and Jabhat Al-Nusra, against the Lebanese
army last August in Ersal demonstrates how Lebanon
is suffering the repercussions of the crisis in Syria.
We must do our utmost to end the attacks against
the army and the attempts to destabilize the country.
The dissociation policy and principles of the Baabda
Declaration of 2012 (S/2012/477, annex) provide the
framework to which all Lebanese forces must subscribe.

The mobilization of the Security Council is needed
to support Lebanon in three concerns. First, it is
urgent that a President be elected. Countries that can
influence the Lebanese actors and their regional allies
should advocate the election of a President. Secondly,
support for the Lebanese Armed Forces should be
strengthened and accelerated in the short and medium
term. France is working closely with Saudi Arabia to
finalize the initiative to strengthen the Lebanese Army.
Thirdly, our economic and financial support must be
reinforced in order to strengthen the institutions and
infrastructure in Lebanon. With the highest ratio of
refugees to population in the world, Lebanon ought to
benefit from a sharing of the burden.

Finally, allow me to briefly mention the situation
in Libya, which is of increasing concern to us. This
Council must remain united and mobilized in order to
respond to the two major challenges in Libya.
First is the political transition. The legitimacy ofthe
authorities elected on 25 June must be recognized by all.
At the same time, that does not exempt the authorities
from having an inclusive approach. The conclusion of
the ceasefire in Libya and the launching of an open
and sincere political dialogue, focused on the search
for a lasting agreement, are the first steps towards the
restoration of peace. That is the challenge facing the
mediation efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Bernardino Leon. All international
actors must encourage the parties to take part in that
dialogue in a spirit of compromise. As for ourseves,
we must be prepared to use individual sanctions under
resolution 2174 (2014) against those who endanger
peace, stability or security in Libya, or those who
hinder the success of its political transition.

The second challenge facing Libya is that of
terrorism. The presence in Libya of various terrorist
groups is a significant risk for the region, but for
Europe as well. It allows terrorist groups in the Sahel to
rebuild their forces, especially in Mali. In neighbouring
countries, a strategy to contain the terrorist threat, as
well as illicit arms trafficking, must be encouraged.

