Mr. Pressman (United States of America):
Yesterday we met in the consultations room and
listened to United Nations Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura describe the daily deadly indiscriminate
bombings raining down on eastern Aleppo. We heard
Special Envoy de Mistura implore the Security Council
to take urgent action to avert a large-scale massacre,
noting that failure on our part would be a tragedy and
a stain on the Security Council that lingers like others
in recent history.

The draft resolution contained in document
S/2016/846, vetoed by Russia today, had a simple
demand and one goal: stop the bombing in Aleppo
City. Over the last two weeks, Russia and the Al-Assad
regime have launched a terrifying military offensive
in eastern Aleppo that has laid waste to an area of the
city with 275,000 civilians trapped inside of it. Air
strikes from this Russian and Syrian regime offensive
have systematically eliminated whatever infrastructure
was left to support the people of eastern Aleppo.
Hospitals have been bombed. Pumps for drinking
water have been bombed. Ambulances and fire trucks
for first responders have been bombed. Families have
been trapped under the rubble. Hundreds of civilians
are dead, and hundreds of thousands of civilians are
literally at risk of starving to death if nothing changes.

The Secretary-General has described Aleppo as
worse than a slaughterhouse. The United Nations Special
Envoy has warned the city will be completely destroyed
by the end of the year. And we know the cause - the air
strikes conducted by Russia and the Al-Assad regime
are the cause. Russia and Al-Assad want to seize eastern
Aleppo to further bolster the regime in Damascus.
Russia could not let this draft resolution stand in their
way, so they vetoed it. Russia dropped its veto here in
the Security Council to strengthen Bashar Al-Assad at
the expense of 275,000 Syrians. We have heard so many
warnings in this Chamber, so many words of anguish
offered, so many descriptions of the barbarism that is
unfolding. Simply put, today was time for the Council to
act, to learn the lessons of the recent past. We failed to
do that because one ofus - perversely, the President of
the Security Council - is intent on allowing the killing
to continue and, indeed, participating in carrying it out.
It is grotesque.

Russia, as always, will offer a different narrative.
Russia has said that it is fighting terrorism. They will
probably somehow blame the United States of America
for the suffering in Aleppo; they will suggest that we are
the ones not serious about the fight against terrorism;
they will invoke past conflicts in distant lands; and they
will lie. In short, they will do anything and everything
to deny and deflect from the truth.

The truth is that Russia is using counter-terrorism
as an excuse to help the Al-Assad regime re-take
control of Aleppo by brutal force, snuff out whatever
opposition groups dare to resist the Al-Assad regime's
brutality, and cow civilians who yearn for a different
government into submission. As Secretary of State
John Kerry has said,

"this is a targeted strategy to terrorize civilians and
kill anybody and everybody who is in the way of
their military objectives".

There is no other plausible explanation. Why else
would the first targets in the Syrian/Russian offensive
be hospitals and the bases for first responders, which
should have been protected? Why else would each
hospital in eastern Aleppo have been struck not once, but
at least twice? Why else would a convoy of life-saving
humanitarian aid bound for Aleppo be destroyed?

One does not have to be an international legal
scholar to know that there is a term that may well
describe these actions: war crimes, and they must be
investigated. Russia cannot use the presence of what
the United Nations estimates to be a couple hundred
members ofAl-Nusra to justify an indiscriminate aerial
bombing campaign devastating an entire population of
hundreds of thousands of civilians currently trapped by
Russia and the regime.

Russia has the privilege of serving as a permanent
member of the Security Council, with a responsibility
to maintain international peace and security. But
through the campaign it describes as counter-terrorism,
Russia has become one of the chief purveyors of terror
in Aleppo, using tactics more commonly associated
with thugs than Governments. Russia and the Al-Assad
regime think the world will look the other way if they
recite the word "counter-terrorism". That is wrong, and
each and every one ofus must make that clear to Russia.

There are terrorists in Syria - a lot of them. The
United States does not need anyone to explain why
terrorists are serious, deadly and dangerous. That there
are terrorists in Syria is the reason the United States
leads a 67-member coalition in the region to fight them.
It is why the United States remains unambiguous in
our call for opposition groups to separate themselves
from Al-Nusra. It is why this week the United States
conducted an air strike that targeted a senior Al-Nusra
leader in Idlib, Syria.

The United States will be relentless in our fight
against terrorism. We spent months looking for a way
to work with Russia on a campaign that would have
effectively targeted Al-Nusra. We agreed on a way
forward that would have allowed us to focus on terrorist
targets. In return, we asked that Russia show a good faith
commitment by upholding a cessation of hostilities and
allowing for humanitarian aid. When presented with
this opportunity to cooperate on counter-terrorism,
Russia decided to walk away. Russia decided to ignore
the Council's repeated calls to implement the cessation
of hostilities. Russia decided that it would support the
Al-Assad regime's military campaign to "re-take every
inch of Syria", to use Al-Assad's own words.

Some here today will criticize this draft resolution
for lacking balance, but there is no balance in the
bombardment of eastern Aleppo. It is simple. Russia
and the Al-Assad regime launched the deadliest
campaign of aerial bombardment since 2011. Russia and
the Al-Assad regime are using incendiary weapons and
bunker-buster bombs, which are magnifying human
suffering, hitting even doctors trying to treat patients
in basement emergency rooms because nowhere else
was safe. Russia and the Syrian regime are causing
this bloody chaos. So we must demand that the ones
responsible for this air campaign stop. This is not how
you defeat terrorists; it is how you create them.

In this conflict, violence begets violence. Our effort
today was to stop bombardments over Aleppo, nothing
more. It is a deadly shame that we were unable to do
so. The United States remains committed to finding
ways to de-escalate this violence, put a ceasefire in
place and start a genuine political process. But for
that to happen, there must be an end to the horrific
suffering of the people of eastern Aleppo, caused by the
current President of the Security Council's and Syrian
aircraft. It is time for Russia to stop starving and killing
Aleppo's children.
