Ms. Hulan (Canada): Allow me to begin by
echoing the words of appreciation that have been
expressed by previous speakers here today to
Mr. Prodi, Commissioner Lamamra and Minister
Dlamini Zuma for their presence and presentations this
morning. I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to
address the Council today on an issue that we all agree
could affect the way that peacekeeping is conducted in
Africa for years to come, namely, the need to increase
coordination with the African Union (AU) and enhance
its long-term capacity to respond to urgent
requirements for peace operations in Africa. Canada
considers that the report of the panel of experts
(S/2008/813) provides an excellent basis for further
efforts towards a sustainable and predictable funding
relationship between the international community and
the African Union.

Africa is facing some of the most dire
humanitarian and security situations in the world.
While the entire international community is committed
to bringing a peaceful resolution to the conflicts on that
continent, it is important to acknowledge that African
organizations continue to show a particular and
extraordinary commitment to that effort. Canada
applauds the African Union and African subregional
organizations for their involvement in African peace
and security and supports the continued contribution of
African States to conflict resolution and peacekeeping
operations on the continent.

Canada has long supported African Union efforts
in the area of peace and security. In cooperation with
other partners, Canada has provided direct training,
equipment and other support to the military, civilian
and police components of AU and United Nations
missions to build capacity for peace operations in
Africa that meet African needs, including the
development of the African Standby Force, direct
support to the African Union Mission in Sudan and
now in support of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
Canada also remains committed to supporting the
development of African peacekeeping capacity-
building, including through the implementation of our

G8 commitments. We are encouraged by the results
demonstrated by the African Union, notably progress in
the development of the police component of the
African Standby Force and the continent-wide training
and implementation plan, but we acknowledge that
further donor support will be required to consolidate
and sustain the achievements that have been realized
thus far.

It has become increasingly clear with the recent
AU mission in the Sudan and the current mission in
Somalia that ad hoc donor funding mechanisms for AU
missions are neither sufficient nor carry the required
predictability or accountability to be reasonably
considered as a sustainable model for future
cooperation. Improvements must be made and a more
comprehensive approach taken to the provision of
support to African-led operations if effectiveness and
efficiency are to be improved. The panel's report opens
the door to some possibilities that need to be further
studied to determine a way forward. Further
consideration should also be given to the complexity of
transition planning. The processes associated with
recent transitions, such as in Liberia and Darfur, should
be assessed with a view to determining the best
methods and realistic timeframes associated with those
processes.

With such a high proportion of peacekeeping
activities being conducted in Africa and the
commitment of the African Union to increase its
operational capacity, Canada very much supports
developing an effective strategic United Nations-AU
relationship. As the panel of experts notes, that
relationship needs to be further strengthened, in
particular between the AU Peace and Security Council
and the United Nations Security Council. Those efforts
should be aimed at maximizing the AU's strengths, as
well as at developing a stronger mutual understanding,
joint approaches to issues and improved continuity in
the transition of peacekeeping operations. Canada
commends both the United Nations and the AU for the
continuing close cooperation between respective
officials, which was noted in the report, and urges a
strengthening of the relationship at that important
level. Canada welcomes further analysis and discussion
of the potential mechanisms that could support an
effective strategic relationship.
Canada takes note of the new ideas stated in the
report regarding mechanisms to address sustainable
funding for both operational and capacity-building

activities. We agree that while the AU is stretched to
respond to crises across the continent, the need for
overall organizational capacity-building must not be
forgotten.

It is clear that the demand for new missions, as
well as the scale and complexity of existing missions,
have both continued to grow and that that has resulted
in significant cost increases to the Organization. Since
2000, the cost of United Nations peacekeeping has
more than tripled and there are now some 18
operations in the field, requiring a heavy commitment
from the United Nations and its Member States. While
we are supportive of mechanisms to increase the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations in Africa, we
must be conscious of the overall costs of United
Nations operations and responsible in maximizing the
effectiveness of every dollar spent. To that end, we
encourage all missions to be reviewed regularly for
areas of success where United Nations presence may
be reduced in order to preserve global capacity to
respond to new and urgent crises.

Finally, I would like to extend Canada's
particular appreciation to Mr. Prodi and his team for
casting a critical eye on the challenging and very
timely issue of supporting African Union peacekeeping
operations. We are encouraged by the efforts to address
this issue and look forward to further analysis and
consideration by the Secretary-General and the African
Union Chairperson.

