Mr. Fernandez Valoni (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to commend the
Republic of Poland for organizing this debate, and to
welcome the presence of President Andrzej Duda this
morning. I would also like to thank the Chef de Cabinet
of the Secretary-General, the President Emeritus of
the International Court of Justice and the President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals for their briefings.

Argentina reaffirms its strict adherence to
international law and to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations in particular, and
implements its international policies accordingly in the
belief that multilateralism is essential to international
peace and security.

That is why we welcome the initiative of the Polish
presidency of the Security Council in organizing
today's debate, which coincides with the seventieth
anniversary of the International Law Commission and
the twentieth anniversary of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. At a time when we are
seeing frequent challenges to international law, we want
to reaffirm the importance of ensuring that the Council
duly considers the legal aspects ofthe situations it deals
with in discharging its great responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations.

Argentina reiterates the cardinal importance of the
principle of the peaceful settlement of international
disputes and maintains that any method for the peaceful
settlement of disputes is equally valid for resolving
conflicts. It is only through such methods that just and
lasting solutions can be secured. In the framework of
the Charter, the International Court of Justice plays a
central role as the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations. In addition to the Court, we note the role of
other courts specializing in particular branches of
international law, such as the International Tribunal for
the Law of the Sea.

Negotiation is the primary means of resolving
disputes. In that context, my country stresses the
importance of ensuring that the parties to disputes
comply in good faith with the calls for negotiations
made by United Nations bodies, including the General
Assembly, in order to help to settle them peacefully.
Whenever the organs of the Organization, particularly
the Assembly, call on the parties concerned to negotiate,
those parties should do so in good faith, refraining from
any action that could undermine their obligation to
resolve the conflict by peaceful means. States outside
a dispute should also refrain from conduct that could
sabotage a peaceful settlement. Among the means of
peaceful settlement available to the Organization and its
Member States we also note that the Organization can
entrust the Secretary-General with exercising his good
offices. Whether that or any other means of peaceful
settlement can achieve its aims and purpose depends on
the fulfilment in good faith of the obligations incumbent
on the parties concerned.

We agree with the idea expressed in the concept note
for the debate (S/2018/417/Rev.l, annex) emphasizing
the importance of the fight against impunity and of
ensuring accountability for the most serious violations
of international law, and we want to highlight the
central role that the International Criminal Court can
play in that context. Given that States have the primary
responsibility for judging the responsible parties, it is
important that States parties to the Rome Statute abide
by the necessary standards to that end. It is also crucial
to ensure that all States cooperate with the Court. In
that connection, I want to underscore the historic
importance of the decision taken in December 2017 by
the Assembly of States Parties on activating the Court's
jurisdiction over the crime of aggression, which marks
the end of a long road that goes back to Nuremberg and
completes the legal edifice provided for in the Statute.

Accountability mechanisms have an important
preventive role to play. That is why the Security Council
must strengthen its commitment to fighting impunity
for such crimes. We reiterate the importance of an
effective follow-up by the Council to its referrals to the
International Criminal Court, as well as the possibility
of recourse to the International Humanitarian Fact-
Finding Commission, as provided for in the Additional
Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949,
relating to the protection of victims of international
armed conflicts.

Lastly, I would also like to stress the importance
of respect for due process in the Council's own work
in its Sanctions Committees. That is why Argentina
is in favour of extending the role of Ombudsman to
all Sanctions Committees. We also wish to echo the
concern expressed about the issue of notifications
under Article 51 of the Charter, in which the Council
should ensure greater transparency on its follow-up to
such communications.

