Mr. Ansay: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to
address the Security Council once again during your
presidency. I wish to speak this afternoon on the situation
in the occupied Arab territories.

 

When I addressed this body a few days ago on another
issue, I took the opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on
your election to your high office. Permit me to reiterate my
Organization's assurances of its fullest cooperation in the
discharge of the important responsibilities you are
shouldering this month.

The Middle East peace process, launched about four
years ago with the objective of achieving a just and
comprehensive solution of the question of Palestine and the
related conflict in the Middle East, continues to attract the
strong support of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (01C). In the year that has passed, the peace
process has advanced a few steps forward. The signing of
the peace treaty between Jordan and Israel on 26 October
1994 and the signing of the Declaration of Principles in
Washington, DC, on 28 September 1995 have been the
high points of these initiatives in this period. I have very
happy memories of my association with the process of
observing the recent historic elections in Palestine, when
the enthusiasm, organizing ability and restraint of the
Palestinian people and their leadership won the admiration
and congratulations of us all.

Following the withdrawal of Israeli troops from Gaza
and Jericho and the assumption by the newly established
Palestinian National Authority of its functions, the
Palestinians have commenced the process of reconstruction
and development. They now have the challenging tasks of
reviving and modernizing national institutions, designing
and developing both the human and physical infrastructure
and rebuilding the economy by revitalizing agriculture,
industry, trade and social services, all with extremely
limited resources and formidable impediments. But those
challenges can not be dealt with freely until such time as all
the Palestinian and other Arab territories under illegal
Israeli occupation, including the holy city of Al-Quds
al-Sharif, are fully restored to the Palestinian people and
their sovereignty is once again established over the entirety
of what was and is legitimately their land.

Last November, in my intervention during the General
Assembly's debate on its agenda item 42, on the question
of Palestine, I drew attention to the fact that, with a scarcity
of resources, the task of United Nations funds, programmes
and agencies in furnishing much-needed humanitarian and
technical assistance to the Palestinian people in their
reconstruction and development efforts has been difficult
enough. What has added to the international community's
costs and frustrations is what can only be described as the
non-cooperative attitude of the Israeli authorities, whose
difficult bureaucratic formalities designed to deal with the
population of the occupied areas are continuing to be
enforced even after the conclusion of the peace
agreements. Similar practices at the hands of Israeli
authorities are adversely affecting the promotion of
Palestinian trade, especially exports to other countries.
These practices continue to be at variance with the
spirit of compromise and cooperation which should
characterize all ongoing and future dealings between the
Palestinian and Israeli authorities in the implementation of
the peace agreements. Instead, Israel's resort to such
drastic actions as the latest fierce aerial attacks on
Lebanese territories, including Beirut, causing the
displacement and mass exodus of hundreds of thousands
of innocent civilians; its bombing even of ambulances; its
indiscriminate destruction of civilian property and
demolition of Palestinian homes; its decision to freeze the
peace negotiations; its continuing occupation of Arab
territories in Palestine, Syria and Lebanon; and its
frequent closing of borders on the Palestinian population,
depriving Palestinians of their livelihood and access to
much-needed medical and other essential facilities, are all
only hindering peace and throwing the peace process into
further jeopardy.

I should add here that the Organization of the
Islamic Conference does not condone terrorism of any
kind, and it has always supported proposals for the
containment of terrorism in all international forums.

We in the OIC want to continue to encourage and
support the ongoing peace process, but I must point out
that this cannot be accomplished without a visible change
of attitudes and practices. Time is of the essence; the time
is now.

We would like to see without further delay the
implementation of United Nations resolutions, particularly
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978), and
Israel's withdrawal from all the Palestinian and Arab
territories, including Al-Quds al-Sharif, the occupied
Lebanese territories and the occupied Syrian Golan. We
particularly demand an immediate halt to the Israeli
military actions in Lebanon.

I should also add that, in the spirit of the peace
process, Israel needs to be persuaded not to carry out any
geographic or demographic change in holy Jerusalem
during the interim phase which may jeopardize the
outcome of negotiations on the final status of the city, and
to stop Jewish settlement in the occupied Palestine and
Arab territories, including Al-Quds al-Sharif.

 

Once again, on this occasion and on behalf of the
Secretary General of the OIC, His Excellency Mr. Algabid,
whose statement on the latest crisis was issued this
morning, I bring to the Council a message of peace, a call
for reason and an appeal for the extension of every support
to the Palestinian people to help alleviate its sufferings
from long years of occupation, repression and the denial of
the exercise of their inalienable, natural human rights.
Towards this goal, the resolve behind the ongoing peace
process must be maintained, and the pace of its progress
must be accelerated through the united efforts of the
international community in assisting the Palestinian
National Authority to gain fuller and firmer control over all
its nation-building tasks so that the Palestinian people may
re-emerge as a proud, productive, independent, sovereign
nation with its own flag flying over all of its territory,
including Al-Quds al-Sharif, and having full status as a
State Member of the United Nations.

In the current peace process the prospects of achieving
peace and prosperity for all countries of the Middle East
region, including Israel, are within sight. It is incumbent
upon the international community, as represented in this
great world Organization, to ensure that the opportunity is
taken and not lost.

