Mr. Hill (Australia): We appreciate the
opportunity to contribute to this discussion on Timor-
Leste. Australia is grateful for the Security Council's
prompt attention in the form of the Council President's
statement of 25 May welcoming the presence of the
international stabilization force. The rapid dispatch of
the Secretary-General's Special Envoy, Ian Martin, was

S/l'V.5457

 

also a welcome development, and we appreciated the
opportunity to listen to his briefing today.

Since 1999, the United Nations has, of course,
been integrally involved in, first, bringing security to
Timor-Leste and, then, beginning the process of nation-
building. There have been notable successes, but the
recent crisis has demonstrated how fragile those
successes have been and the need, again, for the
international community - including, importantly, the
United Nations - to help consolidate those successes.

As the Security Council is aware, Australia has
again been deeply involved in the international
response to deliver urgent help. Along with Malaysia,
New Zealand and Portugal, we have, at the request of
Timor-Leste, deployed military and police to restore
stability. We have deployed some 2,500 military
personnel, with about 1,900 on the ground at present.
We have deployed 150 police, and we are building that
up to 200. We believe that that presence will be
necessary for some time. The international deployment
is now meeting Timor-Leste's immediate security
needs. The presence of the deployment has stabilized
the situation to the extent that violence is now
sporadic, rather than continuing. Arson attacks have
been substantially reduced. About 100 people have
been arrested and are being processed through the
justice system, which is again functioning.

While four countries are contributing to the
international deployment, there may be scope for
broadening such participation on a voluntary basis and
the request of the Government of Timor-Leste. We see
no need for the stabilization force to be brought under
direct United Nations mandate. We want the United
Nations to be free to focus on, and dedicate resources
to, addressing Timor-Leste's longer-term needs through
a new Security Council-mandated mission.

The international community must build on the
momentum that has been provided by the stabilization
force. Australia would support a further 28-day
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Office
in Timor-Leste, but it encourages the Council,
supported by the Secretariat, to move urgently to
design and implement a new mission. The new
mission, we believe, should be established under
Chapter VII of the Charter. In designing the mission it
is important to recognize that the problems of today are
fundamentally different from those faced by the East
Timorese people in 1999. The issues today are of

internal governance and the failure of law and order,
and it was in response to those challenges that the
Government of Timor-Leste requested the assistance of
external military forces.

The new United Nations mission should, in our
View, complement the international stabilization force
and should address the key longer-term challenges
facing Timor-Leste. In our view, the first area of focus
for a new mission should be to establish an
environment conducive to political and community
reconciliation. It will be of vital importance to Timor-
Leste's long-term stability that the United Nations
facilitate the efforts urgently needed on the part of
Timor-Leste's leaders to build political dialogue and
reconciliation. It is, of course, also crucial that those
leaders step up and take responsibility for achieving
good governance and consolidating democracy within
the framework of Timor-Leste's constitution. They
must lead their country beyond the point where
international assistance is necessary whenever
problems occur.

The United Nations must also focus on helping to
restore the confidence of the people of Timor-Leste. In
the short term, that will include addressing the needs of
internally displaced people. The international
community, along with the United Nations, must also
conduct a thorough and independent investigation into
the recent violent events. Further, the United Nations
should assist Timor-Leste to prepare for and hold free,
fair and informed elections.

The second key area on which the United Nations
should focus its attention and efforts, in our view, is the
strengthening of the Timor-Leste justice system. On
operational policing, careful planning will need to go
into managing the transition from the police working
within the stabilization force to a United Nations police
presence. Close consultation with Timor-Leste's
leaders will be required on the issue of interaction by a
future United Nations policing presence with Timor-
Leste's police force. Australia believes that there is a
case for appointing a foreign national as Police Chief.
As a longer-term goal, consideration must also be
given to structural reform of Timor-Leste's security
forces. Strong court and prison administration is an
essential part of achieving a functioning justice system.
There is a role for the United Nations in helping to
achieve both goals. It is desirable that the United
Nations should also oversee the prison system, at least

S/l'V.5457

 

in the short term, to ensure its continued operation,
irrespective of political developments.

The third area on which the United Nations
should focus is strengthening the machinery of
government in Timor-Leste to ensure the continued
delivery of basic services in the short term and to
support capacity-building in the longer term.

Finally, we would suggest that a particular area of
focus is assisting the Government of Timor-Leste to
identify opportunities to develop economic growth and
so generate employment and address the chronic and
destabilizing levels of unemployment. The United
Nations and its agencies, as well as bilateral friends,
can all play a part in addressing that challenge.

Australia, as a long-term and steadfast friend of
Timor-Leste, would be prepared to contribute to such a
mission while playing an ongoing role in the
stabilization of the security situation.

