The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

We are gravely concerned about the powerful
earthquake that occurred yesterday in Haiti. We
express our deep condolences to the Haitian people and
concerning the casualties among United Nations
peacekeepers and other personnel. As an initial step in
our assistance, a Chinese international rescue team of
more than 60 members departed Beijing this morning
in a special aeroplane and with specialized equipment.
The team is expected to arrive in Haiti this evening to
begin its rescue work. Moreover, the Chinese Red
Cross has decided to provide $1 million in
international humanitarian assistance to Haiti.

Turning to the item on our agenda, China places
great emphasis on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
the maintenance of international peace and security. In
that connection, I would like to focus on the following
four points.

First, to strengthen cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, it is
imperative to adhere to the principles and relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.

Secondly, regional organizations have unique
advantages in carrying out preventive diplomacy and
engaging in facilitation with countries in their
respective regions to settle disputes through such
peaceful means as mediation, negotiation and good
offices. The Security Council should encourage
regional organizations to play a positive role in that
regard.

Thirdly, the United Nations and regional
organizations have their own respective advantages in
maintaining international peace and security. They
should strengthen coordination and complement and
synergize each other's efforts. As regional
organizations vary from each other in many aspects, a
flexible and pragmatic approach may be adopted in the
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations.

Fourthly, with regard to capacity-building, we
support the United Nations in providing more
assistance to regional and subregional organizations,
including the African Union.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its previous
relevant resolutions and statements of its
President which underscore the importance of
developing effective partnerships between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations and the relevant statutes of the
regional and subregional organizations.

"The Security Council recalls the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, reiterates its primary responsibility
under the Charter for the maintenance of
40

international peace and security and further
recalls that cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in matters relating to
the maintenance of international peace and
security, consistent with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, can improve
collective security.

"The Security Council expresses its
intention to consider further steps to promote
closer and more operational cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in the fields of conflict early
warning, prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, and to ensure the coherence,
synergy and collective effectiveness of their
efforts. In this regard, it welcomes the already
existing strong cooperation initiatives between
the United Nations and regional organizations.

"The Security Council commends the
ongoing efforts and contributions made by the
Secretariat to consolidate partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations and
welcomes the convening of the Secretary-
General's Retreat with Heads of Regional and
other Organizations on 11-12 January 2010. The
Council expresses its intention to hold in the
future informal interactive dialogues with
regional and subregional organizations.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the peaceful settlement of
disputes, acknowledges the important
contribution of regional and subregional
organizations to the peaceful settlement of local
disputes and preventive diplomacy, as they are
well positioned to understand the root causes of
many conflicts and other security challenges. The
Council underlines the importance of utilizing the
existing and potential capabilities of regional and
subregional organizations in this regard,
including through encouraging countries in the
region to resolve differences peacefully through
dialogue, reconciliation, consultation,
negotiation, good offices, mediation and judicial
settlement of disputes. The Security Council is
resolved to strengthen United Nations support for
the peaceful settlement of disputes through
improved interaction and cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations.
"The Security Council invites the
Secretariat and all regional and subregional
organizations that have a capacity for
peacekeeping to enhance their working relations
and to further explore how their collaboration
could better contribute to the fulfilment of United
Nations mandates and goals, so as to ensure a
coherent framework for peacekeeping. The
Council underlines the importance of regional
and subregional organizations enhancing their
peacekeeping capabilities and the value of
international support to their efforts, in particular
to the African Union, in terms of the 2006 United
Nations-African Union Ten-Year Capacity-
Building Programme for the African Union.

"The Security Council recognizes the role
that regional and subregional organizations can
play in post-conflict peacebuilding, recovery,
reconstruction and development processes and
affirms the importance of interaction and
cooperation between the Peacebuilding
Commission and regional and subregional
organizations. The Council encourages the
Commission to continue to work in close
consultation with regional and subregional
organizations, with a view to ensuring more
consistent and integrated strategies for post-
conflict peacebuilding and recovery.

"The Security Council recognizes the need
for close cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, as appropriate, for the
coherent and effective implementation of its
resolutions, including those on thematic issues
applicable to a wide range of conflict situations.

"The Security Council encourages the
Secretariat and regional and subregional
organizations to further explore information-
sharing on their respective capabilities and
lessons-learned in maintaining international
peace and security and to continue to compile
best practices, in particular in the field of
mediation, good offices and peacekeeping. The
Council also encourages strengthening of
cooperation and dialogue among regional and
subregional organizations in this regard."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/l.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. I would like to thank the Secretary-General and the
representatives of regional and subregional
organizations for participating in today's meeting.
The Security Council has thus concluded its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.
