Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we sincerely thank the briefers and welcome
the participation of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Haiti in this meeting.
In April 2004, that is 15 years ago and during the
German presidency of the Security Council, the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti was established
and tasked with restoring stability to Haiti. Since
then and to this day, the United Nations has achieved
success upon success at all levels thanks to the hard
work of all actors and staffmembers in the Mission. We
would like to express our appreciation and respect for
all they have done during this period, and in particular
to those who have sacrificed their lives in defence of
the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
embodied in the establishment of peace and security
and the restoration of stability to a founding Member
of our Organization. That led the Council to draw down
the Mission and to its replacement with another for
two years, tasked with supporting the justice system in
Haiti and planning for the future presence of the United
Nations beyond peacekeeping.

That Mission has pursued its tireless efforts, within
its mandate, to consolidate and build upon the successes
already achieved. We are today on the verge of the end
of that mandate. Before us are recommendations and
proposals of the Secretary-General, which have been
submitted after careful and meticulous assessment,
as well as after consultations with all stakeholders in
Haiti on the ideal future presence of the United Nations
following the closing of the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti.

Much progress has been made in recent years at
different levels, leading to an environment of relative
security and stability in Haiti. That is apparent, first,
in the professionalism and efficiency of the Haitian
National Police, as was seen in its handling of the
demonstrations this year, through which it earned
the respect and trust of the international community
concerning its ability to maintain security and
public order.

Second is the continued reduction of the reported
crimes as a result of the efforts of the United Nations
Mission and the Haitian National Police alike.

Thirdly, progress has been achieved in combating
the cholera epidemic as a result of the continued
support provided by the United Nations to the national
authorities in order to implement the national plan with
the aim of eradicating the epidemic.
Fourthly, the justice appointments of recent days
will positively affect the progress of the justice system
in the country and increase its efficiency, especially
after the adoption of the law on establishing and
organizing the National Council on Legal Aid.

There have also been many other successes that are
hard to enumerate. However, there are at the same time
numerous significant challenges that must be taken into
consideration. First, the scheduled legislative elections
next October will require tireless efforts from the
national authorities so as to ensure that they are held in
the best possible way. Secondly, the economic depression
has caused many problems that have affected the basic
needs ofcitizens and will require all parties and political
stakeholders to put aside their differences and engage in
a comprehensive national dialogue to agree a national
plan for implementing economic reforms and creating
an environment conducive to investment. Thirdly, the
overcrowding in the penitentiary system has negatively
affected the humanitarian situation. Fourthly, financial
shortcomings have undermined the strategic plan to
increase the efficiency of State institutions. Fifthly, all
forms of corruption must be combated and a foundation
laid for the achievement of good governance and the
promotion of the rule of law.

We must make a concerted effort to provide
support to the national authorities in order to overcome
those challenges so as to preserve the many gains
achieved. We therefore support the Secretary-General's
recommendations and suggestions concerning the
establishment of a special political mission in Haiti
to provide good offices and advice for the duration of
one year.

