Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank you, Madam, for the
work you have done as President of the Council this
month and for having convened this important meeting.
I would like also to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his valuable briefing.

Aisha Mohammed was a 45-year-old Palestinian
Arab woman and the mother of eight children. She
was murdered in cold blood by a group of Israeli
settlers last Friday. Hers was a terrible death. She was
stoned to death as she was with her husband, leaving
her children motherless. She was killed just for being
a Palestinian woman. That criminal act is but one of
the many examples of the ongoing violations carried
out by Israeli settlers and soldiers against unarmed
Palestinians. It is not enough that they have occupied
the land; now they are targeting Palestinian lives,
property and holy places.

Among the most heinous Israeli crimes that are
being currently committed is the forced eviction of
Palestinian residents from Khan Al-Ahmar, in the West
Bank, and the unjust blockade that Israel continues
to impose on Gaza. All of this requires us to reiterate
our call on both the international community and the
Security Council to protect the Palestinian people
and to bring pressure to bear on Israel to implement
international resolutions.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia condemns all Israeli
violations and rejects all attempts to undermine the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. It reaffirms
the Arab and Muslim identity of Al-Quds Al-Sharif
and the right of the Palestinian State to exercise its
sovereignty throughout all Palestinian territories
occupied in 1967, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif. My
country also condemns Israeli practices in the occupied
Arab Syrian Golan. We reject all illegitimate attempts
by Israel to annex the Golan. The Kingdom underscores
the importance ofa lasting and comprehensive peace in
the Middle East, a strategic choice that puts an end to
the Arab-Israeli conflict through the two-State solution
on the basis of the international terms of reference;
the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative, which stipulates the
creation of a Palestinian State along the 4 June 1967
borders; the return of refugees; and an end to the Israeli
occupation of all Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan and Lebanese territory.

The fraternal Syrian people continue to endure the
horrors of the violations and crimes against humanity
perpetrated by a regime that has lost its legitimacy and
sense of humanity. I will limit myself to what I said
yesterday in the Council (see S/PV.8373) and stress the
importance of urgently establishing a constitutional
committee so that it can begin its work of drafting a
new national Syrian constitution. This would be a
turning point in the Syrian political process and would
put an end to hostilities by all parties, bringing about a
peaceful transition ofpower to the representatives ofthe
Syrian people, on the basis of the Geneva communique
(S/20l2/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015).

My country denounces the Iranian Government's
persistent occupation of the three United Arab Emirates
islands - Greater Tunb, Lesser Tunb and Abu Musa, in
the Arab Gulf - as well as violations of the sovereignty
of the United Arab Emirates, which undermine security
and stability in the region and threaten international
peace and security. We reaffirm the full sovereignty
of the United Arab Emirates over their three islands
and support all peaceful measures undertaken by
that country to recover their sovereignty over those
occupied islands.

Many States have suffered, and continue to suffer,
as a result ofIran's aggressive and flagrant interventions
in their domestic affairs, which have destabilized the
region. These include its support for the coup militias
in Yemen and its lack of respect for international
resolutions, especially resolutions 2216 (2015) and 2231
(2015). It also threatens continually to block maritime
traffic, in particular the Strait of Hormuz. It carries
out manoeuvres around Bab Al-Mandab and maintains
a presence south of the Red Sea and the Arabian Sea
through its vessels and ships.

Perhaps the Council is aware of the fact that a
commercially registered vessel, 150 metres long,
equipped with machine guns and military boats as
well as espionage equipment, is travelling south of the
Red Sea. It receives and sends speedboats carrying
equipment and material that is clearly not commercial.
This Iranian vessel, the Saviz, is a military operational
centre that jeopardizes the security and safety of
international maritime transit. In addition, Iran
continuously supports armed terrorist groups that are
destabilizing security and stability in the region and
throughout the world, such as the terrorist Hizbullah.

The evidence of this revolutionary regime's
interference in the internal affairs of States of the region
and worldwide, as well as its support for terrorism, is
clear and striking. As noted in paragraph 10 of the
twenty-second report of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team (see S/2018/705), submitted
pursuant to resolution 2368 (2017) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals and entities:

"Al-Qaida leaders in the Islamic Republic of Iran
have grown more prominent, working with Ayman
al-Zawahiri and projecting his authority more
effectively than he could previously. They have
influenced events in the Syrian Arab Republic,
countering the authority of Abu Mohammed
al-Jawlani and causing formations, breakaways
and mergers of various Al-Qaida-aligned groups
in Idlib."
In Yemen, the Houthi coup militias, supported by
Iran, continue to turn a deaf ear to the calls made by
the international community and the United Nations.
Their intractable stance makes it clear that they want to
prolong the crisis in Yemen. They did not take seriously
the invitation made by the United Nations Envoy
during the Yemeni peace negotiations held in Geneva
last September. They continue to hinder the delivery
of humanitarian assistance convoys and loot them,
lay mines and cut off roads. The coup militias have
launched more than 200 rockets targeting residential
areas of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Those rockets
were manufactured in Iran and brought from Iran. The
rocket-launcher operators were also trained in Iran, in
breach of all relevant provisions of international law.
My country, on the other hand, has been generously
delivering assistance to the sisterly Republic of Yemen
since 2012 - more than $13 billion so far in all areas,
to save lives and maintain the security and prosperity
of the people of Yemen.

My country is playing a crucial role in peacefully
resolving regional and international crises, in keeping
with international conventions and treaties. My country
seeks to uphold the principle of the peaceful settlement
of disputes and undertakes initiatives aimed at the
peaceful resolution of conflicts.

A few weeks ago, we witnessed the historic
signing of a peace agreement between Ethiopia and
Eritrea in the city of Jeddah in the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, sponsored by the Custodian of the Two Holy
Mosques, King Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, and in
the presence of Secretary-General Antenio Guterres.
We also witnessed the beginning of a reconciliation
process between Djibouti and Eritrea, with a historic
summit held between the Presidents of the two
countries in Jeddah. We hope that the summit will
lead to reconciliation between the two neighbouring
countries. The Kingdom will continue to work towards
maintaining security in the Red Sea basin, enabling it
to transform into an oasis of peace, cooperation and
prosperity among Arab and African States bordering
the basin.

