The President: The Security Council will now resume
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Afghanistan of 16 March 1997 (S/1997/240). It has
also considered the views expressed at its 3765th
meeting on 14-15 April 1997 on the subject.

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the continued fighting in Afghanistan and
its intensification in recent months. It reiterates that
the continuation of the conflict threatens to destabilize
the region and prevents steps towards the formation of
a fully representative and broad-based government
able to address effectively Afghanistan's acute social
and economic problems.

"The Security Council calls upon the Afghan
parties to cease immediately all hostile actions and to
enter into sustained negotiations. The Council strongly
believes that a negotiated settlement is the only
solution to the long-standing conflict in this country.

"The Security Council fully supports the United
Nations efforts to facilitate national reconciliation in
Afghanistan. It is convinced that the United Nations
must continue to play the central role in assisting the
warring Afghan factions to engage in a fully fledged
negotiating process on the basis of Security Council
resolution 1076 (1996) and General Assembly
resolution 51/195. The Council welcomes the activities
of the United Nations Special Mission in Afghanistan
(UNSMA) and supports further efforts by the
Secretary-General to give a new impetus to its work.
In this context it welcomes the holding by UNSMA of
intra-Afghan working group meetings in Islamabad but
regrets that these efforts have not yet achieved
positive results.

"The Security Council deeply regrets that many
important provisions of Security Council resolution
1076 (1996) and General Assembly resolution
51/195 remain unimplemented. It calls upon all
Afghan parties, in particular the Taliban, to abide by
these resolutions, to cooperate fully with UNSMA
and to participate in serious and honest negotiations
through the good offices of the Special Mission. The
Council urges interested countries to coordinate their
activities with those of UNSMA and to refrain from
supporting one Afghan party against another.

"The Security Council welcomes the convening
by the Secretary-General of a meeting of concerned
countries on 16 April 1997, following the earlier
meeting held in New York on 18 November 1996.

"The Security Council takes note of the
intention of the Secretary-General to consult the
Afghan parties and all those concerned on the
advisability of an intra-Afghan meeting at some
stage and requests him to put forward a concrete
plan if and when he decides that it will contribute to
the peace process.

"The Security Council again calls upon all
States to end immediately the supply of arms and
ammunition to all parties to the conflict in
Afghanistan.

"The Security Council reiterates its concern that
the continuation of the conflict in Afghanistan
provides a fertile ground for terrorism and drug
trafficking which destabilize the region and beyond,
and calls upon the leaders of the Afghan parties to
halt such activities.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned at
the worsening of the humanitarian situation
including the displacement of the civilian population.
It is also deeply concerned at the discrimination
against women and other Violations of human rights
and of international humanitarian law in
Afghanistan. The Council deplores the mistreatment
of personnel of international humanitarian
organizations, which inhibits the international
community's ability to respond to Afghanistan's
pressing humanitarian needs.
 

"The Security Council welcomes the convening
of an International Forum on Assistance to
Afghanistan on 21-22 January 1997 at Ashgabat and
the forthcoming meeting of the Afghanistan Support
Group on 21 April 1997 in Geneva. It encourages all
States and international organizations to continue to
extend all possible humanitarian assistance which
should be distributed equitably throughout the country.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter and requests the Secretary-General to continue
to keep it regularly informed of the situation in
Afghanistan."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1997/20.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.30 am.
