Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin this statement by
remembering my brother and friend, Mr. Bernard
Tanoh-Boutchoue. I had the good fortune of sitting
next to Bernard during these three and a half months
of our presence in the Security Council, during which
time we served each other glasses of water and cough
drops and relayed jokes and thoughts about the high and
complex responsibility we shared as representatives
of our respective countries on the Security Council. I
was able to measure and assess the very high quality
of Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue as a person. He was jovial,
friendly, simple, humble, a great professional diplomat
and a person who, once one knew him, one had the
impression of having known him for years. His sudden
physical disappearance is a great blow to the diplomatic
community of the United Nations in general and to
the Group of African States and the African members
of the Council in particular. We express our deepest
condolences to his bereaved family, his compatriots and
the Government of C6te d'Ivoire. May the Almighty
Lord take him to his breast. May my dear friend and
brother rest in peace.

Iwish to welcome His Excellency the Vice-President
of Colombia, Mr. Oscar Adolfo Naranjo Trujillo, and
Her Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, Ms. Maria Angela Holguin Cuellar, and to
thank them for being present at this meeting. Their
presence is a testament to the great importance they
attach to this issue.

Our delegation appreciates the quarterly report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia (S/2018/279), which
has just been presented to us by Special Representative
Mr. Jean Arnault. We commend him for the important,
clear and detailed information he has just given us,
but also for the arduous and difficult work he and his
team are undertaking in Colombia in the framework the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia for
the political, economic and social integration of former
members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP), as well as to
guarantee their security and that of the communities
affected by the conflict in Colombia.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea commends the
progress achieved in the Colombian political process,
including the holding of legislative elections on
11 March, which represented an important step in the
transition of Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del
Comun from weapons to politics and in Colombia's
transition from conflict to peace. The success in terms
of participation is an endorsement by the Colombian
people of the peace process and a statement that the
process is irreversible. We hope that the same spirit
will prevail in the upcoming presidential elections,
and that political actors will demonstrate maturity
and good political sense and help to consolidate that
political process.
The development of events in Colombia is a good
example of how frank, direct and inclusive negotiations
can lead to resolving a problem when there is a sincere
will to move forward and leave 50 years of conflict
behind. The international community's support in that
process has been and continues to be very important.
Challenges remain, such as the security of former
FARC-EP combatants in some areas of the country,
their socioeconomic reintegration and reinsertion,
the lack of a functioning legal framework providing
them access to land, the murders of community and
social leaders and so forth. Those aspects must be
taken into account, as they could delay the permanent
strengthening of the process.

The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea commends the Colombian authorities on the
measures they have taken to secure the process, such as
strengthening security measures in the most affected
areas, the investigation of the murders of former
combatants and community leaders by the Office of the
Attorney General and the adoption of legal measures
regulating access to land, which are all steps in the
right direction. The resumption of talks with the
Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional is a very positive step,
which should lead to the complete restoration of peace
in Colombia. That would undoubtedly help the country
to explore and develop its full economic potential.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea calls on the
Security Council and the international community to
continue to fully support the peace process in Colombia
and to respect the leadership of the Government
and the people of Colombia in that process with
constructive assistance.

In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
reiterates its support for the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia and all Colombian actors and
encourages them to continue their efforts to fully
achieve irreversible peace in the beautiful country that
is Colombia.

