Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, and
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Stephen O'Brien, for their briefings.

We are extremely concerned about the latest
developments in Aleppo and the pattern of systematic
destruction of the city, as Under-Secretary-General
Feltman put it, and about the heavy loss oflife due to the
brutal clashes between rebel groups and Government
forces in this divided Syrian city. The senseless
bloodshed must stop immediately.

The deal struck by the United States and Russia
to stop the bloodshed in Aleppo must deliver, and
deliver without further delay. The surge in fighting
over the past two weeks has already cost hundreds of
lives and, unfortunately, the nationwide cessation of
hostilities, which we hoped could hold, is on the verge
of collapse. Even though we all know, including the
parties to the conflict, that a military solution is not
possible, the reality on the ground is that neither side
wants to relinquish its positions and both seem intent
on undermining the efforts of the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy De Mistura to solve the crisis through
dialogue and negotiations. That is, of course, due in
large part to the fact that the Security Council and
international and regional stakeholders remain divided
and continue backing the opposing sides in this sinister,
devastating war.

On previous occasions in which we have exchanged
views with Special Envoy De Mistura, there was still
some hope that the Geneva process, which brought
together so many stakeholders and established a series
of deadlines for transition and constitutional reform,
could be successful. We genuinely believed that the
cessation of hostilities would create space for dialogue
and peace. However, the current reality on the ground
makes it clear that the parties concerned are not
interested in dialogue, but rather in playing strategic
games. The situation is further complicated by the
presence of various terrorist groups in civilian areas
and by the fact that those groups are not part of any
negotiating process or ceasefire agreements.

Even though the fight against terrorists is a top
priority, concerted efforts must be pursued, in particular
by the International Syria Support Group ceasefire task
force, by urging the parties committed to the Geneva
process to put an end to military offensives - offensives
that do not specifically target terrorist groups. Also,
considering that the humanitarian situation is getting
worse every day, we strongly urge all parties to respect
the cessation of hostilities proposal, act accordingly
and immediately allow for the delivery of humanitarian
aid and medical evacuations.

It is unfortunate that Security Council statements
have so little effect on the parties to the conflict.
However, we must continue making our voices heard
until reason finally prevails. Inaction on this issue will
be felt for generations. We therefore sincerely hope that
the Geneva process will not collapse and that the parties
will put down their weapons and resume negotiating a
peaceful political transition.

