The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden.

I thank the Secretary-General very much for
reminding us of the achievements of the United Nations
over the past 70 years, and for laying out his vision of
a United Nations equipped to respond to the conflicts
and instability that today affect the lives of millions.
A close and proactive working relationship between
the Secretary-General and the Security Council is the
cornerstone of the Organization's ability to deliver
lasting peace and security. We look forward to forging
a strong and trusting relationship with the Secretary-
General, not least to improve the United Nations
capacity to take early action to prevent violent conflict.

We have discussed conflict prevention many times
before in the Chamber - and I am sure many around
the table will make that point - but progress has been

meagre. I would like to say some words about how that
needs to change.

The year 2016 exposed the urgent need for a global
recommitment to multilateral solutions to conflict and
to collaborative security, specifically to the prevention
of conflict. The horror in Syria and Yemen, and
situations such as the instability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, dominate the Council's work.
Can we afford an ever-growing list of crises slipping
into violent conflict and needless human misery?

The United Nations humanitarian and peacekeeping
instruments have come under immense pressure, with
$22.2 billion in humanitarian appeals and over 100,000
United Nations peacekeepers. Meanwhile, research
shows that measures to peacefully prevent conflict cost,
on average, just a tenth of post-conflict recovery efforts.
Investing in prevention is not only morally right; it is
the smart, economically sound and sustainable thing
to do.

Prevention requires addressing the root causes
of conflict and instability before they reach the front
pages or the Council's agenda. It calls for inclusive
nationally led processes that build strong institutions
and that are supported by a whole-of-organization
commitment. The sustaining peace agenda, together
with the Sustainable Development Goals, provides the
platform and the master plan.

At the same time, Chapter VI of the Charter
of the United Nations - on pacific settlement of
disputes - requires the parties to a dispute to seek
solutions through peaceful means, such as negotiation,
conciliation or judicial settlement. We have the tools.
What we need now is a new political consensus in
support of prevention. Let me highlight some areas for
priority actions that can underpin it.

The first, as the Secretary-General has said, is to
make prevention a priority for the whole United Nations
system: hold each entity accountable for its part in
contributing and ensure that the United works closely
with other international, regional and subregional
actors. A good example is the current joint efforts with
regard to the Gambia by the Economic Community of
West African States and the United Nations Regional
Office for West Africa and the Sahel.

The second is to improve the capacity of the United
Nations to recognize and address the root causes and
drivers of conflict by working together across the
United Nations system's pillars, mandates and agencies.
In that regard, we are encouraged by the steps that
the Secretary-General has already taken to make the
Secretariat work more efficiently.

The third is to improve system-wide analysis and
welcome independent advice from the Secretary-
General, including on new and emerging threats and
risks, such as climate change, to improve our collective
strategic planning and response. We would like the
Secretary-General to tell us what we need to know, not
only what we want to hear.
The fourth is that we need to harness the agency
of women to create sustainable peace through inclusive
processes. Experiences shared through a network of
female peace mediators, which I have also initiated,
confirm the importance of inclusiveness.

Finally, we need to recognize that, in the words of
the Secretary-General, there can be no humanitarian
solution for a political crisis. Humanitarian action can
never be a substitute for political dialogue and mediation.

We should heed the Secretary-General's call for
a surge in diplomacy for peace. In order to do so,
Sweden commits to contributing to a Security Council
that empowers the Secretary-General to take timely,
decisive and effective action to resolve disputes and
prevent conflicts before they begin. I hope that other
Council members can join us in adopting that approach.
We will do our utmost to create an atmosphere of open,
respectful and honest dialogue around the Council
table.

We have heard the Secretary-General's call for
effective conflict prevention. We know that for him to
be effective, he needs the political support of Member
States. Let us resolve to put peace first.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Kazakhstan.

