Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes this open debate and the fact that the
Security Council is discussing the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and terrorism, particularly
as it relates to non-State actors. We requested this
debate, together with the delegations of Canada,
Mexico, New Zealand, Sweden and Switzerland,
because it is our view that this open debate provides an
opportunity for the wider membership of the United
Nations to contribute to the proposed draft resolution
by sharing new ideas and proposals.

We are pleased that the sponsors have already
taken some of the recommendations that have been
made during the consultations that have been going on.
We trust that the recommendations made during the
course of this debate will also be taken into
consideration and reflected in further adjustments to
the draft resolution.

South Africa shares the concerns regarding the
threat that weapons of mass destruction pose not only
to individual countries but also to the international
community as a whole. This threat is exacerbated by
the possibility that weapons of mass destruction could
fall into the hands of terrorist groups or those engaged
in the activities of networks dealing in the illicit
transfer of weapons of mass destruction and related
technology and materials. We are concerned, however,
that the draft resolution under consideration addresses
only the spread of weapons of mass destruction, and
even then in an incomplete manner. There is only a
passing reference to disarmament in spite of the fact
that chemical and biological weapons have been
prohibited by international law and despite the
unequivocal undertaking of the nuclear-weapon States
to eliminate their nuclear arsenals.

On the issue of non-proliferation, the draft
resolution addresses only non-State actors while
ignoring the threat to international peace and security
posed by proliferation by States. If the Council were
not to act in a comprehensive manner there is a danger
that loopholes might remain that could be exploited by
those who seek financial or political gain and by those
who seek to achieve their objectives through terror.
South Africa believes that the threat posed by weapons
of mass destruction can be effectively addressed only if
we use all the instruments at our disposal, in the fields
of both non-proliferation and disarmament. The
attempt to establish a mechanism in the Security
Council that is isolated from the Biological Weapons
Convention, the Chemical Weapons Convention and
the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty is a weakness that
may impact on the effectiveness of the measures being
considered in the draft resolution. It is South Africa's
belief that universal adherence to and compliance with
international agreements on weapons of mass
destruction and the complete elimination of those
weapons provide the international community with the
only guarantee against the threat or use of those
weapons.

It is important that the draft resolution be drafted
in a manner that makes it practical and implementable
by States. The current draft resolution imposes
obligations on United Nations Member States and
attempts to legislate on behalf of States by prescribing
the nature and type of measures that will have to be
implemented by States. That is the case also where
States have already accepted non-proliferation
obligations under international treaties and other legal
instruments. South Africa believes that the draft
resolution could have far-reaching legal and practical
implications for Member States, especially those that
have a capacity in nuclear, chemical and biological
matters. In recognizing the dual-use nature of such
materials, there may be potential implications for a
wide range of institutions, including hospitals,
laboratories, universities, veterinary clinics,
agricultural research centres and similar institutions.

In terms of South Africa's national legislation
that controls such materials, there are clearly defined
lists of items that are regulated. This is also the case in
schedules attached to the Chemical Weapons
Convention and other regimes, such as the Zanger
Committee, the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Australia
Group and the Missile Technology Control Regime.
Such specified lists of controlled items are essential to
ensure that those controlling these items know exactly
what to control. The absence of such clearly defined
lists if items in the draft resolution could lead to
conflicting interpretations of "controlled items" and to
a multitude of control lists. A more effective an
sustainable approach would be to utilize the existing
mechanisms and regimes to ensure that they operate
more efficiently and effectively.

My delegation believes that all States Members of
the United Nations would be opposed to the prospect of
weapons of mass destruction falling into the hands of
non-State actors, especially terrorists. The challenge
for the Security Council, whose mandate is the
maintenance of international peace and security, is to
ensure that the systems assistance that we already have
to control the technologies, material and equipment for
the production and delivery of weapons of mass
destruction are implemented more effectively and
improved where necessary. The efficiency of those
systems and the ability of States to implement control
measures in a way that will prevent access by all of
those, both States and non-State actors, who wish to
use these items for the development of weapons of
mass destruction depends on the sharing of intelligence
and information.

It is unlikely that any application for the transfer
of a controlled item would be for a transfer to an end-
user that is known to be a terrorist organization. It is
more likely that front companies or front end-users
would be used instead. The ability to prevent such a
transfer is less dependent on the fact that the item is
controlled and more dependent on information about
the real end use to which it will be put. That
information holds the key to success and can be made
available only through intelligence sharing. My
delegation believes that it is through such sharing of
intelligence information that the gap in non-
proliferation controls can be bridged.

