Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): It is right that the
Council should be addressing the situation in the
Middle East, because there is widespread and deep
concern across the United Nations membership at the
continuing violence, at the closures of the occupied
territories and the isolation of towns and villages
within them. Above all, there is profound anxiety at the
deteriorating prospects for peace between Israel and
the Palestinians, which have implications well beyond
the borders of Israel and the Palestinian areas.

The situation today is grim. Many roads inside
Gaza and the West Bank are still closed, today. In the
last two days, two Palestinians have died at
checkpoints, delayed on their way to hospital. Thanks
to the continued closure of Gaza airport, thousands of
Palestinian pilgrims cannot return from Mecca. Tension
is increasing, and that is a matter of immediate and
international concern.

The Council has to live up to its responsibility to
address peace and security in this region as elsewhere.
We must find a way forward that improves the
situation, not worsens it. We must find a way forward
that provides the maximum unity in the Council, to
guide the parties towards a peaceful course. The United
Kingdom is ready to contribute to that effort.

The United Kingdom, in support of the European
Union position which will later be set out in full by the
Union presidency, has repeatedly pressed the Israeli
Government to end the practices of closure and
extrajudicial killings. The Israeli Government has told
us that these measures are necessary for the protection
of Israeli lives. But, in fact, these practices radicalize
the Palestinian population and fuel violence in the
occupied territories. Thus, they cannot achieve their
stated purpose. We will continue to press the Israeli
Government to end these practices, and in this regard I
welcome the assurance by the Israeli Deputy Prime
Minister yesterday to the Council that these measures
would not comprise the policy of the new Israeli
Government. We wish to see that fully put into effect.

A further step that needs to be taken is to resume
the payments of revenues withheld from the Palestinian
Authority. Meanwhile, the Palestinian Authority itself
must make good-faith efforts to end the violence and to
restore security cooperation.

So what needs to be done right away? Both
parties must take urgent steps to reduce the violence
and build confidence between them. Both parties must
pursue contacts between them, for example, to make
real progress in security cooperation. There is in reality
no alternative to the parties themselves deciding to
arrest the current cycle of violence and return to the
path of negotiations. But the record- not least the
melting away of the Sharm el-Sheikh agreement-
shows that they need help. That should be the purpose
of any action the Council decides to take. We should
always be thinking of how to improve conditions on
the ground, for people on both sides. We should
explore proposals that can achieve that goal.

We continue to believe, with France, Ireland,
Norway and others, that an observer presence in the
occupied territories could be beneficial, but that this
can only be achieved with the acceptance of both
parties. This issue should not be allowed to become a
totem, dividing the parties and, still worse, the Security
Council. It is the responsibility both of those who are
traditionally supportive of Palestinian positions and of
those traditionally supportive of Israeli positions to
make a real effort to prevent such a harmful division
occurring.

We have all made clear to the parties our
conviction that an observer force could be useful. The
parties bear the primary responsibility to agree how
this might be possible. Our aim should be to encourage
them to work together, not to polarize disputes and
perpetuate the breakdown in constructive dialogue.

The Council has a challenge before it. We have to
make this a common endeavour: how to maximize the
prospects for renewed negotiations; how to help the
parties move back from violence; and how we can give
them practical support on the ground.
