Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I would
like first of all to thank Under-Secretary-General
Honwana, for his briefing. I welcome the presence here
today of the Prime Minister of Djibouti, the Permanent
Representative of Eritrea, and the representatives of the
African Union and the Arab League. Those two
organizations have an important role to play in
resolving this crisis.

I would like to highlight two points. First, the
border dispute between Djibouti and Eritrea has
become an international issue. The Council has already
discussed, in informal consultations, various border
disputes between Djibouti and Eritrea.

In May, the Secretariat advised the Council of
tensions between the two countries on the issue of the
promontory and Doumeira Island following various
defensive exercises undertaken by Eritrea. France
made a statement to this Council, as it had already
done in its national capacity, condemning that Violation
of Djibouti's sovereignty. At the time, the Council
welcomed the positive gestures made by Eritrea, which
had withdrawn from certain positions. We had hoped
that the two parties, with the help of the Chair of the
African Union, the Arab League and other interested
States, were on the verge of engaging in dialogue in
order to find a diplomatic solution to their dispute.

The Council was, however, forced to react to the
new situation created by the bloody confrontations of
10 and 11 June. On 12 June, in a presidential
statement, the Council condemned the military action
conducted by Eritrea against Djibouti and called on the
two parties to implement a ceasefire, exercise restraint
and - with regard to Eritrea in particular - withdraw
its forces and return to the status quo ante.

The situation on the ground seems to be stable,
but it could still degenerate very rapidly in an area
where the rugged landscape forces the two armies to
face each other at close proximity. The parties, in
particular Eritrea, must imperatively abide by the
presidential statement of 12 June. In particular, that
means that Eritrea must retreat from its defensive
installations that it has started building on the southern
flank of the promontory leading to the crest of the hill
and that the two parties withdraw from Doumeira
Island. The troops from Djibouti have done so; they
have withdrawn. The Eritrean troops have not.

The Security Council will therefore continue to
follow this question very closely, as will the African
Union and the Arab League.

The second point that I would like to highlight is
that the two parties have a new window of opportunity
to find, with the support the international community, a
diplomatic solution to their dispute. France welcomes
the role being played by the European Union
Commissioner, Louis Michel, who is in contact with
both parties. We must not underestimate the difficulties
facing us, but the Horn of Africa has already had its
share of conflict, and it is in the interests of the two
parties to avoid a new one.

I would like to emphasize that we believe that
Djibouti plays a stabilizing role, especially by
welcoming the holding on its territory of negotiations
between the Transitional Federal Government and the
Alliance for the Re-Liberation of Somalia. That region
is very important to the stability of Africa as a whole.

Djibouti and France have established a
relationship of friendship, cooperation and trust that
dates back many years. In that regard, France fully
intends to respect its commitments to Djibouti. Neither
a large-scale conflict nor a frozen conflict is a
satisfactory alternative.

I should now like to return to the issue of the
border, which is at the heart of the problem and to
which the parties must find an agreement. The border
was delimited by a Franco-Ethiopian agreement of
1897 and, subsequently, by Franco-Italian protocols in
1900 and 1901. Other later agreements have not been
ratified. The border has never been defined. With
regard to Doumeira Island, the Franco-Italian protocol
provides that the two parties would eventually
determine sovereignty over the island and that, in the
meanwhile, they would not deploy troops there on a
permanent basis.

Several relevant documents of long standing
therefore exist, none of which has been signed by the
States that are currently parties to the conflict. That
uncertainty twice led to tension between Eritrea and
Djibouti during the 19905. France therefore hopes that
the two parties - along with a third party of their
choosing, if they so desire - can find a negotiated
solution and that the border of Doumeira can be
definitively demarcated.

Along with the African Union, the League of
Arab States and Qatar, we have expressed to the two
parties the readiness of France to support them in such
an undertaking. We have in particular proposed the
sending of an envoy or a legal team to facilitate the
parties' discussions. I should like today to reiterate our
readiness to do that.

Lastly, I should like to underscore the fact that
the two points I have raised - internationalization and
a call for dialogue between the parties - are in no way
mutually exclusive. To the contrary, it is clear that it is
not up to the international community, and especially
not the Security Council, to define the border for the
parties. However, we must together help the parties to
find a negotiated solution that is their own. My
delegation therefore believes that it would be useful
today for the Security Council to send some specific
messages. We regret that Eritrea did not respond to the
calls contained in the Security Council presidential
statement of 12 June. We call on the two parties,
especially Eritrea, to withdraw their forces and to
return to the status quo ante.

We would like to thank the regional and
subregional organizations involved in helping the two
parties to find a negotiated solution.

It would be very helpful for the Secretary-
General to deploy a fact-finding mission to the region,
which should have the full cooperation of both parties.
The Secretary-General could also keep the Security
Council apprised of developments in the situation as
soon as he has a report from the mission we are calling
for.
I think that this is a useful and unifying message
from which you, Sir, could draw when you meet the
press following this meeting.

