Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): I wish
to begin by welcoming the presence of Mr. Ian Martin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Nepal, and of the Permanent Representative of Nepal. I
should also like to thank the Special Representative for
his comprehensive overview of the current situation in
Nepal and of the assistance that the United Nations has
given, is giving and can continue to give to the ongoing
peace process.

Nepal has recently experienced many historic
moments - a series of what I would call "firsts". In
April, the Nepalese elected a Constituent Assembly for
the first time. On 28 May, the Assembly met for the
first time and decided to change the form of the State
by making Nepal a federal republic. Tomorrow, Nepal
will appoint its first president.
The Nepalese can be proud of the peace that they
have built. In no peace process has the word
"ownership" been so meaningful because, while Nepal
has certainly benefited from the support of the United
Nations and the international community, it has also
been the driving force behind its own peace process.

In particular, Belgium wishes to congratulate
Nepal on the proportion of women elected to the
Constituent Assembly, who represent more than a third
of those elected. That performance puts Nepal in
fourteenth place on a list of 135 countries. Since the
Constituent Assembly is mandated to chart the
country's future, it is essential that women, who
represent more than 50 per cent of the population, be
equally involved.

While stressing progress, we should not close our
eyes to the challenges ahead, to which we believe it is
our duty to draw the attention of the Nepalese
authorities. The Secretary-General highlights the fact
that the human rights situation remains very
worrisome. We share that concern. A lasting peace
cannot be based on extrajudicial executions or on
impunity for past acts of violence. In particular, we
encourage the new Government to provide for
transitional justice mechanisms.

The issue of weapons and armies must not remain
the "poor relation" of the peace process. We
congratulate the parties on the 25 June Agreement and,
in particular, on the provisions related to the strategy
for discharge from the cantonments. It is essential that
those provisions be implemented as soon as a
Government has been formed. Here, we should also
like to stress the urgent case of minors who have not
yet been demobilized.

The issue that particularly concerns us today is
that of UNMIN's future. At the request of the parties,
the United Nations assisted the peace process during its
crucial phase. Now we must see how the Organization
can best continue that assistance, in response to the
request of the Government of Nepal.

We sincerely encourage the parties to implement
the 25 June Agreement - particularly those provisions
relating to the cantonments - swiftly and in good
faith. It is in that spirit that we can support a six-month
renewal of UNMIN's mandate.
