Mr. Mahmood (Bangladesh): I thank Germany
for scheduling this very important open debate on the
situation in the Middle East. Allow me to express our
appreciation to the Minister of State of the Federal
Foreign Office of Germany for chairing this debate. I
also convey our thanks to Mr. Robert Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his comprehensive briefing this morning.

The Bangladeshi delegation aligns itself with the
statements delivered by the representatives of Egypt
and Kazakhstan on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, respectively. In addition, I wish to briefly
make certain points that Bangladesh believes to be of
importance.

A durable and sustainable resolution of the Arab-
Israeli conflict, including the issue of Palestine, which
is the core of the long-lasting crisis, must be our
collective strategic objective. All Member States
should pledge complete commitment to this objective
and throw their full moral, diplomatic, political and
economic support behind its early realization.

The people of Palestine are being denied their
fundamental rights to self-determination and to live

freely in their own land, and displaced Palestinians
have been denied their rights to return home and live in
dignity and safety. Unfortunately, it appears to be a
collective failure on the part of the international
community, and especially the people of Israel, who
themselves having suffered deprivation failed
nevertheless to rise to the occasion and guarantee the
people of Palestine their fundamental rights to self-
determination and to live in a sovereign State of their
own, side by side with Israel. In order to achieve a
lasting solution in the Middle East, it is very important
to address the key issue, which is the prolonged and
illegal occupation of the Arab territories by Israel.

We express our concern at the occupying Power's
extensive destruction of property, homes, economic
institutions, agricultural lands and orchards; the
construction of the wall; the confiscation of land; and
the continued imposition of checkpoints, contrary to
international law, in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including in and around East Jerusalem, which have
seriously hampered the already dire socio-economic
situation facing the Palestinian population.

We commend President Mahmoud Abbas'
leadership of the Palestinian Authority and continued
Palestinian State-building efforts, especially in the
areas of governance, rule of law and human rights,
livelihoods and productive sectors, education and
culture, health, social protection and water.

But we are worried owing to the Israeli military
operations and the continuing Israeli policy of closures
and severe restrictions on the movement of persons and
goods, including humanitarian personnel, as well as
food, medical, fuel and other essential supplies, in the
Gaza Strip, which are causing civilian casualties. We
therefore call for maximum restraint and respect for
international humanitarian law. In this regard, it is very
unfortunate that a French civilian boat, which was
sailing to provide humanitarian support, was recently
seized.

My delegation believes that the Fourth Geneva
Convention, the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 425 (1978), the land-for-peace
principle, and the Madrid Conference terms of
reference, which guarantee Israel's withdrawal from all
occupied Arab and Palestinian territories to the lines of
4 June 1967, the Road Map, and the Arab Peace
Initiative are the best guides for achieving a two-State
solution.

The principled support for the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination that has come
from all corners of the globe, both bilateral and
multilateral, has been an essential pillar of Palestinian
resilience over the decades. My delegation welcomes
in this regard the Palestinian Authority's plan,
"Palestine: Ending the Occupation, Establishing the
State", a plan for constructing the institutions of a
Palestinian State by September 2011.

Let us turn to the situations in Lebanon and the
occupied Syrian Golan. It is sad that the occupying
State is violating Lebanese sovereignty and repeatedly
breaching Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). It
is also of concern that there have been various
measures and actions to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Bangladesh's long-
standing position that the continued illegal occupation
of Palestine over the past six decades is the root cause
of violence, unrest and destabilization in the region.
Let me also reiterate our full support for a lasting
peace for all inhabitants of the region, both Arabs and
Israelis, and our strong commitment to the realization
of an independent, sovereign and viable State of
Palestine with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, living
side by side and in peace with all its neighbours.

