We thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy Onanga- Anyanga for their important briefings. Indonesia commends the positive engagement between the Sudan and South Sudan, as well as their respective transitions and hopes for their continuation in Abyei. However, the fragile security situation in Abyei remains cause for concern. Unless checked effectively, it could exacerbate the existing socioeconomic and humanitarian challenges. This is especially perilous amid the looming coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We hope that the current grave situation will be used by both Governments to intensify peacemaking and put all energies behind ensuring that the effects of the pandemic on the people of Abyei and those within their domains are minimized. On this note, I would like to underline three key issues. The first is enhancing the capacity of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). UNISFA's presence remains essential to maintaining stability in Abyei. Thus, enhancing UNISFA's ability to fully discharge its mandate remains our utmost priority. UNISFA's reconfiguration must be geared towards enabling the mission effectively to respond to the challenges on the ground and meet them with appropriate personnel and capability support. It is especially important to enhance UNISFA's readiness for the COVID-19 pandemic. Indonesia supports the Secretary-General's recommendation to renew the UNISFA mandate for six months, and looks forward to working with other Council members on the mandate renewal. Secondly, on cooperation between the Sudan and South Sudan, both countries need to seize the positive momentum in their bilateral relations to propel the negotiations on Abyei forward. We join the Secretary-General in his call for the two countries to resolve outstanding issues expeditiously, including the implementation of their Agreement of 20 June 2011. Abyei's peaceful resolution is a test case of the political transitions in the Sudan and South Sudan. This also requires further effective engagement from countries of the region, the African Union and the United Nations. Thirdly, it is vital to promote intercommunal dialogue. Indonesia notes with concern the recent clashes in Abyei, most notably in Kolom. We call for an immediate joint investigation followed by remedial actions to help the two communities heal. UNISFA's role in enhancing intercommunal dialogue in Abyei through the Joint community peace committee is commendable. The traditional leaders conference last month was also a positive initiative. More such undertakings, topped with enhancing the rule of law, are critical for peacebuilding. Hence, UNISFA's work on capacity-building for the community protection committees and its support of traditional justice mechanisms must continue. The additional deployment of the remaining authorized United Nations police and formed police units is also of critical importance. In conclusion, Indonesia fully supports the efforts of the Sudan and South Sudan to reach a peaceful solution in Abyei as a part of their journey to peace.
