Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to welcome the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator and to thank him for his very informative
briefing on the exhaustive report of the Secretary-
General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2007/643). We also welcome the Director-General
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, an
organization which, as we all know, does a great deal
to assist and support the victims who are at the centre
of our concerns today.

My delegation fully concurs with the statement to
be made by Mr. Gaspar Martins, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Angola, on behalf of
the Group of African States.

Generally speaking, what we draw from the sixth
report of the Secretary-General is a very gloomy
picture, given the number of civilian victims of armed
conflicts and their geographical distribution. It is a
tragedy, often with irreparable effects, experienced
every day and at every moment by thousands of
people. Like the Permanent Representative of Italy,
who spoke earlier, we have doubts concerning any
progress made regarding the number of people who are
still suffering from the effects of those violent acts.
Given the situation, my delegation agrees with the
Secretary-General that actions are more important than
words and that, when it is not possible to prevent an
armed conflict, the protection of civilians should be a
priority. We believe that it is a moral duty.

This sixth report is even more informative in its
definition of the nature of current armed conflicts, in
the alarming figures it provides on the numbers of
displaced persons and, especially, in its depiction of the
situation of women, children, the elderly and people
with disabilities, who are among those most affected
and who have endured the most serious difficulties and
extreme violence. We believe that the international
community should be able to take some of the actions
necessary to confront those challenges, as noted in
section IV of the report of the Secretary-General. We
would like to say a few words on the following points.

The responsibility to protect populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity was emphasized in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1),
particularly in paragraphs 138 and 139. That
responsibility belongs first and foremost to
Governments, which need to shoulder it effectively by
conducting background educational work and in
publicizing information regarding international
instruments, particularly international humanitarian
law. In that regard, we should note that some
Governments that are not able to accomplish this
themselves should benefit from assistance from the
international community.

Moreover, the International Criminal Court
should play a pre-eminent role in judging those who
commit the most serious crimes, when they are not
considered to be within the competence of national
jurisdictions or when national jurisdictions are not able
to exercise their role. My delegation reiterates our
commitment to a policy of zero tolerance for all forms
of violence, all acts of sexual exploitation and other
actions against civilians, during conflicts and during
peacekeeping missions, by military, police and civilian
personnel, in accordance paragraph 20 of resolution
1674 (2006) of 28 April 2006.

We also wish to reiterate here that we condemn
acts of terrorism and the use of mercenaries. The nature
of conflicts and the actors involved are significant
factors in exacerbating armed violence against
civilians, which then often results in a higher number
of deaths, displaced persons and refugees.

In the kinds of internal conflicts that we see now,
as the Secretary-General mentioned, in which
Government troops are facing armed rebellions, the
protagonists often use measures or methods that can
exacerbate the illicit traffic in and proliferation of
weapons and drugs, the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, sexual violence, trafficking in women and
children, the recruitment of child soldiers and punitive
expeditions against vulnerable people. Given those
practices, the international community, and first and
foremost the Council, must do more to coordinate
efforts to coherently combat acts of terrorism and the
use of mercenaries. In that regard, the Council should
set the example through its unity, cohesion and
impartiality.

We also agree with the Secretary-General that the
access and assistance of humanitarian personnel to
civilian populations should be assured. The report of
the Secretary-General notes 2.2 million internally
displaced persons in Iraq, the same number in the
single region of Darfur in the Sudan, 300,000 in the
Central African Republic, 170,000 in Chad, 700,000 in
Somalia and 1.2 million in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Those figures alone cannot show the deep
and indelible scars of the victims and those close to
them.
We therefore condemn very firmly the acts of
sexual exploitation and abuse of and trade in women
and children carried out by combatants, but also by
other actors, and sometimes peacekeeping forces. We
are convinced that the only way to assist those
hundreds of millions of people, who have no voice and
no hope, is to require that the parties to a conflict
facilitate access for humanitarian organizations.

Finally, we would like to note that the protection
of humanitarian personnel and journalists should also
be ensured. It is regrettable to note the increase and the
frequency of violent acts against humanitarian
personnel of the United Nations and other
humanitarian organizations, journalists and media
professionals over the past few years. We should note
that resolution 1738 (2006) of 23 December 2006
emphasizes that States have the responsibility to meet
their obligation under international law to put an end to
impunity and to bring to justice those responsible for
grave violations of international humanitarian law.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to put
particular emphasis on the need for all United Nations
Member States complying with arms embargoes,
because it is very often the violation of an embargo
that fuels the action of rebel groups and other forms of
terrorism.

