The President: I thank the representative of Uganda
for his kind words addressed to me.

The next speaker is the Permanent Observer of the
Organization of African Unity to the United Nations, to
whom the Council has extended an invitation under rule 39
of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

Mr. Sy (Organization of African Unity (OAU))
(interpretation from French): At the outset allow me to
thank you, Mr. President, for your kindness and, through
you, to thank all the members of the Council who were
kind enough to support the participation of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) delegation. My thanks also go to
all those who have sought to rescue this question from
oblivion.

Indeed, the civil war that has torn at Somalia for
several years has yet to find a peaceful settlement, and
the country remains without a central government. In this
light, the events of the past six months have not been
encouraging. Fighting has been observed in the north-
west, at the Hargeisa airport; in August, between various
Issa clans; in the areas of Zeila and Lughaye in July and
August, leading to the closing of the border with Djibouti;
and finally, in the towns of Abdel Kadir and Jidhi, near
the Ethiopian border, which troops loyal to Mr. Egal have
retaken from the Issa militias. In the south, partisans of
General Aidid have been fighting the militiamen of the
Rahanwein Resistance Army in and around Baidoa and
those of Ali Mahdi and Osman Atto in Mogadishu.

It is well known that in recent years approximately
600,000 Somalis have fled to neighbouring countries,
while within Somalia itself there are half a million
displaced persons. As a result of the fighting in the north-
west and an increase in the cost of living, population
movements have been noted towards both Djibouti and
Ethiopia. It should also be pointed out that more than 400
people, primarily from southern Somalia, reached
Bossaso, in the north, after having been expelled from
Yemen on 29 August last. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and
the World Food Programme (WFP) have provided
assistance to that group, which includes a relatively large
number of unaccompanied children.

In this context, we can only welcome the
continuation of operations to repatriate Somali refugees
who had gone to Kenya. Of these, 3,588 who had been
living in the Marafa carnp returned to the Lower Juba
area, and 2,934 others have left the Dadaab camp for the
Middle Juba region. We note that over the past 18 months
UNHCR has helped repatriate nearly 100,000 Somali
refugees and hopes to transport another 20,000 by air,
land and sea by the end of 1996.

But, of course, that is only part of the problem.
During its 63rd session, the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) took up that
question. First, it expressed gratitude to His Excellency
Mr. Ato Meles Zenawi, Prime Minister of Ethiopia and
current Chairman of the OAU, who also has a special
mandate. It expressed concern about the situation in
Somalia and the impasse in the negotiations aimed at
restarting the process of national reconciliation and setting

 

up a broad-based national authority. The Council of
Ministers therefore appealed to the Somali factions to
refrain from any activity that might plunge the country into
widespread war.

Above all, the Council of Ministers urged the Somali
leaders to take urgent action to promote dialogue with a
View to establishing a broad-based national authority for
achieving national reconciliation. The Council also decided
that the Tripartite Mission should make another visit to
Somalia in order to maintain direct contacts with the
various Somali factions and assess the situation on the
ground.

The humanitarian situation remains a source of
anxiety. Serious reductions in food have been reported,
especially in the Basi region, which has been affected by
severe drought. The OAU wishes to take this opportunity
to appeal to Member States and to the international
community to provide humanitarian assistance to deal with
the worsening humanitarian situation. The situation is
serious - more serious than we would like to admit.

We therefore appeal to the international community
to consider how to come to Somalia's aid. The country
deserves such aid, and now is the time to support the
proposals of Tunisia and Ethiopia and to reaffirm our
support for establishing permanent United Nations
representation in Somalia, which we believe is imperative.
I am sure that my appeal will be heard.

The President: I thank the Permanent Observer of the
Organization of African Unity for his kind words addressed
to me. The next speaker is the representative of Rwanda. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.


