Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Under-Secretary-
General Lowcock for his comprehensive briefing. We
want to express our appreciation to the United Nations
and humanitarian partners for their continued selfless
and courageous service in providing assistance to all
Syrians in difficult circumstances.

We remain concerned about the humanitarian
crisis in all the areas of Syria where it is prevalent.
As the Under-Secretary-General said, the Syrian war
has entered its eighth year, bringing unspeakable
suffering to the people of the country. The escalation
of violence that we witnessed last month in eastern
Ghouta and other parts of the country has been a source
of extremely grave concern. According to the statement
issued on 21 March by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, shelter, protection, water and
sanitation remain the key priority humanitarian needs
of the internally displaced. In that regard, we thank
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners for
providing much-needed assistance.

Alleviating the suffering of Syrians requires urgent
and coordinated action on the part of all actors, while
respecting the relevant resolutions of the Council,
particularly resolution 2401 (2018). It was encouraging
that the Council unanimously adopted resolution 2401
(2018), demanding a cessation of hostilities throughout
Syria for at least 30 days so as to ensure the safe,
unimpeded and sustained delivery of humanitarian aid
and medical evacuations. In that regard, while much
remains to be done to fully implement the resolution,
compared to the previous month there has been positive
action, including aid delivery to some of the areas that
are especially badly affected and difficult to reach.
The conflict has also diminished in intensity in some
areas, according to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/243).

However, this does not mean that the action taken
has been sufficient. We therefore stress that it is vital
to redouble our efforts to do everything possible to
fully and comprehensively implement the resolution
with a sense of urgency and enhanced political will. We
believe that what the people of Syria need is a cessation
of hostilities, along with protection and access to basic
goods and services. All ofthose demands are contained
and affirmed in resolution 2401 (2018). All Syrian parties
should therefore respect and fully implement resolution
2401 (2018), and all States that have influence over the
parties should try to bring the maximum pressure to
bear on them, with the ultimate objective of helping to
fully operationalize the resolution, which was adopted
unanimously by the Council. In that regard, we hope
that the Astana guarantors, Russia, Turkey and Iran,
will play their role in implementing resolution 2401
(2018), strengthening the ceasefire arrangements and
improving humanitarian conditions, as stated in their
final statement of 16 March.

In addition, while we acknowledge that the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners have been able to
reach millions of Syrians using all modes of aid delivery,
the fact remains that humanitarian access, particularly
inter-agency convoys, remains a critical challenge. In
that connection, it is absolutely vital to ensure safe,
sustained and need-based humanitarian access so that
life-saving aid can reach all Syrians in need.

Let me conclude by reaffirming that only a
comprehensive political dialogue, under the auspices of
the United Nations, can ultimately end the humanitarian
tragedy in Syria. We reiterate our position that the
only solution to the Syrian crisis is a political solution
based on resolution 2254 (2015). We support the
continued efforts of the Special Envoy and encourage
all Syrian parties to engage with him constructively
and meaningfully in order to revitalize the Geneva
intra-Syrian talks and support the establishment of a
constitutional committee, in line with the outcome of
the Sochi congress. We fully concur with the Secretary-
General, who states, in his report of20 March, "Political
efforts to bring the war to an end must be accorded
priority and redoubled by all parties to the conflict."
(S/2018/243, para. 48)

While the primary responsibility for resolving the
conflict lies with the Syrians themselves - a principle
that is firmly embedded in resolution 2254 (2015) - the
Council also has an important role to play in supporting
the efforts in a spirit of unity, which we believe can
have a positive impact on the ground in alleviating the
suffering of all Syrians. That may be a tall order, in
the light of the fragmentation that Ambassador Delattre
mentioned earlier. However, the effort must be made.

