Mr. McNee (Canada): We are honoured to have
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan and
Pakistan participate in today's debate.

Canada thanks the Secretary-General for his
thoughtful report (S/2008/434) on the situation in
Afghanistan, and we express our appreciation to
Mr. Eide and to Under-Secretary-General Holmes for
their informative briefings earlier today. The report of
the Secretary-General presents a frank picture of the
situation, but also outlines a vision for the way ahead.

Canada extends its deepest condolences to the
Governments and peoples of Afghanistan and India on
the loss of their citizens in recent days. The horrific
attack on the Indian embassy in Kabul is a reminder
that our work is far from done and that the coming year
will be a critical one. The efforts of both the Afghan
Government and the international community need to
be more focused, more decisive, more effective and
more coherent as we move forward.

In that regard, Canada wishes to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the vigour,
focus and leadership he has brought to the Mission. In
the process, he has built a strong relationship with the
Government of Afghanistan and with the entire
international community.

We also share the Secretary-General's positive
assessment of the Paris Conference. We congratulate
him and the Governments of France and Afghanistan
for establishing the terms of a strengthened partnership
between the Afghan Government and the international
community.

Canada remains firmly committed to working
closely with the Afghan Government, the Afghan
people, the United Nations system, NATO, our partners
in the International Security Assistance Force and the
wider international community to help establish a
stable, peaceful future in Afghanistan.

Canada welcomes the successful launching of the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy. As the
Secretary-General's report rightly points out,
international resources must be aligned with the
priorities identified and agreed to in the Strategy.
Canada is doing its part to ensure that alignment.

At the Paris Conference, Canada was pleased to
announce the pledge of an additional $600 million for
the development and reconstruction of Afghanistan,
bringing our overall pledged assistance over a 10-year
period to $1.9 billion. Canada remains one of the
leading donors to Afghanistan. Much of that assistance
will support the implementation of the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy over the coming years.

In addition, we have sharpened the focus of our
efforts in order to be even more effective in
Afghanistan, and specifically in Kandahar province. To
that end, the Canadian Government recently announced
six priorities upon which our training, assistance and
diplomacy will focus. We can assure the Council that
those priorities are firmly in line with those outlined by
the Afghan Government in the National Development
Strategy and with those highlighted in the Secretary-
General's report. They include support for the Afghan
national security forces, building Afghan capacity to
help deliver basic services, continued humanitarian
assistance, support for Afghan-led political
reconciliation, helping to build key national
institutions, and border security.

With that last priority in mind, we welcome the
Special Representative's recent visits in the region and
encourage such regular consultations as a key step
towards building the strong and productive dialogue
that is required.

Yet our collective efforts are also at risk from
within. For that reason, Canada shares the Secretary-
General's concern regarding the devastating impact
that corruption is having on the average Afghan and on
the international community's development and
security efforts. In addition, we share the Secretary-
General's assessment that free, fair and secure
elections in 2009 and 2010 represent crucial steps in
the consolidation of democracy for all Afghans. With
that in mind, Canada will lend its full support to
Afghan authorities and to the United Nations as they
work to plan and administer upcoming elections across
the country.
(spoke in French)

Canada strongly concurs with the Secretary-
General that for the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is to be able to properly
deliver on its enhanced mandate, it must be allocated
greater resources. We expect the full support of the
Secretariat in empowering the Special Representative
to manage the complex, ambitious and demanding
mandate set out for him by Member States.

In that evolving context, UNAMA must
strengthen its offices. Vacant positions must be staffed,
while new ones continue to be created. To that end, we
are confident that the risk allowance increase that was
recently approved by the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions will make a
real difference.

Canada also welcomes the Secretary-General's
resolve to expand UNAMA's presence throughout the
country. We look forward to a more visible United
Nations presence in Kandahar Province, for instance.
Such a presence would send a strong stabilizing signal
in that troubled region of Afghanistan.

Canada remains committed to helping
Afghanistan build a stable and democratic future.
Success in Afghanistan requires a very high degree of
coherence and cooperation. In that regard, the United
Nations has a critical role to play, and UNAMA can
count on Canada's full support in that context. At the
same time, Canada has high expectations that UNAMA
will deliver on its mandate and be fully accountable for
its actions to the Security Council.

Finally, UNAMA's leadership must ensure that
our efforts shall lead to the assumption of
responsibility by Afghans for their own security,
governance and development across Afghanistan. That
is what we are all striving for, after all.

