Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Since the latter part of October, violence and
conflict have been escalating in eastern Zaire, resulting in

 

a large-scale humanitarian crisis arousing the concern of the
international community.

The Chinese delegation is gravely concerned and
disturbed by the renewed fighting and the displacement of
millions of refugees in the Great Lakes region.

We appeal to the parties concerned to cease
immediately all hostile actions, ensure the safety of the
lives and property of refugees and innocent civilians and
guarantee the smooth delivery out of international
humanitarian assistance so as to create conditions for the
voluntary and orderly repatriation of the refugees and lay
the foundation for a political settlement in the Great Lakes
region.

The Chinese delegation believes that the international
community, including the Security Council, is duty-bound
to settle the present crisis in the Great Lakes region. The
present task is to defuse the humanitarian crisis. In this
regard, we have noted the communique of the Central
Organ of the OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution and the letter from its
Secretary General, His Excellency Mr. Salim Ahmed. We
appreciate and support the African countries and the OAU
in their efforts to resolve the present crisis with the help of
the international community.

We believe that it is very necessary to provide
emergency humanitarian assistance to the refugees in
eastern Zaire in View of the fact that Zaire and its
neighbouring countries have already agreed to the
deployment of the multinational humanitarian force. We
will respect the requests of Zaire, the African countries and
the OAU.

The Chinese delegation will therefore vote in favour
of the draft resolution.

The Chinese delegation believes that international
military intervention in eastern Zaire involves many
complicated and sensitive questions. Therefore, when
carrying out such an intervention the following principles
should be observed. First, the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the countries concerned, particularly Zaire,
should be respected and there should be no interference in
the internal affairs of these countries. Secondly, before
initiating this action, there should be full consultations with
the States concerned and their consent obtained. Full
cooperation should be provided during implementation.
Thirdly, this action should be strictly confined to
humanitarian purposes. Fourthly, since the intervention is

 

authorized by the Security Council, the Security Council's
political guidance must be accepted. Furthermore, there
should be a clear time-frame and terms of reference. I
should also like to point out here that the action mandated
by the draft resolution is strictly confined to humanitarian
purposes. We therefore have reservations about invoking
Chapter VII of the Charter.

The Chinese delegation believes that speedy and
smooth repatriation and settlement of the refugee question
are the bases for the settlement of the question of the
Great Lakes region.

We understand the complexity of the refugee issue
in this region, but so long as the parties involved are
sincerely making serious efforts, with the help of the
international community, all problems, including the issue
of refugees, should in the end be effectively settled.

The Great Lakes region has long witnessed chaos.
All countries face the task of consolidating peace and
economic reconstruction. Therefore, maintaining good-
neighbourly relations is vitally important to all countries.
We hope that all countries in the region will adhere to the
principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, non-interference in internal affairs, the
settlement of disputes through consultations based on
equality, and non-use of force in relations between
countries. In this way, they will be able to remove
interference, overcome difficulties and achieve peace and
stability in the Great Lakes region.

