Sheikh Al Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
my friend and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation, and your friendly country on your
able and professional leadership of the Security Council
for this month. I would also like to thank Mr. Antonio
Guterres, Mr. Vladimir Norov, Mr. Valery Semerikov
and Mr. Sergey Ivanov for their valuable briefings today.

Today's topic - cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security - is
highly important for the State of Kuwait. Thus, during
our presidency of the Council in June, we organized
a high-level briefing on cooperation between the
United Nations and the League of Arab States and
the means necessary to strengthen such cooperation
(see S/PV.8548). In this context, we encourage the
Security Council to convene more meetings to review
and promote cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, which would promote many principles,
most important of which are multilateralism, diversity
and dialogue, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations.
Experience has proven that no one country alone
can confront the increasingly diverse, complicated
and interconnected contemporary challenges that are
facing our world today, such as terrorism, transnational
organized crime and trafficking in drugs and in
people, inter alia. In order to effectively confront
these challenges, we require concerted and collective
efforts and the establishment of strong, regionally
owned frameworks to prevent conflicts and ensure
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. That is
why we once again stress the important role of regional
and subregional organizations, given their proximity
and their knowledge of the history and culture of their
regions and their commonalities, which make them
better poised to understand the nature of regional
conflicts and disputes.

Central Asia is a Vital and promising region, thanks
to its geostrategic importance and natural resources.
The three regional organizations we are discussing
today - the Commonwealth of Independent States,
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization - have close
ties with the countries of Central Asia. They play an
important role by galvanizing collective efforts to
confront the challenges facing those countries.

The phenomena of terrorism and violent extremism
are two of the ugliest forms of crime and threats to
international peace and security, targeting many
innocent civilians, including women and children. Given
the growing threat of terrorism to global security and
the developing modus operandi of terrorist operations
and manifestations, as well as the recruitment of new
terrorist elements, countries and organizations must
maintain and step up their efforts to promote their
counter-terrorism capacities.

The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters is one
of those threats. Its growing nature and the increasing
number of individuals undertaking terrorist activities
have become a source of serious concern, especially for
countries of origin, transit and destination.

The United Nations and its counter-terrorism
bodies, such as the Security Council, the Counter
Terrorism Committee, the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
all have a vital and important role to play in designing
international policies and strategies based on legal
frameworks, such as resolutions of the Security Council
and General Assembly and relevant international
conventions and treaties.
Despite all such international measures and actions,
we need more regional and effective cooperation. We
commend the Vital and effective role of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia in bringing the views of the countries of
Central Asia into convergence, convening them around
the negotiation table and strengthening dialogue, which
has led to many fruitful results.

We also commend cooperation and coordination
between the Centre and the three regional organizations
subject of our discussion today. The Centre plays a
pivotal role in cooperating with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and in
supporting efforts aimed at promoting security and
stability in Afghanistan in a number of areas, foremost
of which is countering terrorism, violent extremism
and organized crime, including trafficking in drugs.

We hope that such cooperation between the
Centre and relevant regional organizations will
culminate in supporting Afghanistan economically and
developmentally. The speediest possible achievement
of security and stability in Afghanistan is considered
essential to the maintenance and strengthening
of regional and international peace and security.
Afghanistan has long suffered from terrorism and
violent extremism, which have adversely affected all
aspects of life there, including development.

We must seize the opportunity to help Afghanistan
to overcome similar challenges by encouraging relevant
parties to reach a peace agreement that would pave
the way for a road map for comprehensive national
reconciliation. A peace agreement is undoubtedly
a critical element in restoring security and stability
in friendly Afghanistan. In that regard, we value the
efforts of UNAMA and welcome the adoption by the
Security Council last week of resolution 2489 (2019),
on the renewal of the Mission's mandate.

The State of Kuwait is a member of various
regional organizations, including the Gulf Cooperation
Council, the League of Arab States and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. We believe that
those organizations must shoulder their responsibilities
to confront the aforementioned challenges, in line
with the relevant Security Council resolutions. Those
organizations have already adopted a series of strategies
and plans and made intensive efforts in that regard.
For example, they have collectively contributed to the
adoption of relevant counter-terrorism instruments
and conventions, in addition to adopting strategies
that effectively contribute to promoting the efforts
of their Member States to combat terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, criminalize extremist
ideologies and establish a database on terrorism and
terrorist organizations. Those organizations have also
raised awareness through social media and moderation
centres. They have further renounced extremism and
sought to enhance the role of youth and the family,
while launching programmes to rehabilitate terrorists
returning from areas of conflict.

In closing, my country hopes that those discussions
will lead to further proposals and strategies in order
to expand, scale up and improve cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations as a means to consolidating our collective
capacity to effectively and swiftly address threats to
international peace and security.

