Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): First, I wish to
join other delegations in thanking Mr. Malloch Brown,
Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, for his
remarks and his briefing.

Ghana considers the issue of procurement reform
in the United Nations to be of cardinal importance, as
transparency and accountability are critical to the
integrity of the Organization as a whole. For the
record, and in order that there be no doubt, I wish to
state categorically that Ghana does not condone, or
belong to any group or association of States that
condones, fraud, waste or abuse of authority in the
United Nations system.

The General Assembly deserves to be
commended for initiating, at the urging of the Group of
77 and China, of which my country is proud to be a
member, the management audit that led to the
disclosure of very disturbing incidents of fraud, abuse
of authority and highly unethical conduct involving
staff of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO). We associate ourselves with the statement to
be made later by the representative of South Africa on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.

We welcome the interim audit report and expect
the General Assembly to vigorously follow up with the
required measures to ensure that the various loopholes
are closed immediately. In that connection, my
delegation regrets the speed with which what is only an
interim report has found its way to the media, even
before its having been considered by the Assembly,
which commissioned it on its own initiative in the first
place. Some Member States, including mine, were
naturally dismayed to read the details of the report,
which had been embargoed to the media, as far back as
23 January 2006, when Member States had not yet
seen, or been provided with copies of, the report.
Obviously, such deliberate leaks are aimed at
misleading the public and bringing the United Nations
into disrepute. While we endorse the need for a
whistleblower policy to enhance transparency and
accountability in our Organization, in this case the
leakage of the interim audit report to the press was
hasty and unwarranted, and also unethical on the part
of those who were responsible.

On the substance of the interim report, the need
for efficient and effective use of the resources of the
United Nations, especially those earmarked for critical
peacekeeping operations, cannot be overstated. Such
operations are invariably costly, and it is in the interest
of all to ensure that waste through fraud and
embezzlement is avoided.

As the body that authorizes such critical
peacekeeping operations, the Security Council must be
especially concerned to ensure that funds are always
available for that purpose. Therefore, today's public
meeting affords the Council the opportunity to raise its
concerns before the public, including the General
Assembly, which exercises management oversight over
the Secretariat, so that together we can find a way
forward.

While recognizing the right of the Security
Council to consider some aspects of peacekeeping
operations by virtue of the fact that it is the organ
entrusted under the Charter with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security - and therefore authorizes
peacekeeping missions - we also believe that
procurement is essentially a management issue that
falls within the remit of the Fifth Committee of the
General Assembly and, by extrapolation, is under the
oversight responsibility of the General Assembly.
Therefore, at the appropriate time and in the proper
forum, we will articulate our views in extenso on some
of the issues and recommendations contained in the
audit report. In the meantime, we wish to make a few
remarks and observations on what is, after all, an
interim report.

Procurement has been one of the major areas of
focus in the reform of the United Nations over the past
10 years. In that regard, we wish to acknowledge that
efforts have been made, and are still under way, in the
Secretariat, peacekeeping missions and offices away

from Headquarters to improve excellence and
accountability in the provision of services. Those
efforts include initiatives such as the development of
the United Nations Global Marketplace, the
establishment of lead-agency procurement and direct
agreements with manufacturers and a harmonized
system-wide training and certification programme. We
also cannot fail to take into account the programme of
reforms introduced by the Secretary-General in 2005,
which included five main categories: ensuring ethical
conduct, strengthening oversight and accountability,
updating the Organization, improving senior
management performance and increasing transparency.

Despite those laudable efforts, much remains to
be done. The interim audit report reveals several
shortcomings in the procurement of items for United
Nations peacekeeping operations, as well as a lack of
proper care and attention by officials responsible for
designing and implementing internal controls. The
interim audit also documented substantial evidence of
abuse in the area of procurement for peacekeeping
operations, leading to financial losses and inaccuracies
in planning assumptions. Also of concern is the fact
that the United Nations management has not enforced
accountability for non-adherence to internal control
procedures, financial rules and procedures and
procurement procedures.

It is imperative that immediate steps be taken to
rectify those anomalies. We hope that, when the time
comes for us to consider the review of the financial
rules and regulations in the wider context of
management reform, we will bear in mind that, in some
cases, the fault lies not with the rules and regulations
but with those entrusted with the responsibility to
implement them.

Despite the fact that the document under
consideration is preliminary, we note with much
concern that a perennial problem found in United
Nations procurement activities is yet to be adequately
addressed. This relates to the increases in procurement
from developing countries, which are still largely
limited to host countries of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and their neighbours. My
delegation recognizes the important contribution of
that activity to the development of the economies of
host and neighbouring countries that are greatly
burdened by prevailing conflict situations. However, it
is our candid view that greater diversity in that area is
needed.

We would also appreciate information on whether
procurement officers are ensuring equitable
geographical representation among vendors, and on the
extent to which the United Nations has taken steps to
ensure procurement from vendors from developing
countries and countries in transition.

We have learned from elsewhere that some
officials have been put on leave. We welcome
measures aimed at dealing with officials found to be
guilty of fraud, waste or abuse of authority, but we
should also bear in mind that it is public knowledge
that the United Nations has of late been vocal on the
need for democracy in all Member States. Democracy
is based on the rule of law. The United Nations should
therefore be seen to be practising what it preaches.
There should be due process of law and, by extension,
the right of accused persons to be heard. Viewed from
this perspective, even though the audit report is still in
draft form, staff members under investigation are
entitled to due process of law and should be deemed
innocent until proven guilty.

Finally, let me emphasize that scandal, abuse,
fraud and mismanagement eat away at confidence in
the United Nations. The United Nations is
unreformable only if we Member States choose not to
reform it. If we make reform, especially management
reform, a collective undertaking and not a matter of
interest to only a few countries, we are bound to
succeed. We sink or swim together. Let us therefore, in
tranquility and with unity of purpose, seek to reform
this institution, which is indispensable. Our success
will redound to the benefit of all Member States, big
and small, weak and powerful.

