Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First, I would like to thank the Chinese
presidency of the Security Council for the invitation
to participate in this open debate on an issue of such
importance to the international community, and the
Secretary-General for his briefing at the beginning of
this debate.

Argentina condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and believes that terrorist acts constitute
a threat not only to international peace and security, but
alsotohumandignity,peacefulandcivilizedcoexistence,
the stability and consolidation of democracy, and the
economic and social development of nations. Terrorist
acts are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation, whenever and by whomsoever committed.
Terrorism must be fought within the rule of law and
respect for fundamental rights, which demands organic
and ongoing cooperation, with legal legitimacy and
in conformity with international law, international
refugee law, international humanitarian law and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. We are convinced that the response to terrorist

acts cannot and should be one-dimensional, but must
be based on a comprehensive approach, as reflected in
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
National, regional and international efforts in this area
must be built upon the balanced implementation of the
four pillars of the Strategy.

We must recognize that the emergence of such
extreme violence is due in many cases, among other
factors, to root causes linked to racial, religious, cultural
and economic motives, the violation of human, civil
and political rights, inequality, corruption, poverty and
poor governance. We must therefore deepen prevention
activities. In this sense, the crucial importance of
education in combating discrimination, xenophobia,
racism and other forms of intolerance cannot be
overemphasized, as well as in promoting a culture of
tolerance, dialogue and diversity. In this context, too,
the role of the media is essential.

That is why Argentina supports the Secretary-
General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism,
given its preventive nature, which seeks to provide a
comprehensive framework in the fight against violent
extremism leading to terrorism, within full respect
for international law, international human rights law,
international humanitarian law and international
refugee law.

Argentina agrees that foreign terrorist fighters
pose a severe threat to international peace and security,
and reiterates the need for States to comply with their
obligations under resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005),
2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014), among others. Indeed, the
severity and complexity of the current threat, which
includes an unprecedented flow of foreign terrorist
fighters and facilitation networks that fuel many
conflicts in various parts of the world, undoubtedly
increase the risk of terrorist attacks.

The problem of the emergence and participation of
foreign terrorist fighters is also based on underlying
issues, including social exclusion, discrimination,
religious, ideological and ethnic intolerance, among
other factors. It is therefore necessary to adopt a
comprehensive, multidimensional and multidisciplinary
approach based on international cooperation, which
requires commitment and interdependence among
security agencies and organizations dealing with
development, social policies and public education.

For our region, although far from the conflict zone,
the threat of foreign terrorist fighters is still a concern
that requires preventive actions. In this sense, the issue is
being followed by the Specialized Forum for Terrorism
of the Southern Common Market and Associated
States, in which Argentina stresses the importance of
strengthening cooperation with countries of the region
through cooperation and effective border control.

It is essential to redouble our efforts to prevent and
suppress the financing of terrorism, which requires
following financial trails; coordinating the work of
police, investigators and prosecutors; obtaining and
preserving tangible evidence; and strong and agile
multilateral and bilateral international cooperation. In
this regard, it is worth highlighting the Argentine decree
No. 918/2012, which provides for the administrative
freezing of assets or money from individuals designated
by the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) and from third countries, in accordance with
resolution 1373 (2001)

The terrorist phenomenon has mutated in recent
years, particularly in the stages of propaganda and
recruitment, using new technologies and taking
advantage of communication tools, including the use
of the Internet and social media. Social networks are
an important means for spreading propaganda and
recruitment. The sophistication and propaganda style
of terrorist groups are deliberately aimed at young
people from different societies and present an attractive
combination of idealism, enthusiasm, membership and
sanguinary content.

It is necessary to work closely with providers of
these services to address the rising numbers of foreign
terrorist fighters, not only to detect and stop their
recruitment but also to neutralize mass propaganda
that justifies and glorifies crimes. Another important
issue is assistance to the families of the victims, not
only to alleviate their needs, provide psychological help
and keep the memory of the victims alive, but also so
that they can play the important role of reaffirming a
counternarrative to terrorism.

Our country, which has been the victim of
bloody terrorist attacks, follows this issue with the
utmost attention, as evidenced by Argentina's recent
ratification of the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism of 2005 and
its participation in the recent Geneva Conference on
Preventing Violent Extremism. Similarly, Argentina
will actively participate in the fifth biennial review of

the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
to be held in June.
Finally, we reaffirm the central role of the United
Nations in the fight against terrorism, as a pillar
of the multilateral system and an organization of
universal membership with primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. We are
convinced that multilateral action through the United
Nations, in accordance with the principles of the
Organization, will allow us to confront the threat of
terrorism in full respect of international human rights
law and international humanitarian law and achieve a
more secure world for everyone.

