Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): On behalf of the
Ukrainian delegation, I would like to thank you, Sir,
for holding this important meeting and for inviting
Ukraine to participate. I would also like to wish the
Austrian delegation and you personally every success
in fulfilling your highly responsible duties as the
Security Council President.

Our appreciation also goes to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, for presenting the second
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/590) pursuant
to resolution 1846 (2008), dealing with the issue of
piracy off the coast of Somalia.

Aligning ourselves with the statement of the
European Union, my delegation would like to point out
some issues of particular relevance to Ukraine.

Like the previous report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/l46), the document before the Security
Council today details a worldwide surge in the number
of incidents of piracy and armed robbery at sea against
vessels. It convincingly testifies that this challenge is
no longer confined to the Gulf of Aden. It has become
global, requiring a global, coordinated and integrated
response. Ukraine believes that the United Nations
should play a lead role in these efforts.

Ukraine welcomes actions taken by the Security
Council to counter piracy, including the adoption of
resolution 1846 (2008), which my country co-sponsored.
We support the adoption of its successor resolution with
the aim of extending and fine-tuning the anti-piracy
measures put in place by the Security Council. My
delegation strongly believes that the Security Council
should remain actively seized of this matter.

Ukraine commends the activity of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, which has
already proved to be instrumental in facilitating
coordination among the major actors, aimed at
combating piracy in all its aspects. We look forward to
the early launching of the trust fund to support counter-
piracy initiatives off the coast of Somalia. My country
appreciates the standing invitation to participate in the
meetings of the Contact Group and is ready to
contribute to its fulfilling its mandate in every practical
way.
Ukraine considers European Union naval force
Operation Atalanta to be an important element of the
international community's efforts aimed at enhancing
the safety of navigation and at preventing and
combating piracy. We take positive note of the efforts
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the
United States-led Combined Maritime Forces, aimed at

fighting piracy off the coast of Somalia, which have
also contributed to reducing the number of successful
hijackings.

Ukraine takes the challenge of piracy with the
utmost seriousness. Ranking flfth among the countries
whose citizens are contracted to the international
merchant fleet, Ukraine is seriously suffering from acts
of piracy. At the time of this meeting, Somali pirates
continue to hold hostage 24 Ukrainians, the crew of the
vessel Ariana captured on 2 May. Over the past five
years, 15 vessels with Ukrainians on board have been
hijacked by pirates. Sixty-seven of my compatriots
have been captured by the Somali pirates, among whom
one has been shot dead and one seriously injured.

In his address to international organizations,
President of Ukraine Victor Yushchenko urged the
international community to redouble its practical
efforts to fight piracy at sea. A number of proposals
have been put forward to this end, some of which, such
as the establishment of regional coordination centres
for navigation safety, are already being implemented.

With a focus on the legal and methodological
aspects of the global anti-piracy campaign, Ukraine, in
the framework of the International Maritime
Organization (IMO), was one of the initiators of the
IMO resolution on piracy and armed robbery of ships
in waters off the coast of Somalia, which preceded
relevant Security Council resolutions. The political
decision was taken by the President of Ukraine to join
the European Union Operation Atalanta. At this stage,
we are carefully studying the modalities of our
involvement in this maritime coalition, either through
intelligence, logistical or military support. Ukraine is
also considering making a contribution to the trust fund
to support counter-piracy initiatives.

We welcome recent international meetings on
piracy, which reveal the strong political resolve of the
United Nations Member States to deal with this
challenge. In order to maintain this positive dynamic,
Ukraine is ready to host one such future event under
the auspices of the United Nations.
It is obvious that the roots of piracy lie on the
ground and not at sea. They are closely linked to
political, economic and social conditions, mainly
extreme poverty and lack of food. Fully backing the
comprehensive and coherent United Nations policy
recognizing the interconnected nature of security and
development, this year Ukraine has become a donor to
the World Food Programme, with contributions
totalling more than $500,000.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming the strong
commitment of Ukraine to contribute to the efforts of
the Security Council aimed at countering maritime
piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of
Somalia.

