Mr. Eyadema is the current Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
Mr. Obasanjo is the President of the country most
involved in peacekeeping in West Africa. I must note
that, in spite of this initiative, it has not yet been
possible to have the three heads of State sit down at the
same table for discussions. Even the idea of organizing
a preparatory meeting of the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of these three countries has not received a
positive response from all the potential partners. This
means that the situation has continued to deteriorate
since the time of the Mission that I led to West Africa.
In the report we suggest that the members of the
Security Council, together with the members of
ECOWAS, see to it that such a dialogue can be
established. That is why I reiterate this
recommendation, especially to members of the Security
Council that might have some influence on one or more
of the heads of State concerned. It is obvious that the
deteriorating military situation, especially with the
worsening of the situation in Liberia, now allows us,
paradoxically, to begin a dialogue on a basis that might
be much more durable. Along with this, it would be
desirable for the Security Council once again to appeal
to and urge the three heads of State to open a dialogue.

The second aspect focused on in the report is the
situation in Sierra Leone. After the briefings given by
my two colleagues, I shall not address the relaunching
of the peace process or the humanitarian situation,
except perhaps to emphasize that within the framework
of the outcome of the recent Abujan Summit, which
has opened there a window of opportunity for
relaunching the peace process, it is important to plan
elections in Sierra Leone at the end of the year, taking
into account all dimensions and implications. In fact,
the Mission was of the View that due to the prevailing
situation in Sierra Leone it was, at the very least,
premature to consider organizing elections in Sierra
Leone by the end of the year, for much of the country
is under de facto rule by the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF) and much of the population consists of
internally displaced persons and refugees abroad.

Regarding Guinea, the Mission suggested the
holding of an international conference to mobilize
funds in order to help Guinea cope with its
humanitarian and social situation. The Council will
recall that in 1999 an initial round table was held.
Unfortunately, the plan to hold a second international
conference did not materialize, first of all because of
the prevailing political situation in Guinea, and also
because of the deteriorating situation in the Mano
River Union. The Mission is of the View that in the
face of the current threat to stability in the country, and
because of the long-standing impact of refugees there,
where they make up as much as 10 per cent of the total
population, Guinea, which furthermore has been
making outstanding efforts to improve its
macroeconomic situation - as the Bretton Woods
institutions acknowledge - deserves greater support.
This is why the Mission reiterates its proposal to hold
such an international conference.

With regard to Guinea-Bissau, which is
geographically outside the Mano River Union, the
prevailing precarious and unstable situation in the
country resulted from a lengthy crisis that occurred in
three stages - the overthrow of the legal Government
of President Nino, the establishment of a long period of
transition dominated by the military and, finally, the
organization of presidential and legislative elections to
install a new regime - and has left its mark on the
economic and social structure of the country. Political
instability in particular continues. There is also
economic instability due, on the one hand, to the
decline of the country's resources, especially the price
of cashews, which has fallen 40 per cent on the
international market, and further, to the fact that donors
have not followed up the commitment they made in
1998 to assist the country. The situation is extremely
fragile. We believe that because of this, and because of
the traditional conditions imposed by financial
institutions on countries emerging from crises, it is
important to organize an international conference on
financing for development and for urgent humanitarian
needs in Guinea-Bissau.

Finally, with regard to cote d'Ivoire, the Mission
determined that the economic situation should be taken
into account not just as it exists in the country but also
as it has effects beyond its borders. That is to say,
account must be taken of the economic impact of the
C6te d'Ivoire on other countries of the subregion in
general and on those of the West African Economic and
Monetary Union in particular, as C6te d'Ivoire's
economy represents 40 per cent of the economic power
of the Union. That is why the Mission proposed here
that - in tandem with the pressure and influence
exerted upon the Government of C6te d'Ivoire to bring
it to engage effectively in a dialogue leading to
national reconciliation - it is important to ensure that
the economic and financial crisis of C6te d'Ivoire not
be made worse so as not to further exacerbate its effect
on the Economic and Monetary Union. That is also
why we have also called here for assistance from the
international community.

It turns out that since our Mission ended, the
international commission of inquiry set up by the
Secretary-General has also returned to New York. It is
now in the process of drafting its report and
conclusions on the grave violations of human rights
that took place during the presidential election. The
commission believes that it should be able to submit its
report by the end of the month. Nothing in the talks we
have had with the Chairman of the commission
interferes with the proposal our Mission has made for
the holding of a meeting in support of Cote d'Ivoire.

Those are the recommendations in the first
category. With regard to recommendations in the
second category - namely, those having to do with
institutional arrangements - there are essentially two
types.

First of all, the Mission proposed the
establishment of a United Nations office for West
Africa. This is the logical result of the overall approval
garnered for the idea the Council itself initiated after
its mission to the countries of the Mano River Union
last October. The mission received guidelines from the
Secretary-General to consider an overall subregional
and integrated approach to West Africa's problems,
rather than continuing to act on a sectoral and country-
by-country basis. Following the general approval for
such an approach, we proposed the establishment of a
United Nations office for West Africa. The
competencies of that office were clearly set out in the
report and in the recommendations, so I do not feel
there is a need to revisit them.

Since the Mission took place we have shared the
report with the United Nations Economic Commission
for Africa, the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the World Bank, the European Union,
United Nations country teams in the field and other
partners. We have done so in order to get their views,
observations and recommendations with regard to
implementing the proposal to create a United Nations
office for West Africa. Of course, comments and
concerns may be expressed with regard to the risk of
bureaucratization of that office. The Mission has
clearly thought about all the implications of setting up
such an office. The office should have as its principal
role gathering, harmonizing and using the synergies
that exist between United Nations bodies already in the
field and other partners so as to create the dynamics for
an overall, integrated approach to cope with West
Africa's priority needs. This is why the Mission
believes that the office should not simply be an office
that swallows up funds, but one which would have the
minimum number of necessary staff. We hope that the
Council will express to the Secretary-General its
support for the creation of the office.

The second recommendation of an institutional
nature is to create an inter-agency working group. As I
have said, such a group already existed before the
Mission's trip to the field. But there is today a need to
give it a much more solid foundation, as there is a need
to deal with the economic and financial consequences
of such an expanded base.

Those are the institutional recommendations. I
now come to the last category of recommendations,
those having to do with the most important trans-
border questions.

The first recommendation has to do with
peacekeeping and security operations in the Mano
River Union region. In that regard, during our Mission
we took note of concerns expressed by ECOWAS heads
of State facing the need to envisage, in the overall
context of an integrated approach, the peacekeeping
and security operations in particular in the region of the
Mano River Union, in a way that takes the
interrelationships into account. I need not repeat here
what was said by Ms. McAskie, who a while ago
stressed the need to take into account the humanitarian
aspect in this interrelationship and who believed that it
would be difficult to deal with humanitarian problems
on a country-by-country basis.

It is exactly in that context that we must place the
proposal made by several of our interlocutors, and
which we echo, to expand the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) to
include Guinea and Liberia. According to those with
whom we spoke, doing so would not only help in
dealing with the problems of Sierra Leone but would
also create the necessary conditions for monitoring the
situation on the borders between Guinea and Sierra
Leone and Guinea and Liberia.

The Mission had no doubts about the very
controversial nature of this proposal and felt itself
duty-bound to report on it to those concerned. Since
our arrival, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Political Affairs
have worked together on this idea, which will require
further analysis. But we should recall once again that
the proposal was made in the context of an integrated
subregional approach, which was the reason why our
mission was sent to the field.

The second recommendation concerns national
reconciliation. Many of us have noted that, in most of
the countries of West Africa, it is the absence of
dialogue and national reconciliation that has led to
marginalization and exclusion, which in turn are
conducive not only to triggering conflicts but also to
aggravating existing ones.

For all of these reasons, we believe that the
United Nations Office for West Africa should focus its
conflict-prevention and conflict-settlement activities on
the issue of national reconciliation. In this connection,
we were struck by the decisive contribution made by
women's movements to the promotion of negotiated
settlements, in particular among member States of the
Mano River Union. In her report, Ms. McAskie
stressed the role of women's organizations, so I do not
need to dwell on this any further.

I would, however, like to note that goodwill is the
only resource available to these women's
organizations. They are cruelly lacking in funds and in
capacity. Aware of the impact they might have on the
process of the prevention and settlement of conflicts, I
cannot fail to appeal to the international community as
a whole, and to the Council in particular, for consistent
assistance to these civil society groups.

The third element is disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration. Our mission was struck by the
criticism made in West Africa of the United Nations. It
was said that we tended to arrive too late and to adopt
mandates that were not in keeping with realities, and
that, as soon as a peace agreement was concluded, we
were too hasty in withdrawing. Finally, and most
importantly, it was said that the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement process
was very often botched because of a lack of financial
resources.

Those we spoke with noted that, both in Liberia
and in Sierra Leone, the aborted disarmament and
demobilization process was one of the reasons for the
resumption, prolongation or worsening of conflicts in
West Africa. Indeed, abandoned to their fate, the ex-
combatants, most of them young people, after a few
months' wait have no other option than to take up arms
once again. Moreover, in an economic environment of
absolute poverty, if a consistent reinsertion and
rehabilitation programme is not contemplated, there is
a real risk that the international community, rather than
being part of the solution to the problem, could be
responsible for its aggravation.

That is why we appeal for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process to be
considered in a much broader context. It should be
considered from a geographical perspective, so as to
involve countries that are interconnected, as is the case
with the Mano River Union, but also from an economic
and social perspective, in order to contemplate the
long- and medium-term reinsertion, of the former
combatants, especially young boys and girls.

In this connection, I should like to remind the
Council that one of the conclusions reached the Abuja
meeting, to which Mr. Guehenno has just referred,
concerns the resumption of the demobilization and
disarmament process in Sierra Leone, and the fact that
perhaps lessons should be learned, so that this time
sufficient resources can be allocated to this process.

The next element concerns the proliferation of
arms. This is a well-known issue, and, as we are only a
few weeks away from the holding here in New York of
the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, let
us simply recall the efforts made in West Africa by
ECOWAS in the framework of its moratorium to stop
the circulation of arms and monitor them.

That is why the mission proposed that States
Members of the United Nations, and in particular
members of the Security Council, become more
involved with ECOWAS in this process. The mission
even proposed that sanctions be considered against
those States that might contravene this moratorium, be
they States in the subregion or States that provide arms
outside the region.

The penultimate point on which specific cross-
border proposals have been made is the problem of
peacekeeping operations. Here we wish to emphasize
in particular the circumstances under which several
West African countries have been urged to take part in
peacekeeping operations. In this connection, we wish
to reiterate what was said by most of those we spoke
with: that the United Nations propose to West African
countries, when they take part in peacekeeping
operations, that they choose the option whereby it is up
to the countries themselves to provide troops, but up to
the United Nations to provide the equipment. This is
what we call "dry" leasing. This option is much more
in keeping with the financial resources available to the
countries of the subregion. Experience in Sierra Leone
has shown that those countries that opted for "wet"
leasing were not able to comply with their obligations
regarding equipment levels.

Since our arrival, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has been considering this
issue, with a view to further discussions. We hope that
those discussions will give rise to proposals that might
finally solve this problem - which, as a matter of fact,
is often used as a reason for saying that West African
countries do not have the necessary equipment to take
part in peacekeeping operations.

Finally, a last proposal on cross-border matters.
The United Nations Office in West Africa should
strongly focus on the question of good governance and
human rights, especially in the context of the
prevention, management and settlement of conflicts
and of post-conflict peace-building. Indeed, human
rights violations and poor governance often serve as
the trigger for crises. In this context, it is important for
the United Nations office, working together with
ECOWAS institutions, to play a much more active role
in terms of preventive diplomacy.

Those are a few of the major recommendations
made by the Mission that I had the honour of
leading- recommendations relating to the countries
particularly affected by the crisis in West Africa,
recommendations of an institutional nature, and cross-

border recommendations on priority issues in West
Africa.

