Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I should like first of all to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency; I am
confident that you will discharge your duties in the
most effective way possible. We would also like to join
others in welcoming the representatives of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda
and Burundi who are participating in today's meeting
of the Security Council. We have listened very
carefully to the important statements they have made.

The Russian Federation is grateful to the Panel of
Experts, chaired by Ms. Safiatou Ba-N'Daw, for the
substantive report that it has provided on the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources and other forms of
wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
are disturbed by the information that it contains about
the large-scale looting of resources, in violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. However, we do not believe
that the report should prompt the over-hasty adoption
of measures on the basis of an emotional response;
rather, it should provide food for thought, as it contains
information that we must study calmly and carefully.
Accordingly, we support a three-month extension of the
mandate of the Panel of Experts so that, at the end of
that period, it can submit an addition to the current
report, including commentaries by States named in the
report. We call on all the States mentioned in the report
to cooperate with the experts in their work and to
clarify carefully the situation with regard to the natural
resources and other forms of wealth of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Illegal activities, by whomsoever committed,
must be brought to an end, and the sooner the better.
Russia believes that, in the final analysis, it is the
armed conflict that underlies the problem of the illegal
exploitation of the resources and other forms of wealth
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, just as it
underlies the problems of refugees, internally displaced
persons and child soldiers, human rights violations,
humanitarian crises and many other problems. Only
recently has there been some movement towards a
settlement of that conflict. We believe that movement
towards a political settlement in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must be a priority for the
Security Council. That is how we see the Council's
discharge of its responsibilities under the Charter for
the maintenance of international peace and security.

