Mr. Rudolph (Germany): At the outset I would like
to state that Germany fully supports the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of Luxembourg,
Ambassador Wolzfeld, on behalf of the European Union.

The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) shares the analysis of the Peace
Implementation Conference hosted by Germany on 9 and
10 December 1997 in Bonn: namely, progress has been
made, but many steps are still to be taken towards a self-
sustaining peace, lasting reconciliation, tolerance and
democracy.

We firmly believe that the importance of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
process of civil implementation of the Peace Agreement
can hardly be overestimated. In close cooperation with the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) troops, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the other
international organizations and agencies present in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the United Nations personnel, and in
particular the police officers of the International Police
Task Force (IPTF), face the unique challenge of serving
both as monitors and partners in dialogue of the local
authorities in order to establish a stable, non-
discriminatory environment of law, order and tolerance.
This engagement by men and women from 40 countries
deserves our respect and our full support.

A lasting, self-sustaining security and police
structure in Bosnia and Herzegovina, based on the
confidence of the citizens of all three constituent peoples,
cannot be established by international decree; it needs the
cooperation of the local authorities. The absence of war
can be imposed by international troops, but reconciliation
has to root in the peoples' hearts and minds.
 

We share the Secretary-General's observation that
UNMIBH should increase its contribution to the peace-
building process in an even more effective way, within the
limits of the current mandate, as outlined in Annex 11 of
the Dayton Agreement. While the monitoring continues, the
training programme for the local police will be enhanced.
Specialized education and training by international experts,
particularly in fighting economic crime and corruption, will
help not only to expand the capacities of the local police,
but also to limit the illegal profits of those opposing the
peace process.

Our increased input of international experience and
police skills in order to support the police of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in fighting crime and maintaining public
security will remain ineffective without a democratically
legitimized judicial system that guarantees fair
investigations and trials as well as acceptable circumstances
of detention. The international legal assistance should be
welcomed by all the parties as a chance, not as interference.
Last week's request of the High Representative's Supervisor
in Brcko to review the privatization programme of the
Republika Srpska shows the intention to work out adequate
regulations in a joint effort.

Germany therefore welcomes the Secretary-General's
intention also to increase the efforts of IPTF in the area of
judicial reform, as well. Germany is the second largest
police contributor to IPTF, having provided 166 well-
trained and experienced police officers. Germany has also
provided a prosecutor and other experts. We have extended
invitations for training courses in Germany to Bosnian
police officers. My Government is now considering ways
to meet the request contained in both the final document of
the Peace Implementation Conference and the Secretary-
General's report, for more contributions in the form of
training, funds and equipment.

UNMIBH and IPTF cannot operate in Bosnia and
Herzegovina without the necessary security arrangements.
At present, a secure environment for United Nations
personnel can be guaranteed only by the international
military force. In our opinion, the current distribution of
responsibilities between IPTF and SFOR has been effective
and has met the challenges. The civilian and military
international engagement are mutually reinforcing. Only a
successful civilian implementation under the protection of
the military forces can lead to a self-sustaining peace that
may finally make an international military presence
unnecessary.

But while UNMIBH - like SFOR, the High
Representative, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the European Union and many
more - stands ready not only to continue, but to enhance
its efforts, all authorities of the central Government and
the two entities must know that they themselves are
responsible for achieving reconciliation, stability and
democracy. The support offered by the extension of the
mandates of UNMIBH and IPTF must be met by their
full compliance with the Peace Agreement and subsequent
obligations. These commitments include, in particular,
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia.

Germany welcomes the arrest of two more persons
indicted for war crimes by members of SFOR on
Thursday night. The operation in Vitez underlines once
more the resolve of the international community to bring
the indicted persons to trial in The Hague. If justice is not
brought to Bosnia and Herzegovina, peace and
reconciliation will remain a distant goal.

At the Bonn Conference, it was clearly pointed out
that the patience of the international community is not
unlimited. Those who ignore or boycott their obligations
to cooperate, in particular in the joint Presidency, should
know that time is not on their side. Therefore, the Peace
Implementation Conference strengthened the position of
the High Representative. Germany welcomes the first use
of his new competences on 16 December, when the High
Representative imposed new legislation on citizenship,
effective 1 January 1998, after the Federal Assembly
failed to come to an agreement.

I want to close by expressing our gratitude and deep
respect for the work of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Ambassador Kai Eide, and his staff, who
can claim credit for the successful work of UNMIBH and
IPTF thus far. Ms. Elisabeth Rehn has all our best wishes
and support as she takes over Mr. Eide's task to work
towards establishing a lasting and self-sustaining peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

