Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): The Central African
Republic has been in a situation of armed conflict since
the beginning of 1996. This conflict, which began as a
military uprising, has had other dimensions of the
character of a civil rebellion with intermittent military
uprisings. During its duration it has plunged the country
into acute political crisis and unprecedented economic
catastrophe. It has affected every aspect of civil life in
that country and could destabilize the whole region. This
situation poses a threat to international peace and security
and requires the urgent attention of the Security Council.

It is this threat to regional stability that attracted the
attention of the Ouagadougou summit in December 1996,
at which the Head of State of the Central African
Republic requested international intervention. As a result,

 

a regional initiative with the participation of Burkina Faso,
Chad, Gabon, Mali, Senegal and Togo was initiated. Today,
thanks to the efforts of those countries, an, international
force, the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) is
already in the Central African Republic with the objective
of restoring peace to that country.

It is this regional initiative, which has already been
marked by a measure of success, that the present draft
resolution must be seen to support, because, after all is said
and done, the Security Council has the universal
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security. The Security Council has a responsibility to
support regional initiatives. The draft resolution before us
would give MISAB the Security Council's approval for the
continued conduct of its mission.

We believe that for progress in the resolution of any
conflict the parties to that conflict must show a willingness
to settle the dispute through peaceful means. We are
convinced that the parties in the Central African Republic
showed this commitment by signing, on 25 January 1997 a
series of documents that are now referred to in the draft
resolution before us as the Bangui Agreements. The
documents are considered by all parties as a modus vivendi
by which they can achieve peace and reconciliation. In this
regard, we wish to commend the efforts of President El
Hadj Omar Bongo of Gabon.

MISAB is trying to observe the implementation of
these commitments by the parties - commitments they
have freely entered into. We believe that MISAB is doing
a good job and deserves the support of the Security
Council. It is for that reason that we support the present
draft resolution and will vote in favour of it. In doing so,
we acknowledge the significant contribution that African
countries and the Government of France are making in
resolving the crisis, and we appeal to the international
community to continue to support the initiative. It should be
borne in mind that there is an interlinkage between peace
and development. We believe that any meaningful
international involvement in the Central African Republic
should take account of this and should address the situation
appropriately.

