Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): I am going to skip the
courtesies, in the interest of time. But I would like to
assure you, Madam President, that we are indeed very
pleased to see you presiding over this very important
meeting and to have the Ministers from Guinea and
Sierra Leone around the Council table.

We would like to thank Sir Kieran Prendergast,
Mr. Dieye and Mr. Diarra for their very important

statements. We were also very pleased to see the
President of the Economic and Social Council,

Ambassador Simonovic', at the Council table this
morning. We hope that his presence will not be
restricted to debates on Africa only.

The topic of our discussion this afternoon - the
way forward: developing a coordinated action plan for
the Mano River Union - is very timely in order to
build upon the glimmer of hope that is being observed
in Sierra Leone at present. One of the tasks of the
Security Council's ad hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa is indeed to see
how to promote confidence-building measures in the
Mano River region as a means of promoting durable
and sustainable peace and stability in the whole region.
The Group has had a preliminary exchange of views on
this issue, with the contribution of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and the International Crisis
Group. It is the intention of the Working Group to
invite, in its future meetings, countries of the region,
subregional organizations and other interested parties
to pursue further discussions. As an initial step, various
recommendations have been examined by the Working
Group, and this is going to continue.

The question of peace and stability in the Mano
River region has to be Viewed from a regional
perspective. The insurgency in Liberia, the problem of
refugees in Guinea and Sierra Leone and the
restoration of peace in the latter country are all
interrelated. Any approach to resolving these problems
should be closely coordinated with initiatives
undertaken by the African Union, particularly by its
Peace and Security Ministerial Coordinating
Committee, with the Mano River Union countries and
with the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). We believe that we should work very
closely with the African Union, and more particularly
with the leaders of ECOWAS, who could use their
good offices to bring peace and stability to the region.
Inconsistencies among the policies of the Security
Council, the African Union and subregional
organizations will not be in the best interest of the
region.

The launching of the African Union and the
implementation of the process of the New Partnership
for Africa's Development (NEPAD) represent a new
dynamic for bringing peace and stability to Africa as a
whole. The principles of the African Union Charter,
namely democracy, good governance and respect for
human rights, as well as NEPAD's own principles,
implemented through its peer review mechanism,
economic and corporate governance, and subregional
and regional approaches to development provide an
excellent basis for a new approach to peace-building
and overall stability and development in the continent.
The Security Council and the international community
as a whole will need to extend all their assistance to
help African countries uphold and promote these
principles.

The new situation in Sierra Leone following the
peaceful elections, which we most heartily welcome,
will no doubt be a catalyst in helping the whole Mano
River Union region move away from conflict,
instability and lack of socio-economic development to
a more prosperous phase, provided that the necessary
support and focus are given. In that regard, the recently
established Economic and Social Council ad hoc
advisory group on African countries emerging from
conflict should give the necessary attention to Sierra
Leone.

Let me now briefly dwell on the situation in
Liberia, to which many speakers referred this morning.
It is clear that instability in Liberia will have adverse
effects on peace in the region. The Council, together
with the African Union and the leaders of the region
should, in our view, find ways of engaging
constructively with Liberia rather than isolating it any
further. The sanctions imposed on Liberia have been of
tremendous help in bringing peace to Sierra Leone, but
if we want real regional peace, then we will have to
engage in a process that will help us attain our
objectives. I say that in the light of the elections that
are going to take place in Liberia next year. It could be
extremely important for the Council and the
international community to engage in some kind of
constructive dialogue that will further the objectives of
the Council and peace in the region.

The success of any action plan for the Mano
River Union rests on the degree of trust and confidence
among the members of the Union. Every effort should
be made to encourage frequent meetings at the highest
level among the countries of the region in order to
reduce tension and rebuild trust and confidence. In this
context, we welcome the summit hosted by the King of
Morocco at Rabat, bringing together the Presidents of
the countries ofthe Mano River Union. Such initiatives
aimed at reviving social, political and economic
integration deserve to be encouraged in the region.
Likewise, it will be in the interest of the countries of
the region if they invest seriously in bilateral talks.

One important field of cooperation among
countries of the region could be the joint monitoring of
borders with the help of the international community.
The Mano River Union countries could work out
modalities leading to agreements on joint monitoring of
borders and they could be encouraged to enter into
agreements by which they would undertake not to
support rebel activities in neighbouring countries. The
international community could be invited to provide
assistance in reactivating the implementation of the
existing Mano River Union pacts and agreements.

There is a vital role for the United Nations Office
for West Africa to play in developing a coordinated
plan for the Mano River region. I am glad that the
representatives of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and of ECOWAS, who spoke
earlier, mentioned this. The idea of the Office assisting
in carrying out an audit of the armed groups in the
region should be implemented as soon as possible. The
findings of such an audit exercise could be used to plan
a full and comprehensive process of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement.

The United Nations Office for West Africa could
also assess the requirements of the countries of the
Mano River Union in the fields of security, economic,
social and development issues. The assistance of the
Mano River Union in the field will be very helpful. The
outcome of this exercise could provide the basis for all
the agencies involved in the region to prioritize their
responses to the post-conflict peace-building needs of
the countries individually and ofthe region as a whole.

In the field of post-conflict peace-building, relief
and development assistance by the international
community should be geared towards capacity-building
in the individual countries of the region, rather than
only responding to immediate needs. The UNDP and
the Bretton Woods institutions should adapt flexible
financial instruments to strike a balance between the
need for macroeconomic stability and the peace-related
priorities ofthe Governments ofthe Mano River Union
countries. For instance, a country such as Guinea,
which has been hosting a huge number of refugees,
deserves international assistance. We should not
overlook the fact that, if refugee problems are not
addressed adequately, there will be the potential for
further conflict. It is, therefore, important to find a
long-term solution to the problem of refugees.

The illegal exploitation of natural resources and
the illicit flow of arms in the Mano River region have
been important destabilizing factors. The capacity of
the countries of the region to strictly observe the
diamond certification scheme and the relevant arms
control programmes, such as the ECOWAS moratorium
on small arms and light weapons, should be
substantially reinforced with a View to securing peace
in the region. While we recognize that Guinea and
Sierra Leone have put in place diamond certification
regimes, it is important that we impress upon the
Republic of Liberia the importance of setting up such a
scheme in order to ensure a coordinated approach in
the region, and that we assist it in doing so.

We believe that it would also be useful to have a
contact group on the Mano River Union countries, as
we have in the case of Somalia, bringing together all
stakeholders in the conflict, where we can discuss
means of advancing durable peace in the region.

Finally, the countries of the Mano River Union
have many things in common. The cultures, languages,
history, geography and socio-economic and political
backgrounds of the three countries are factors that bind
them. We must build up confidence in the region using
these commonalties. The establishment of relationships
among civil societies, students, scholars, the private
sector and businessmen of the countries of the region
will help in promoting confidence. Already the Mano
River Union Women's Peace Network and other non-
governmental organizations are doing a wonderful job.
It is important that we encourage them.

Civil society, we believe, could also play a major
role in mediation efforts to bring about peace and
reconciliation. The private sector should be given a
greater role in the region's integration process. We
think that the international community should be
exhorted to fully support such a process.

