The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Guinea-Bissau in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedures.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr.
Cabral(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council
table.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 25
September 2003 from the Permanent Representative of
Angola to the United Nations which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that His
Excellency, Mr. Jose Ramos Horta, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste and Special Envoy of the
Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries
(CPLP) to Guinea-Bissau, take part, under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council, in the open briefing on Guinea-
Bissau scheduled for 29 September 2003."

That letter has been issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2003/9l7.

Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jose
Ramos Horta.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I extend a warm welcome on behalf of the
Council to Mr. Jose Ramos Horta and invite him to
take a seat at the Council table.

The Council will now begin its consideration of
the item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

I now give the floor to Mr. Kalomoh.


