Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank Staffan
de Mistura for his briefing. Frankly speaking, we
are disappointed. We were hoping for more positive
information, and we are concerned about the challenges
that Mr. De Mistura described, especially the attitude
of the Syrian regime with regard to the role of the
United Nations.

In our view, it is time for the constitutional committee
to be launched. We believe that it is important to make
irreversible progress towards a political resolution of
the conflict in Syria by convening the constitutional
committee under United Nations auspices as soon as
possible, in November, before the end of Special Envoy
De Mistura's tenure. We need to see the actual launch
of the constitutional committee, and invitations should
be sent out in the coming weeks.

One can speak of a credible political process
only if the constitutional committee itself is credible,
balanced and inclusive and represents all Syrians.
Therefore, the role of the United Nations is key, and the
Security Council adopted resolution 2254 (2015) to that
end. The role and the autonomy of the United Nations
are essential, and that autonomous role includes the
membership of the committee and the scheduling and
scope of its work. The United Nations did not start from
scratch but is operating fully in line with resolution
2254 (2015) and the Sochi final statement of January,
circulated to the Council by the Russian Federation.
The Syrian regime therefore has to work with the
United Nations, and we count on the countries that
have influence, especially the Russian Federation, to
use such influence with Damascus.

We need to see the meaningful commitment of the
Syrian regime to work with the United Nations. The
political time and space for further delaying the process
and endlessly moving the goalposts have simply run
out. We expect the Syrian regime to make sure that the
Syrian delegation can travel to participate, that it can
participate in full and that it will participate in good
faith - contrary to what we saw during the earlier
Geneva rounds. We expect the same of any members
of the United Nations middle list who currently reside
in Syria. Let me also say that we strongly support the
Special Envoy's commitment to ensuring that women
constitute 30 per cent of the constitutional committee's
members, as he indicated earlier. We strongly urge that
such a commitment be extended to ensuring that any
future drafting subcommittee or other committee also
include 30 per cent women's representation, particularly
this week given yesterday's open debate dedicated
to resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security (see S/PV.8382).

Of course, the constitutional committee is not a
goal in and of itself. It is part of the broader United
Nations-led political process based on the Geneva
communique (8/2012/522, annex) and on resolution
2254 (2015). Implementation of that resolution is the
only path forward. There is no circumventing that
important resolution. Let us use the "Idlib window", as
Staffan de Mistura mentioned earlier.

In conclusion, let me just refer to our well-known
position on accountability, humanitarian assistance and
certainly the need for a political transition to take place
as a precondition for reconstruction aid.

