Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I, too, would like to thank
Ambassador Nestor Osorio for the 90-day report on the
activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), as well
as for his leadership of the Committee. I also want to
convey my appreciation to the Panel of Experts for the
final report presented to the Council in May, which
includes concrete and useful recommendations aimed
at further improving the efficiency of the regime and at
assisting Member States in implementing the necessary
measures to that end, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions. Both reports have been crucial in shedding
light on some of the apparent patterns of violations of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, namely,
paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007), which enforces
a ban on the export and procurement by Iran of any
arms and related material.

I must say in that regard that Portugal is
convinced of the usefulness and urgency of making the
final report public, including by posting it on the
Committee's website. It is important, in our View, to
make available to other Member States the concrete
contents of the report. This should be done as a
measure of transparency and accountability with regard
to the activities that are being undertaken by the
Committee, but also as a way to raise awareness among
the wider international community and ensure broader
understanding of the goals that are being pursued.

My second point relates to what my delegation
stated the last time that the Council held consultations
on Iran, that is, that the work of the 1737 Committee
takes on its full significance within the two-track
strategy that has been followed. We cannot lose sight
of the diplomatic dimension of the process, and we
reiterate the call on Iran to fully engage in meaningful
negotiations aimed at resolving the pending issues
relating to the nature of its nuclear activities, in
particular the new uranium enrichment facilities, as
well as all heavy-water-related projects. That is why

11-3854]
we have to continue to be vigilant. The Council can
count on Portugal's continued support for the work of
the 1737 Committee.

