Uruguay thanks the Dominican Republic for convening this timely debate, which provides us an oppor tunity to reflect on the progress made on the youth, peace and security agenda, identify relevant challenges and obstacles and share experiences and good practices in its implementation. Today the world is suffering an unprecedented global health crisis caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which is disrupting lives across the planet. As humankind faces trying and uncertain times, young people are among the most active groups engaged in mounting a comprehensive response to the crisis: many work on the front lines as health personnel or humanitarian activists; some are leaders, providing aid or distributing food and basic health supplies in their communities; others are leveraging social networks and their advanced technologies skills to share accurate information and raise awareness among the population, or further developing applications for virtual platforms to facilitate communication during this period of isolation and social distancing. Many others are working in innovation and research, helping to develop new technologies, diagnostic tests and treatments to fight the disease. In carrying out these tasks, young people are showing not only their dedication and creativity but also their strong moral values, such as empathy, solidarity and compassion, as well as their strong commitment to global causes. This goes to show that simplistic and negative stereotypes portraying young people solely as victims or perpetrators of violence must be done away with; we must once and for all recognize the immense potential of young people as active agents of change in building peaceful environments, thereby contributing to the maintenance of international peace and security. Resolution 2250 (2015), adopted five years ago this month, represents a historic milestone in the recognition of the essential role of youth in preventing and resolving conflicts and in sustaining peace. Resolution 2419 (2018) called for the inclusive participation of young people in such efforts, including in the negotiation and implementation of peace agreements. Uruguay would like to highlight four aspects crucial, in our view, for making progress on the implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda, and for helping young people make a meaningful contributions to peace and security. First, there is a need to create an enabling environment in which young people are respected and where they can fully develop their talents and abilities. Equal access to quality and inclusive education, as well as opportunities for decent work, as advocated by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, are essential factors for building the favourable environment that young people need. Education is probably the most transformative resource human beings have, and an essential tool for empowering young people. The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the need to use new digital technologies. Digital transformations are already under way as we adapt to our new circumstances. Digital literacy should be part of educational programmes, as should health education, including preparation for tackling global health crises. Nonetheless, education must do more than transmit knowledge and information. Young people should also be taught values, such as respect, tolerance and solidarity, and the ability to participate constructively in political and social life. Education should also impart to them the skills to become effective agents of change and to undertake initiatives aimed at building a more peaceful and prosperous world. Employment is a further priority, as it helps maintain the stability and security of communities and contributes to social integration and inclusion. According to the Secretary-General's recent plan, Shared responsibility, global solidarity: responding to the socioeconomic impacts of COVID-19, young people are among those most affected by the socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic. Unless we can ensure economic security, which helps guard against young people resorting to crime and enables them to be productive members of society, young people run the risk of ending up dangerously marginalized. Uruguay is of the view that young people's participation in political life and decision-making processes should encompass all issues in which young people have a stake, such as education, employment and health, including sexual and reproductive health rights. Therefore, Uruguay has developed legislative frameworks and public policies in line with resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) to strengthen and protect young people and promote their participation as key actors in the national development process. Furthermore, the Youth Action Plan 2015-2025 was devised in close consultation with young people from all over the country. The Plan is a road map that systematizes and coordinates the main youth-oriented actions and policies. It addresses areas such as gender, young people with disabilities, young lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons, youth living in rural areas and the information and knowledge society. The National Youth Institute is the Government body in charge of implementing programmes and actions designed to increase the involvement of youth in public affairs. Some of the programmes developed by the Uruguayan Government are: JOovenes en Red, which provides assistance to young women and men in situations of socioeconomic vulnerability who are unemployed or disconnected from the formal education system; Acompafiamiento al Egreso en Comunidad, which assists young people released from prison in entering the labour market and reintegrating education; and Jovenes a Programar, carried out jointly with the Uruguayan Chamber of Technology and the major companies in that sector, which provides training and employment in the area of information technologies. The programme also includes employment services so that graduates can quickly join the labour market. We are aware that we should do more. Therefore, the Government is planning to implement a strategy aimed at encouraging youth volunteering through the creation of a network of young people who are already young leaders in their respective communities. The hope is that their example will inspire and mobilize their peers, thereby facilitating attitudinal changes in youth and promoting the exercise of positive leadership. Secondly, to advance the agenda and facilitate the work of young peacebuilders, it is important to build bridges of trust and communication between them and Governments and to foster intergenerational exchanges. Youth mobilization and peace efforts are more likely to be successful if young people are given an opportunity to work with local and national authorities. That would help ensure that Governments take into account the views of youth in policymaking and peacebuilding. Dialogue and cooperation among youth and older people and community elders could bring together the new and innovative ideas of young people and the experience of older generations, thereby producing sound creative initiatives to solve complex issues related to peace and security. To that end, a fundamental factor is required - Governments and older generations should show young people their support and confidence and acknowledge young people's capacity for action and initiative. 122/123 Thirdly, a measure that should be taken as a matter of urgency is to increase the protection of young peacebuilders and human rights defenders, who are increasingly the victims of threats and attacks, so they can continue doing their job, free from intimidation and reprisals. They also have to adjust their work to the current health situation; accordingly, efforts should be made to provide them with personal protective equipment and training on how to improve their work during these turbulent times in which they also have to manage the impact of the pandemic. Fourthly, Uruguay would like to highlight the synergies between the women and peace and security and the youth, peace and security agendas. Resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), on youth, peace and security, build on resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions related to women and peace and security. Both agendas are complementary and mutually reinforcing. Breaking down the silos between them will help to advance their implementation and improve the participation of women and youth in peace and security issues. There are striking similarities between the two agendas. At their core lies the fundamental principle that women and youth should be engaged as partners in building sustainable peace. Women, like youth, are underrepresented at all levels of decision-making. They are also generally excluded from negotiation and peace processes, as their opinions are frequently ignored. Both women and youth are viewed as victims or perpetrators of violence rather than as agents of change. Significant efforts have been made to implement the women and peace and security agenda for almost 20 years. Lessons learned from that experience can be used to advance the implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda. Despite barriers to the full participation of women, tangible progress has been made since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), 20 years ago. A set of new resolutions has been adopted, countless studies, research and analyses have been conducted, strong partnerships have been forged with civil society and other stakeholders, and a wide range of networks and coalitions, such as the Women and Peace and Security Focal Points Network and networks of women mediators, have been established across several regions of the world. Although the journey has been slow, the participation of women in peacekeeping operations has increased significantly. The participation of women in peace processes and the inclusion of references relevant to women in peace agreements have also increased, although to a lower extent. In Latin America, the Colombian peace process and the historic peace agreement there are an example in that regard. National action plans are among the most successful mechanisms to accelerate the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Similar plans to implement resolution 2250 (2015) would be valuable tools in advancing the youth agenda as well. Another aspect related to the synergies between these agendas that deserves attention is the role of young women as forgers of peace. They are part of both the women and peace and security, and the youth, peace and security agendas. Given that resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015) complement each other, it is obvious that including young women in conflict prevention and resolution is highly beneficial. The concurrence of their dual identity as women and young people gives them unique skills, abilities and perspectives to make critical contributions to ensuring inclusive and lasting peace. In conclusion, the COVID-19 crisis gives us an opportunity to reflect. No one knows exactly what will come afterward. The youth, peace and security agenda will probably change and adapt to the new reality. However, one thing is certain: youth will continue to play a pivotal role. Ultimately, they will be the ones to build that new reality. It is time to build peace. To that end, we need more than ever the creativity, enthusiasm and innovative energy of the new generations in order to respond in an effective manner and build the foundations for the safe and peaceful world that we all need.
