Ms. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): First of
all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for Japan's
excellent contribution as the penholder in our discussion
on Afghanistan. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is
honoured to be the new penholder, starting in January
2018. We are looking forward to working closely with
Security Council members, Afghanistan, regional
countries, donors and others in order to ensure that our
contribution will be meaningful, and we hope to build
on the excellent work of Japan.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

I would like to thank Special Representative
Yamamoto and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Fedotov,
for their dedicated work, as well as Mr. Umarov,
the Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan, and
Ms. Wazhma Frogh for their valuable briefing. We also
thank Ms. Frogh for her meaningful contributions to
the High Peace Council.

We appreciate the thorough report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2017/1056).
Many people have spoken today of the developments
described in that report, such as the continued threat
of terrorism, the steep increase of the cultivation of
drugs and the lack of meaningful progress on the peace
process, all of which underline the need to stay focused
on supporting peace and stability in Afghanistan. I will
not repeat what has been said by many already, but I
would like to focus today on three issues for today's
debate, in the spirit of the important work carried out
by Ms. Wazma Frogh on women, peace and security.

First of all, I want to focus on the leadership of the

Afghan Government with regard to the empowerment
of women. Secondly, I want to focus on the role of the
United Nations, including the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), in strengthening
the position of women in Afghanistan. Thirdly, I
want to focus on the commitment of the Kingdom
of the Netherlands to promote peace and stability in
Afghanistan, with a special focus on women's rights.

Two months ago, a team of six Afghan girls
visited the Netherlands to participate in the artificial
intelligence summit, where they presented a self-built
solar-powered robot that can help farmers in the field.
The difference couldn't be greater between now and
the era defined by the Taliban's rule, when women
were marginalized to the point of complete invisibility.
Today, Afghan women can, and indeed do, become
engineers, police officers, judges, politicians, civil-
society activists and teachers.

But the potential of Afghan women is far from
fulfilled. Increasing women's participation in all
aspects of Afghan society will contribute significantly
to a more stable and prosperous Afghanistan. We
therefore welcome the personal leadership of both
President Ghani and First Lady Rula Ghani, who made
women's empowerment a top priority. We particularly
welcome the national action plan on women, peace
and security, and the national priority programme
for women's economic empowerment. We call on the
Afghan Government to continue to fund and implement
those programmes with much vigour and determination
and to continue to consult civil-society organizations
in that process.

Secondly, I would like to address the role of the
United Nations. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
agrees with the Secretary-General that the international
community's support to Afghanistan should remain
focused onpeace and stability, as he outlined in his report
(S/2017/1056). Here, the role ofwomen is again of great
importance - their voices should be heard and will
add value to the process. An Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned peace process can achieve lasting results only
when women and youth can participate in a meaningful
way. In that respect, the United Nations should lead and
inspire by example. We encourage UNAMA and the
Council to follow up on the recommendations of the
Council's Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security, which met on 5 December. In particular,
we call on UNAMA to redouble its efforts to increase
the number of female local staff in the Mission.

Thirdly, allow me to turn to our lasting commitment
to Afghanistan. Sixteen years ago, Afghanistan became
one of the Kingdom of the Netherlands' closest partners
in security and development cooperation. The position
ofAfghan women has been and will remain a major focus
of our partnership in a decade of increasing Afghan
ownership and leadership. To support the Afghan
national action plan on women, peace and security, we
have contributed to its local implementation through the
€2 million Safhe-Jaded programme, which contributes
to increased security and justice for women and girls.
Let me conclude by reaffirming, once again, our
continued support for Afghanistan and our readiness
to contribute to the work of the Council on supporting
peace, security and development in Afghanistan during
our membership in 2018.
