The President (spoke in Spanish): 1 shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.

My delegation abstained in the voting on resolution
2440 (2018) because the issue of the self-determination
of the people of Western Sahara - which is one of
the central questions in the resolutions extending
the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) - is not
sufficiently reflected in the final text. The Security
Council must not subordinate the issue of the self-
determination of the people of Western Sahara when
addressing this matter.

We also call attention to the surprising inclusion
by the penholder of new elements in the text adopted
today that were not included in the text negotiated
only days ago. Bolivia believes that meetings held to
negotiate the text of any draft resolution must above all
deal with the issues contained therein. The subsequent
inclusion of other elements naturally creates touches on
the sensitivities of the members.

Bolivia fully believes that the work assigned by the
Secretary-General to his Personal Envoy for Western
Sahara and that of MINURSO require the full support
of the Security Council in order to achieve a political
solution between the parties. We therefore express our
full support for the relaunch by the Personal Envoy
of the negotiating process with a new dynamic and a
spirit in line with the directives of the Security Council
so as to reach a just, lasting and mutually acceptable
solution to the situation in Western Sahara. We
reaffirm our confidence that, through this negotiation
process among the parties and neighbouring countries,
a political solution can be achieved, in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

As this is the last scheduled meeting of the Council
for the month of October, before adjourning this
meeting, I wish to express the sincere appreciation of
the delegation of the Plurinational State of Bolivia to the
members of the Council, in particular my colleagues the
Permanent Representatives, their respective staffs and
the Security Council Affairs Division for all the support
that they have provided us. Undeniably, it has been a busy
month during which we have rallied to consensus on
several important issues within our purview. We could
not have done so alone without the hard work, support
and positive contributions of every delegation and the
representatives of the Secretariat, including, of course,
the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management, the interpreters, the translators, the
Verbatim Reporters and the security personnel. As we
end our presidency, I know that I speak on behalf of the
Council in wishing the delegation of China good luck
for the month of November.

The meeting rose at 3.45 pm.
