Mr. Corr (Ireland): I wish first to thank you,
Mr. President, for arranging today's public briefing on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would also
like, as others have done, to thank Mr. Annabi for his
comprehensive and helpful briefing today, and through
him also to thank the Secretariat staff and the personnel
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) for their
work in promoting peace and reconciliation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also join others,
on behalf of my delegation, in wishing the Secretary-
General every success in his upcoming visit to the
region.

Today's briefing, while, as Mr. Annabi said,
encouraging in some important respects, also evokes a
sense of frustration at the slow pace of progress in
some other areas. When the Council mission returned
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo at the end
of May, we were reasonably optimistic about the
prospects for peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. During the last open debate on this issue, held
on 24 July, we expressed concern at the slow pace of
progress and recalled that the future security and
prosperity of the region lay in the signatories to the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement meeting their obligations.

Today, three months after the Security Council
mission and one month after our last debate on this
item, there is now clearly a need, building on the real
progress about which we have heard this morning, to
give further momentum to the process.

I would like briefly to single out for emphasis a
few points of concern to my delegation. We regret the
absence to date of the political framework necessary
for the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement of armed groups. In the
absence of political will on the part of the signatories
themselves, there is only so much that the United
Nations or the wider international community can do.
We strongly encourage the authorities in Kinshasa and
Kigali to work together to take this process forward.

My delegation welcomes the announcement that
President Kabila has invited MONUC to inspect the
camps where several thousand fighters are reported to
be cantoned, and we strongly encourage him to give
MONUC access as soon as possible.

It is also time that the parties put forward plans
for the orderly withdrawal of all foreign forces from
the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It is further essential, as has been emphasized this
morning, that the Rassemblement congolais pour la
de'mocratie (RCD-Goma) comply with the Security
Council's demand for the demilitarization of
Kisangani. There must be an end to support, from
whatever source, for the activities of armed groups.

The misery and suffering of the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are deeply shocking
and disturbing. We urge the international community to
respond generously to their plight. Ireland is also
deeply concerned at violations of human rights, and it
calls on all parties fully to respect human rights, to
uphold the provisions of international humanitarian law
and to ensure safe access to populations in need. The
exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which is a result of the conflict
and which contributes to the misery of the population,
must cease immediately.

My delegation welcomes the success of the
preparatory meeting of the inter-Congolese dialogue
and warmly commends the efforts of the facilitator, Sir
Ketumile Masire, and the positive spirit in which all
delegations approached the meeting. The success of the
dialogue is essential to the long-term peace and
stability of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well to that of the wider region. We look forward to the
substantive session of the dialogue starting on 15
October, and to the establishment of viable democratic
government in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

