Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh): Sanctions should remain
the last option for ensuring compliance with Security
Council decisions for maintenance of international peace
and security. It is undeniable that a general feeling of
unhappiness prevails about the way sanctions are being
applied now. The Council's credibility is questioned if we
do not do sanctions right. If they have little effect, or
worse, if they continue to have the wrong and unintended
effects on the innocent, that makes a strong case for the
refinement of sanctions.

It is in this context that we welcome the initiative of
constituting a working group for developing
recommendations on how to improve the effectiveness of
United Nations sanctions. We thank the delegation of
Canada for its contribution in successfully leading the
negotiations for finalizing the terms of reference for the
group. We also deeply appreciate the personal interest
which you, Mr. President, have shown in the matter.

Bangladesh supports the list of issues that should be
taken up by the working group as contained in the draft
terms of reference. For us, these issues of concern fall into
four general categories. The first is how to design a
sanctions regime that would be effective but at the same
time would have minimal or no unintended effects. Our
understanding is that comprehensive sanctions tend to have
more unintended effects, and targeting is essential. The
working group has to look into the details of how this
general understanding can be translated into individual
cases. We have to find more ways to ensure and encourage
targeted States and non-State actors to comply. The
question of humanitarian exemptions has to be looked into
in a much more detailed manner than it has been so far.

The second category is how to strengthen institutional
capacity to understand better what works and what does
not, as well as to design, implement and monitor the
sanctions regime effectively. It goes without saying that the
capacity of the Secretariat needs to be strengthened, and
here better coordination is useful. Assessments of the
impact and effectiveness of sanctions on a regular basis is
a must. The sanctions committees need to be energized
more with the means to effectively monitor
implementation and address alleged violations.

The third category is how to ensure adequate
resources. The whole question of assessed or voluntary
contributions should be addressed. The answer would not
be clear-cut either for one or the other. We have to keep
all sources in mind and look for inclusive solutions. If
resources cannot be mobilized, the implementation of
sanctions regimes will always remain imperfect.
The fourth category is how to involve United
Nations Members and other actors more effectively. There
is a need to provide United Nations Members with
technical knowledge for updating or enacting national
legislation and enhancing institutional mechanisms for
monitoring and enforcement, in particular to prevent illicit
arms traffic, impose travel bans and identify violations of
financial sanctions. Cooperation among the United
Nations, regional organizations and non-governmental
organizations would doubtless be useful.

In conclusion, let me say that important work has
been done in many of the areas identified in the draft
note. The working group would have to work out the
details and come up with useful and comprehensive
recommendations. It is encouraging to know that the
working group would be tapping the expertise and
knowledge that exist both within and outside the United
Nations system. We look forward to contributing to the
work of the group.

