Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We are very pleased to see
our good friend and brother, Ambassador Said Djinnit,
the Special Envoy of the Secretary- General for the Great
Lakes region, among us today. He is our encyclopedia
for African politics including those of the Horn. We
thank him for his comprehensive briefing on the latest
developments in the region and his steadfast efforts
aimed at promoting peace, security and stability, in line
with the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.

We have been discussing the situation in the Great
Lakes region in one form or another over the last couple
of months when we were dealing with country-specific
issues, but today's briefing gives us a comprehensive
and holistic picture ofthe political and security situation
in the Great Lakes region. We believe that this is
important because the political instability and conflict
in some ofthe countries has a regional dimension, and a
concerted regional and international effort is needed to
promote peace and stability in the wider region.

In this regard, we take note of the progress made in
addressing the challenges that remain, as highlighted
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/208).
We remain seriously concerned about the deteriorating
security situation in the Great Lakes. No doubt the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is at the epicentre
of the security dynamics in the region, and whatever
is happening in the country will have implications for
the wider region. That is why we are worried about
the activities of armed groups in the eastern part of
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the resurgence
of negative forces which could undermine regional
peace and stability. We appreciate the cooperation
between the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the country's national army, and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in
response to the activities of these illegal armed groups
and negative forces.

We appreciate the efforts being exerted by the
Special Envoy to the Great Lakes Region to address
the issue through consultations with the countries of
the region and the guarantors of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework (PSC) for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region . In that
connection, we welcome the reform of the structures
of governance within the framework of PSC and the
renewed commitment of the signatories and guarantors
to accelerate its full implementation. Regarding
reports of an incursion of ex-M-23 combatants into
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we support the
call made by the guarantors for all concerned parties
to remain committed to the full implementation of the
Nairobi Declarations and to refrain from any actions
that mightjeopardize their implementation.

As far as the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is concerned, we cannot overemphasize
the need for the full implementation of the Nairobi
Declarations. In the spirit of the political agreement
reached on 31 December 2016, the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo must pave the way for ensuring a successful
transition and continued peace and stability in the
country. All parties should be called upon to resolve any
outstanding issues in the spirit of compromise. They
should also be urged to cooperate with mediators of the
Conference episcopale nationale du Congo (CENCO),
whose role continues to be important in ensuring
the implementation of the agreement. It will be very
damaging if there is an inclination to set aside the
agreement of 31 December and marginalize CENCO.

We also believe that the support of the countries
of the region, as well as the African Union and the
United Nations, acting in unison and putting their
full weight behind the effort, are critical in order to
ensure a smooth transition process and ensure that the
holding of elections takes place as envisaged in the
31 December agreement. We commend the Special
Envoy for continuing to play an important role through
his good offices and in close coordination with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic republic of the Congo, Mr. Sidikou,
while engaging the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and the African Union, as well as
regional leaders, in support of the effort.

Regarding Burundi, we understand that the security
situation has improved relative to past years. However,
we note that allegations of violations of human rights,
including forced disappearances and targeted killings,
have not ceased. We believe that intra-Burundian
dialogue, under the auspices of the East African
Community (EAC) mediation effort, remains an
important platform for the search for a solution to the
political crisis in Burundi. We recognize that there
appears to be a veritable stalemate in the peace process.
We support the call made by the facilitator for the
convening of an extraordinary summit on Burundi in
order to stop the political gridlock. We also appreciate
the Special Envoy's engagement on the issue, as well
as his continued interactions with the facilitator
and other regional leaders, aimed at reactivating the
intra-Burundian dialogue and encouraging parties to
show flexibility and readiness for compromise. We
think that there is a need for the EAC, the African
Union and the United Nations to coordinate effectively
in order to ensure that facilitation is supported in the
best way possible.

Finally, the peace and security of the Great Lakes
Region is critical. The resolution of the situation has
broad implications in that regard. Therefore, the
sustained engagement of the Council in supporting
ongoing mediation efforts and ensuring the long-term
stability of the region will be significant in line with
the commitments made within the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region.

