I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for Disarmament Affairs Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). First of all, let me begin by re-emphasizing Viet Nam's consistent policy of supporting complete disarmament and non-proliferation on weapons of mass destruction, including chemical weapons. We would like to reiterate our categorical condemnation of the use of chemical weapons in any form, by anyone, anywhere, under any circumstances or for any reason. Obligations of State parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) must be fully respected. As a member of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), Viet Nam fully supports the work of the organization as entrusted by the CWC. We will continue to encourage the OPCW's endeavours in order to assist State parties in the full implementation of the Convention. To ensure tangible outcomes, the OPCW's investigations into any possible use of chemical weapons must be conducted in a most comprehensive, impartial and non-politicized manner to find conclusive and irrefutable evidence. Regarding the matter of chemical weapons in Syria, we share the concern of the international community over the alleged use of chemical weapons affecting civilians' lives and living environment. Viet Nam takes note the continued cooperation between the OPCW and Syria in the past years, as well as during the recent reporting period, as mentioned in the eighty-fifth report of the Director General of the OPCW (see S/2020/1056, annex). Viet Nam is pleased to see that both sides have been able to retain their engagement given various challenges created by the coronavirus disease pandemic. In particular, we welcome the conduct of the twenty-third round of consultations between the Declaration Assessment Team and the Syrian National Authority in Damascus in late September and early October. We also take note of the submission of monthly reports by Syria to the OPCW Executive Council, as well as the engagement of OPCW mechanisms in relation to various other incidents. The clarification of outstanding issues remains crucial with a view to putting an end to this long-standing issue. However, it is undesirable that there is still a lack of substantial progress in term of cooperation between the two sides. That is reflected in various monthly reports as well as the most recent report on the implementation of the 9 July OPCW Executive Council decision (see S/2020/1033, annex). For that reason, we call on the two sides to step up their efforts at cooperation. We believe that continued engagement is the most viable way to address remaining gaps and work towards the full implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). In finding a solution to the issue of chemical weapons in Syria, we note with regret that there is strong disagreement among various parties. Viet Nam would therefore like to stress the vital importance of unity on this matter, both among CWC State parties and among Security Council members. Only when there is constructive and non-politicized engagement in dialogue and cooperation can there be a tangible solution to bridge the differences. We also look forward to further deliberation on this matter at the upcoming Conference of the State Parties to the CWC. In conclusion, needless to say, the only path towards ending the current crisis in Syria is through a comprehensive political settlement, in full accordance with principles of international law and the Charter of the United Nations. All issues need to be dealt with in a most comprehensive manner to find a durable solution.
