Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to thank
the United Kingdom for organizing this timely briefing
on World Humanitarian Day, and the three briefers for
their sobering contributions.

With an unprecedented number of level 3
humanitarian crises and over 50 million refugees
and internally displaced people in the world, the
dedicated services of humanitarian workers could not
be more vitally important. As we pay tribute to all the
humanitarian workers whose selfless efforts testify
to what is best in our humanity, we must also seek to
ensure that their life-saving work does not exact the
ultimate price: the price of their own lives.

Last week, the Council visited South Sudan, seeing

at first hand those displaced as they tried to survive in
appalling conditions, threatened by cholera and other
diseases and on the brink of famine, with some 50,000
children at risk of dying from acute malnutrition. To
many of those displaced, United Nations protection
and humanitarian aid are their only lifeline. That
lifeline has been threatened by violations of status
of forces agreements and by incitement and attacks
against humanitarian workers. Early this month, six
humanitarian workers were killed. As Toby Lanzer,
United Nations Resident Coordinator in South Sudan,
lamented,

"I cannot imagine how anybody could do that.
Somebody who has come to provide medical
care and attention to your children, and you have
executed that person. It defies the imagination."

And yet that which defies the imagination is an
increasingly dangerous reality for humanitarian workers
in all conflict zones. The year 2013 saw a total of 460
aid workers killed, wounded or kidnapped, the highest
number ever. The first eight months of 2014 have also
been deadlier for humanitarian workers than the entire
year 2012. As the most recent report of Humanitarian
Outcomes indicates, the number of victims relative to
the attack rate also continues to rise.

Locally recruited humanitarian personnel are
especially vulnerable to attacks and account for the
majority of casualties, kidnappings, harassment,
banditry and intimidation. We must do more to protect
humanitarian workers, including national staff.
Questions related to the proliferation ofnon-State actors
in conflict zones and the increasingly asymmetrical
nature of threats must be urgently addressed, among
other issues.

The Rome Statute defines attacks against
humanitarian workers as a war crime. Resolution
1502 (2003) establishes that status-of-forces, status-
of-mission and host country agreements between
the United Nations and host countries should include
provisions designating attacks against humanitarian
personnel as crimes punishable by law and requiring
the prosecution or extradition of offenders. Yet how
often have we seen those provisions put into action?
Whether for lack of capacity or of political will, a
notable gap exists regarding accountability for crimes
against humanitarian workers. States need to make
sure that perpetrators of attacks committed in their
territory against humanitarian and United Nations and
associated personnel are brought to justice. As long as
the climate of impunity prevails, humanitarian workers
will be increasingly exposed to attacks and other
life-threatening situations.

For its part, the Council should consistently
condemn attacks against humanitarian medical workers
and should seek accountability for such crimes,
including through the use of the various instruments
at its disposal, such as sanctions, the designation of
criteria, commissions ofinquiry, fact-finding missions,
reporting by human rights monitoring teams and
referrals to the International Criminal Court.

Humanitarian action, as described in the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols
of 1977, is based on the principles of impartiality,
neutrality and independence - the essential features
of any humanitarian operation, as was stressed earlier
today by the Deputy Secretary-General and the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross. Violating those principles may incur grave
consequences for humanitarian workers themselves,
as well as for those who depend on the assistance they
provide.

In Syria, we have witnessed a most blatant violation
of those principles of impartiality and neutrality, as
parties to the conflict, in particular the Syrian regime,
have repeatedly obstructed humanitarian aid, withheld
consent for operations and redirected aid as a tactic
of war. The Council must ensure that the relevant
humanitarian resolutions are implemented in full and
must take the necessary further action in the event of a
failure to do so.

My delegation is also concerned with regard
to the politicization of humanitarian access on the
eastern borders of Ukraine, where attempts to deliver
purported humanitarian aid have been accompanied by
increased military movements on the part of Russia,
violations of Ukraine's borders and continued support
to anti-Ukrainian rebel groups. All such attempts to
manipulate humanitarian access for military or political
purposes are totally unacceptable and go counter to the
spirit and letter of international humanitarian law.

