Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting. I would also like to convey my
delegation's appreciation to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for the valuable information he has just given us.

During the Security Council's debate on the
subject of Kosovo in January 2002, my delegation
welcomed the progress made during 2001 and called on
all parties to give priority to dialogue in order to reach
a negotiated settlement of outstanding issues. Further
significant progress has been made since then,
including the Assembly's designation of a President
and Prime Minister, the successful establishment of a
multi-ethnic Government, the adoption of a
Government programme and the commencement of the
Assembly's work. These are important steps forward in
implementing the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council.

The report before us describes developments in
the situation on the ground since 17 July 2002. My
delegation is pleased to take note of the progress now
being made with regard to benchmarks. We encourage
the members of the Assembly to continue to pursue
training programmes in the context of building
functioning democratic institutions.

We welcome the successful holding of municipal
elections, which resulted in a turnout of about 54 per
cent. However, we regret the low level of mobilization
among the Serb community despite the many appeals
made in that regard. These elections represent a new
stage in establishing Kosovo's institutions, and the
effective participation of all communities remains
essential.

As the Secretary-General highlights in his report,
the representation of all communities in central and
local bodies should lead Kosovo to establish a good
Government and make it possible for everyone to
benefit from the tangible results of the efforts made. It
is now up to all parties to face up to their
responsibilities by supporting local institutions, as
those institutions provide a framework for cooperation
among Kosovo's citizens themselves, on the one hand,
and the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the countries of the region,
on the other. We also encourage Mr. Steiner to continue
his efforts in the areas of education, health and
administration, as well as in the implementation of the
seven-point plan put forth on 1 October 2002.

Enhancing the professionalism and independence
of the media requires significant assistance to press
bodies, in order to better enable them to meet their
responsibilities.

We appreciate efforts underway to resolve the
issue of missing persons. We also welcome UNMIK's
efforts in this regard, which have made it possible to
develop appropriate protocols to that end. The donor
community should support those efforts.

Despite some isolated incidents of violence,
which my delegation condemns, we welcome the
current calm security situation, as well as the building
of local capacity in the areas of maintaining order and
the judicial system. However, there is a need to support
local authorities in order to enable them to resolve the
problems with prisons.

We believe that the return and reintegration of
refuges and the return of property are continuing
concerns that must be properly resolved. We welcome
the establishment of a special group to accelerate that
process announced on 1 November 2002 by the Prime
Minister and the Special Representative. The
cooperation of central and local leaders and the support
of the international community will be essential to
ensuring that this group can carry out its work
effectively. Moreover, in addition to the strengthening
of cooperation among the States of the region, we also
welcome UNMIK's regular contact with the authorities
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
Republics of Serbia and Montenegro.

We hope that the results of the donors conference
in Brussels on 5 November will have a positive effect
on resolving the challenges confronting Kosovo.

Finally, I would like to conclude by once again
appealing to Kosovo's leaders and peoples to favour
dialogue for strengthening confidence-building
measures and building good-neighbourly relations with
all the countries of the region.

