Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We have taken note of the eighth report of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
on its investigation of the situation in Libya, and we
thank Ms. Bensouda for her presentation of the report.

We cannot help but be concerned about the
information in the report on the continuing violence
in Libya and the complex displaced-persons situation.
The report details unlawful arrests and detentions,
the torture of prisoners and abductions and murders
of civilians. Lawyers and judges working on internal
Libyan trials concerning former associates ofMuammar
Al-Qadhafi continue to be persecuted, and flagrantly
unjust decisions have been handed down, including
cases where the death penalty has been imposed.

We support efforts aimed at bringing to justice
those who committed serious crimes during the events
in Libya since 2011. We hope to see progress in the
work of the ICC in this matter, however we see little
sign for optimism in that regard.

On 24 July, the ICC Appeals Chamber took a
decision confirming the conclusion of the lower
court that Libya was able independently to carry out
an investigation into the Abdullah Al-Senussi case.
Although we do not question its competence on these
issues, we still find no material justification for such
an approach in the light of the entirely contradictory
decision in the SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi case and the
aforementioned assessment of the ICC Prosecutor with
regard to the situation in the country.

Crucial to strengthening the authority of the Court
is its ability to impartially carry out investigations
into the acts committed by all parties to the conflict,
including in Libya. There has still been no significant
progress in that regard. As we have already noted,
there is sufficient information on the crimes allegedly
committed by representatives of the Al-Qadhafi regime
as well by insurgents. However, judging by the report,
no real steps have been taken against the insurgents.
There is no information on specific actions by the ICC
with regard to the ongoing practices of torture and ill-
treatment in Libyan detention centres.

There is unfortunately no news on the fate of the
30,000 Touaregs. As for the many civilian casualties as
a result ofNATO airstrikes, which breached the terms of
resolution 1973 (2011) and was not in line with its goals,
the ICC Prosecutor continues to distance herself from
consideration of this issue, for unknown reasons. We
would like to hear clarification in that regard, if there is
in fact an explanation for this. We call for all instances
of the use of disproportionate or indiscriminate force
during the conflict that resulted in civilian victims to
be investigated, without any exception.

In conclusion, we are forced to note that the
experience of referrals to the ICC related to Libya
cannot be considered a success to date, neither in terms
ofprovidingjustice nor in terms of assisting the process
of national reconciliation. This is, of course, a major
factor when considering proposed referrals of cases to
the Court in the future.

