Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, let me
express our gratitude to the Chinese presidency for
organizing today's open debate, and Foreign Minister
Wang Yi for his leadership. Let me also thank the
Secretary-General for his well-informed briefing.

Georgia fully associates itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union. In
addition, I would like to make some comments in my
national capacity. The full text of my statement will be
distributed.

After the Second World War, in which Georgia lost
more than 350,000 citizens-10percentofitspopulation
at the time the United Nations was established to

save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, and to
maintain peace and security. Seven decades later, we
are still faced with unprecedented security challenges
in many parts of the world.

 

We are deeply distressedby the violent developments
and rapid deterioration of the security situation in the
Middle East. We condemn in the strongest terms all
despicable acts of terrorism and violence against the
civilian population. Terrorist groups such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant threaten the nations not
only in the Middle East but in all other places across the
globe. It is only with our joint efforts and commitment
that we can stop, reverse and prevent such violent
actions from happening.

Unlike the expectations of the early 19905, today's
Europe is neither free from confrontation nor at peace.
European security is once again being deliberately
challenged by Russia's ongoing military aggression
against Ukraine. The annexation of Crimea and the
tragedy taking place in the eastern part of Ukraine
should be duly responded to by the entire international
community. In these troubled times, Georgia stands by
the Ukrainian people in their quest for a democratic
future. We reaffirm our strong support for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine and call upon
the Russian Federation to stop its aggressive policies
against sovereign States.

Alas, the crisis in Ukraine is not an isolated case
but rather a part of the broader policy that Russia has
pursued in its neighbourhood throughout the years,
going so far as to redraw European borders by practicing
aggression, occupation and annexation. One further
attestation to that is the situation in my country, in the
illegally occupied Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions of
Georgia.

Russia's aggression against Georgia started in the
early 19905 and deepened in 2008, when open military
aggression against Georgia was carried out and the
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions were occupied.
Following the recognition of the so-called independence
of both regions, Russia's policy has been nothing but a
creeping annexation of parts of my country's sovereign
territories, manifested in the conclusion of dozens of
so-called treaties and agreements by Moscow with its
occupation regimes, providing the pretext for continued
illegal military presence.

The pinnacle of this policy was the so-called
comprehensive alliance treaties already signed with
the Sokhumi region and soon to be signed with the
Tskhinvali region, which envisages a full merger in all
spheres of the public domain and the open delegation
of all powers to the Russian Federation. There is no
other name for this but annexation. Russian actions
in the region contradict the fundamental principles
of international law, such as non-interference in the
internal affairs of States, the impermissability ofthreats
or the use of force, the sovereign equality of States, the
inviolability of borders and territorial integrity - in
short, the Charter of the United Nations.

Despite those provocations, Georgia remains
dedicated to a peaceful and constructive approach and
has been consistently committed to diplomacy and a
peaceful resolution of the conflict with the Russian
Federation. Since 2012, we have redoubled our efforts
to normalize relations with Moscow to the fullest
extent possible in order to create an environment
conducive to confidence-building and conflict
resolution. Regrettably, those efforts have yielded no
results in terms of conflict settlement. We highly value
the international discussions held in Geneva and will
continue our constructive participation in good faith in
the key format established for the implementation of
the ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008.

Maintaining international peace and security is
central to the Organization, especially the Council.
But far too often, because of the structural deficiencies
of the Council, universally recognized principles
are blatantly abused. Georgia was most directly and
painfully affected by the inability of the United Nations
to take decisive action. In the course and aftermath of
the August 2008 war, one permanent member of the
Security Council and a party to the conflict precluded
all meaningful measures to be taken by the Council.
We arrived at a paradox. The mandate of the then
existing United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
was terminated by a veto, so instead of an increased
security presence in the aftermath of a full-fledged
war, a vacuum was created in the international security
presence. The Syrian and Ukrainian crises are other
notorious examples in that mode.

In conclusion, let me once again stress that
Georgia remains a strong advocate of the principles of
international law enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. We all should take more tangible and resolute
steps towards the realization of our common goal of
preserving international peace and strengthening
international security.

Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the Chinese New Year.

