Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Allow me to welcome the
presence among us of the Vice-Minister of Territorial
Administration of Angola, General Higino Carneiro, and
his delegation.

I would also like to associate myself with the
statement just made by the representative of the United
Kingdom on behalf of the European Union.

Peace in Angola has been an elusive goal which the
Security Council and the Angolans themselves have been
trying to reach for years. Today, we might have reasons
to feel that our ship will reach a safe harbour. As the
Secretary-General acknowledges in his latest report on the
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA),
11 out of the 12 pending tasks defined by the Lusaka
Protocol have been completed. For the record, I would
just add that the Joint Commission recognizes that those
tasks have been formally completed.

This seems to be particularly true when one
considers the military aspects of the peace process. My
delegation takes seriously the persistent allegations of the
existence of a large number of unregistered and un-
demobilized UNITA elements. In this context, we concur
with the Secretary-General's assessment that

"It is obvious that the conclusion of the peace
process will depend on the full demobilization of
UNITA, especially the absentees and the residual
troops, which are still a cause of serious concern."
[5/1998/333, para. 49]

Of course, it would be unfair not to recognize
progress already achieved in the current peace process
based upon the "Acordos de Paz" of Bicesse and the
Lusaka Protocol. Portugal warmly welcomes the most
recent steps by the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation and UNITA towards completing the
remaining tasks of the Protocol. In particular, I would
underline the importance of UNITA'S statements on the
total demilitarization of its forces, which MONUA has

 

been verifying; the return to Luanda of a meaningful part
of UNITA's leadership; the cessation of Radio Vorgan
broadcasts, a step we would like to see as irreversible; the
promulgation by the Government of the law granting
special status to the leader of UNITA; and the appointment
by the Government of the provincial governors, vice-
governors and ambassadors nominated by UNITA.

These actions prove the Angolan Govemment's
commitment to live up to its name. They also enable
UNITA to show its will to transform itself into a political
party.

What is still missing in this ongoing picture? Trust is
still a rare political commodity in Angola. It will take years
to overcome mutual fears and suspicion. In Angola, war has
been the rule - the normal state of affairs - over recent
decades. But peace prevailed between the signature of the
"Acordos de Paz" and the 1992 elections, and peace has
again prevailed since 1994, a fact we should all emphasize.
Why? Because it means that peace is indeed something
tangible and achievable.

The completion of the extension of central
administration to UNITA-held areas, in particular to the
localities of Andulo and Bailundo, is a prerequisite for a
lasting peace in Angola. True, central authority has been
established in 269 out of 335 locations envisaged. But it is
equally relevant to note that this process should have
already been completed, as well as to recognize that the
Angolan Government has shown remarkable restraint and
flexibility in this chapter of the peace process. Excuses for
further delays are not credible.

Inside Angola the de facto existence of two competing
centres of power, with different territories and armies, is,
and in our view always has been, simply unacceptable. The
1992 elections are valid, and UNITA's leadership should
focus its activities on discussing with the Government, in
Luanda, the steps both should take to consolidate peace,
build a democracy and rehabilitate the economy of the
country. The organization of the next elections, within a
reasonable, realistic and internationally acceptable
framework, could be part of those discussions. This is, of
course, a task for the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation, which already includes UNITA.

But none of this will be possible until the completion
of the extension of central administration. Only after this
has happened will we be able truly to believe that the peace
process in Angola is becoming irreversible. By then we will
be in a position to revisit positively the issue of sanctions
against UNITA. We sincerely hope this message is fully
understood.

Portugal is deeply concerned about and strongly
condemns the recent attacks against the personnel of
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA),
the Angolan authorities and the civilian population. The
cold-blooded massacre of more than 20 civilians in Ganda
was an abomination. The incidents in Chongoroi and
N ' gove require a full investigation by MONUA and the
prosecution of those responsible. The draft resolution
before us fully reflects our views on these issues.
Before concluding, allow me to pay tribute to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Maitre
Beye, to Major-General Sibanda of Zimbabwe and to all
the men and women serving in MONUA under the
direction of Maitre Beye. I would also like to recognize
the importance of the recent visit that the Chairman of the
Sanctions Committee, my dear friend Ambassador
Mahugu, paid to Angola and other interested countries.
We have already felt the positive impact of his visit.

As the largest troop and civilian police contributor
to MONUA, Portugal demonstrates in a very clear way
that it believes in a successful conclusion of the peace
process. The same could be said of our significant
bilateral cooperation with that country. United Nations
intervention in Angola has been a major investment in
peace by the international community. We very much
hope to see a continuation of that international support.
We want to be sure that the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation will be able to show us how best
to assist Angolans in the near future.

