Ms. Raskovic-Ivic (Serbia): I would like to thank
everybody for the many constructive proposals and
comments made during the discussion, which I
understood as expressing strong support for the
negotiating process. I would nevertheless like to make
a few clarifications.

On several occasions during the debate, I heard
reference to the argument regarding the uncertainty of
Kosovo Albanians as a reason for haste. I think that the
uncertainty argument is not a good one, because the
status and the situation that prevailed in Kosovo and
Metohija and in Serbia prior to 1999 will never again
prevail. That is especially true in the light of the future

06-6573]
European prospects for the entire South-Eastern Balkan
region.

I would like to say a few words about the
participation of Serbs in the Institutions. First of all,
Serbs living in Kosovo and Metohija do not have
confidence, because freedom of movement is not what
it should be and because there are still many attacks on
people as they move about and commute from place to
place.

There is also another issue involved, because
participation is a complex matter that is not solely
about confidence or security. There is no mechanism to
prevent out-voting. I must remind the Council that
when the Return Coalition was actively participating it
submitted 72 amendments. Only two were adopted, and
70 were rejected. Serbs from that Coalition therefore
always had the feeling that they were just there for
decoration. The participation of Serbs in Kosovo
should be meaningful. That is why we need a
mechanism to prevent out-voting. Such a mechanism
would be the best way to carry out negotiations,
especially in the working group on community rights.

Then, of course, representatives in Kosovo and
Metohija from the Serbian list are legal but they are not
legitimate. That is because, out of the 140,000 Serbs in
Kosovo and the 250,000 in Serbia and Montenegro that
have the right to vote in Kosovo, only 811 persons
voted.

I would also like to refer to the contention that
Kosovo is a sui generis case. From our point of
view - and not only as Serbs, for there are others who
share our feelings and views - the issue of Kosovo is,
by its very essence, a matter of precedent, not a sui
generis case.

With regard to the comments of Ms. Lintonen, I
agree with and welcome many of the things she said. I
also commit myself and the Coordination Centre of the
Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija to
cooperate with the European Union on technical and all
other matters.

