Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The protection
of civilians is one of the most complex topics before
the Council. The report before the membership today
illustrates the diverse and wide-ranging challenges the
Council faces in addressing this topic. They cover
almost the full spectrum of United Nations activities,
with issues ranging from humanitarian assistance to
disarmament. Concerns for the well-being and
protection of civilians need, therefore, to be
mainstreamed into the activities of the Organization,
but in particular, into the decision-making of the
Security Council, whose activities have the most direct
impact on the situation of civilians in armed conflicts.

We support the recommendation in the report to
establish a working group on protecting of civilians,
provided that its mandate is to develop mechanisms to
ensure that the issue of protection of civilians is
mainstreamed into the decision-making processes of
the Council. It must not, however, lead to a situation
where the protection of civilians is treated as a niche
topic, which would in fact be counterproductive.

The numerous topics of direct relevance to the
protection of civilians have one thing in common: the
central role of international law and its application.
Many of the topics covered in the report reveal a
glaring gap between existing standards of international
law and the realities on the ground. It is quite clear that
the situation of civilians would be far less dramatic if
the existing norms of international law were applied
and observed. This state of affairs is cause for great
concern. We are not observing a continuous movement
towards better observance of these standards, but in
some instances, quite the opposite.

There is an ongoing erosion of the political will
to implement international legal standards - among
them, those of international humanitarian law. In this
context, we wish to emphasize the need for private
military companies to abide by applicable rules of
international humanitarian law and insist that the
primary responsibility for enforcing the implementation
of these standards by these actors rests with the States
that commission their services.

The phenomenon of sexual violence is a clear
illustration of this gap. The recent past has brought
about significant developments in the field of
international justice in this respect. For example, the
inclusion of gender crimes in the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and landmark
decisions of ad hoc tribunals, such as in the Akayesu
case before the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda.

Meanwhile, sexual violence seems to continue
unabated, including its most worrisome form of
policies aimed at intimidating a civilian population. It
is worth noting, in this respect, that two of the
situations described in the report, the one in the
Democratic Republic of Congo and the one in Darfur,
fall under the jurisdiction of the International Criminal
Court. In the area of sexual violence, impunity
certainly plays an even more central role than in other
crimes and is exacerbated by the well-known, dramatic
underreporting of such crimes. We thus welcome the
emphasis the Secretary-General's report places on the
need for a more robust response to sexual violence. In
addition to the specific measures mentioned in the
report, the Council might want to consider stronger
action in specific cases under consideration.

In the fight against impunity in general, the role
of the ICC is clearly a central one. The Court is not
only seized with a number of situations, its activities
and mere existence also have a preventative effect. But
the Court is an institution that was created by States
and is owned by States, its independence
notwithstanding. We therefore welcome the clear call
of the Secretary-General for full cooperation with the
Court. It is such cooperation that is indispensable to
achieve success in the fight against impunity.

The Council has been seized with the protection
of civilians for a number of years now. One of the
highlights of the Outcome Document of the 2005
World Summit was the acceptance of the principle of
the responsibility to protect. This decision was of
historic magnitude, but it has not yet led to a watershed
in the protection of civilians worldwide. It is important
that we put this concept into operation and we support
the Secretary-General's efforts in this respect.

We appreciate the fact that the Secretary-General
is making this issue one of the priority topics of his
tenure, but we also believe that more systematic work
needs to be done by us, the Member States, in
particular. The protection of civilian populations is,
first and foremost, the task of the States on whose
territories they reside. Given that the role of the
Council is only complementary and only applicable
after massive human suffering has occurred, United
Nations efforts with regard to the responsibility to
protect can usefully focus on strengthening national
capacities.
Furthermore, the issue of the safety and security
of civilians engaged as humanitarian or United Nations
personnel needs more attention. Currently,
Liechtenstein is one of only two countries financing
the initiative "Saving Lives Together", which aims to
provide better security for the United Nations,
international organizations and non-governmental
organizations in the field. We call upon other Member
States, which are in a position to do so, to support this
initiative as well.

