Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
important debate on peace and security in Africa,
which focuses on the Sahel region. I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his commitment and his
briefing. Also, I welcome Mr. Jim Yong Kim, President
of the World Bank; Mr. Romano Prodi, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Sahel; and Mr. Michel
Reveyrand de Menthon, Special Representative of the
European Union for the Sahel, and thank them for their
respective presentations.

The delegation of Rwanda would like to endorse
the statement of Ambassador Tete Antonio, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
whom I welcome. I will add a few remarks in my
national capacity.
Rwanda welcomes the adoption of the presidential
statement on the Sahel (S/PRST/2013/20), initiated by
Morocco. Iwould like to take this opportunity to welcome
the unwavering commitment of Morocco to supporting
the issue of the Sahel in the past two years as a member
of the Security Council. We have had the open debate
organized last December, presided over by the Foreign
Minister of Morocco (S/PV.6882) and sanctioned by a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/26); a briefing of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee in September on the
fight against terrorism in the Sahel, under Morocco's
chairmanship; and the presidential statement that the
Council has just adopted.

As the presidential statement just adopted
underscores, the problem of the Sahel is
multidimensional faceted. There are aspects related
to governance, security, humanitarian, human rights
and development issues. Rwanda therefore supports a
coordinated, comprehensive and integrated approach
that places priority on the pursuit oflasting solutions to
the root causes of the crisis, which are primarily linked
to governance and development.

Since the Libyan revolution and the subsequent
proliferation of weapons throughout the region,
terrorism and insecurity have become ongoing threats
to the countries of the Sahel. I take this opportunity to
commend the African and Malian forces that, with the
decisive support of French troops of Operation Serval,
were able to free Mali from the terrorists from the
North. We also welcome the significant efforts made
by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali.

Despite the progress that has been achieved, the
Sahelo-Saharan region continues to face security
challenges, in particular from the regrouped terrorist
movements in northern Mali and the disturbing situation
in Kidal. These groups, whose operations are not limited
to a single country, pose an ongoing threat to Mali
and the Sahel as a whole. The countries of the region
must therefore strengthen their security cooperation,
particularly cross-border security, in order to combat
terrorism, transnational crime, and the proliferation
and illicit trafficking of weapons and drugs in the
region in a more effective and coordinated manner. In
that regard, the regional good-neighbourly relations
and the exchange of information and communications,
including in the framework of the Nouakchott Process,
are important to achieving significant progress.

The fight against terrorism also requires the States
of the region to build their capacities to effectively
control their own territories and borders and to fight
criminal and terrorist networks. In that regard, we
welcome the convening in Rabat on 13 and 14 November
of the second regional conference on border security
between the Sahel and the Maghreb. Such cooperative
mechanisms between the countries of the Sahel and the
Maghreb are of critical importance to the effective and
coordinated fight against the terrorist groups that sow
destruction in the region.

As I said earlier, development issues are at the heart of
the crisis in the Sahel. Education, infrastructure, energy,
agriculture and development projects - especially
quick-impact projects and those that create jobs for
young people - are important to fighting terrorism and
organized crime. In that framework, the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel is an ideal vehicle to
address the multidimensional problems of the region,
above all development. In that context, we welcome the
joint visit to the region made by the Secretary-General,
the President of the World Bank and Donald Kaberuka,
President of the African Development Bank, with the
participation of the African Union and other partners.
We believe that the international community's evident
readiness to support the region's struggle for peace and
development is an important dynamic that will surely
be fruitful.

In that respect, we encourage improved coordination
of the activities of regional and international partners
in Mali and the Sahel. Similarly, Rwanda hopes that
the ministerial meeting on the integrated strategy, held
in Bamako on 5 November, gave renewed impetus for
improved coordination of the implementation of the
strategy and provided the region with an opportunity
to assume ownership of that instrument, which must
be wielded in coordination with the States of the Sahel,
West Africa and the Maghreb, and with the assistance
of the United Nations Office for West Africa.

In conclusion, we underscore once again the
need for the countries of the Sahel, with the support
of bilateral and multilateral partners, to address the
root causes of the crisis in their region, in particular
governance and development. We also hope that those
countries will assume ownership of the United Nations
integrated strategy so as to ensure its rapid and coherent
implementation. To that end, capacity-building and
cross-border cooperation and information exchange
are critical in dealing with the scourges of that region,
including drug and arms trafficking and terrorism.

We are convinced that the deployment of the
African Union Mission for Mali and the Sahel, in
synergy with the United Nations and other partners,
will greatly contribute to improving the situation in the
region.

