Mr. Kim Sook (Republic ofKorea): Let me express
my sincere appreciation to you, Madam President, for
convening this open debate. I would also like to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and the four
journalists for their comprehensive and informative
briefings and compelling stories.

Journalists are killed, tortured and subjected to
enforced disappearance and arbitrary detention, as well
as intimidation and harassment, during conflicts. They
reveal a clear picture of conflict situations, including
the tragic suffering of civilians and violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
That makes journalists the target of attacks by parties
to a conflict who do not want their actions exposed.

Attacks against journalists also constitute violations
of the right to freedom of opinion and expression.
Greater threats to journalists increases the risks of
restricting the freedom of the press through the chilling
effect of self-censorship. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the Human Rights Council resolution on the
safety ofjournalists , adopted last year, and calls upon
all parties to put an end to such practices and to provide
special protection to journalists.

Despite the Council's action on the issue, including
its historic resolution 1738 (2006) and last February's
presidential statement on the protection of civilians
(S/PRST/2013/2), violence against journalists persists.
It is extremely disturbing that between 111 and
153 journalists reportedly have been killed during the
past 28 months in Syria. The situation is also troubling
in Somalia, where last year alone, 18 journalists were
killed. We also condemn abductions of journalists in
conflict situations. In that regard, Dutch journalist
Judith Spiegel and her husband, kidnapped by an
armed group in Yemen just over a month ago, should be
released immediately.

Against that backdrop, I would like to underline
the following points. First, those responsible for
violations against journalists should be pursued and
held accountable no matter how long it takes. It is
alarming that a huge percentage of such perpetrators
enjoys impunity around the world. Failure to undertake
effective investigations and to prosecute those
responsible for attacks will lead to further violence in
the future. The primary responsibility for protecting
journalists, investigating each violation and prosecuting
those responsible lies with Governments and State
institutions. To that end, the necessary resources should
be dedicated to preventing and investigating attacks, as
well as bringing those responsible to justice.

While the majority of victims are male journalists,
we note with concern that female journalists are also
subject to violations in conflict situations. They face
additional risks, such as those of sexual violence or
sexual abuse in detention. We believe that a gender-
sensitive approach is needed when considering measures
to address the issue of violence against journalists.

Secondly, my delegation would like to further
encourage coordination and cooperation among United
Nations agencies, Member States and civil society
with regard to ensuring the safety of journalists. My
delegation welcomes and fully endorses the 2012 United
Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists
and the Issue of Impunity. We are also pleased that
its implementation strategy and work plan have been
prepared, including all relevant stakeholders and United
Nations agencies such as UNESCO, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the United Nations Development Programme.

The role of civil society is significant, given
its expertise in the field. We welcome the active
engagement of civil society in the implementation of
the United Nations Plan of Action and would like to
further encourage it. Civil society, for its part, should
strengthen its efforts to raise awareness of the risks
faced by journalists and existing international standards
to protect them.

Thirdly, the scope of journalists should not be
interpreted restrictively and protection should be
provided to a broad spectrum of journalists. The
emergence of online journalists - both professionals
and untrained so-called citizen journalists - plays
an increasingly important role in documenting and
disseminating news in real time. Online journalists
should also be afforded the same protection as offline
journalists.

Last but not least, the Council needs to be more
vigilant about the safety of journalists and consider
including specific language on the protection of
journalists in relevant documents. We welcome the fact
that the Council, in resolution 2067 (2012) on Somalia,
specifically condemned violence against journalists for
the first time, and in resolution 2093 (2013), adopted in
March, emphasized the obligation of the Government
of Somalia with respect to the protection ofjournalists.
We should consider the need for a similar approach in
all relevant situations.

