Mr. Jinga (Romania) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Ukrainian presidency of the Security
Council for its initiative of placing the protection
of critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks on
its agenda for the first time. I also thank the briefers
who, through their interventions, have enriched this
open debate.

Romania fully endorses the statement of the
European Union. I should like to add a few remarks
from my national perspective.

Transport, telecommunications, energy or water
distribution networks, financial systems and emergency
services infrastructure - what is called critical
infrastructure - is essential to the sound functioning
of our contemporary society. Consequently, their
protection is a key priority. Terrorist entities have
demonstrated the ability to act with tenacity, speed and
flexibility. Given their goal of producing the greatest
number of casualties and material damage, critical
infrastructure remains a preferred target.

The global dimension of terrorist threats and
attacks requires a comprehensive response, and the
United Nations must play a key role in a coordinated and
effective approach. Given the inter-State connections of
critical infrastructure, regional and global cooperation
is also crucial. In recent years, terrorist attacks on
critical infrastructure have highlighted the vulnerability
of States. We all remember the most recent cases, which
demonstrated the impact of the terrorist attacks on the
Brussels and Istanbul airports. We must not forget the
most deadly attacks in the history of Spain against
passenger trains in Madrid in 2004.

In addition, the international community has
witnessed the horrors committed against civilians in
Syria, where water became a weapon of war when more
than 5 million inhabitants of the capital were deprived
of water for more than a month after an attack against
its main supplier of water. We also recall the destruction
in 2013 of the Deir ez-Zor suspension bridge on the
Euphrates, cutting access to around 50,000 people
in the city, or the Da'esh attacks that targeted oil
wells, refineries and power stations in Syria and Iraq.
Unfortunately, the list is not exhaustive. No State is
completely immune.

In 2011, Romania developed a national strategy
for the protection of critical infrastructure. We believe
that in our efforts to protect critical infrastructure, we
must place greater emphasis on cooperation among
State authorities, economic operators and the public, as
well as on risk analysis and the operationalization of
the public-private partnership. The latter is essential,
since a significant portion of the infrastructure belongs
to private or multinational companies.

Among the means that terrorist entities exploit of
and that offer immense opportunities are computer
technologies and online communication, which have
exhibited unprecedented growth. Experience has shown
that the most serious terrorist threats are of a mixed
nature, enabling cyberattacks to have a direct impact
on physical infrastructure. In that context, prevention
has become increasingly significant.

In 2013, Romania adopted a cybersecurity strategy
and a national action plan for the implementation of
its national cybersecurity system. Moreover, in 2011,
Romania set up the National Cybersecurity Incident
Response Centre, tasked with public prevention,
response and advisory services. Currently, the Centre
is implementing a project in conjunction with partners
from 27 organizations, from 14 European countries.

Another effective means of combating terrorism is
the prevention of violent extremism, in which Romania
has also invested heavily, with results that speak for
themselves. My country has not experienced the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters or seen a single
case ofa Romanian citizen or foreign national travelling
to the theatre of war to join a terrorist organization.
Furthermore, in Romania, jihadi propaganda is found
only in extremely isolated pockets.

We deeply appreciate United Nations efforts to
develop legal and institutional frameworks for the fight
against terrorist threats to be placed at the disposal of
the Member States. Romania was a sponsor ofresolution
2341 (2017), on the protection of critical infrastructure
from terrorist attacks, adopted unanimously today by
the Council. It complements the adoption of resolutions
2322 (2016), on internationaljudicial cooperation; 2309
(2016), on combatting threats to civil aviation; and
resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection of personnel
and medical facilities in armed conflicts. Another
important pillar remains General Assembly resolution
71/19, on cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Police Organization,
INTERPOL.

We welcome the decision of the Secretary-General
to launch a thorough debate on the implementation of the
Organization's Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The
informal discussion, to be held in the General Assembly,
thus represents a good starting point for strengthening
the United Nations' counter-terrorism component.

In conclusion, Romania believes that the respect
for international legal frameworks and the adoption
and implementation of national laws are essential
to any effort to protect critical infrastructure from
terrorist attacks.

