Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to start by thanking Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for briefing us on their recent joint
mission to Afghanistan, together with the Executive
Directors of the United Nations Population Fund and
UN-Women, and for outlining the current situation
in Afghanistan. I have also listened attentively to the
remarks of Ms. Jamila Afghani, who spoke on behalf of
civil society in Afghanistan today.

At present, the situation in Afghanistan is at a
critical juncture. Election preparations and the peace
and reconciliation process are moving ahead side by side,
while the security situation is a source of concern and
the humanitarian situation remains grim. The United
Nations and the international community must continue
to support the Afghan political and reconciliation
process, preparations for the presidential election and
capacity-building in fighting terrorism and maintaining
stability. They must also honour their commitments in
providing assistance to improve the local humanitarian
situation and support Afghan reconstruction and
reintegration into regional economic cooperation.

Although they are important force for maintaining
international peace and security, women are also
a vulnerable group prone to be victimized in
armed conflicts. Women are important builders of,
contributors to and participants in the peace process.
The international community must support Afghanistan
in enhancing protection for women, ensuring women's
full access to participation and decision-making in the
political sphere and peace process. At same time, it is
also important to fully accommodate and respect local
social realities and cultural traditions, build up the
country's capacities relating to women and peace and
security, and respect the country's national ownership
of the process.

Just now, Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
also talked about the China-Russia-United States
consultation in Beijing, which is the third round of
consultations in Beijing on the issue of Afghanistan.
We welcome Pakistan joining the consultations and
trust that it will play an absolutely crucial role in
advancing peace in Afghanistan. After the meeting, the
four parties issued a four-party joint statement on the
Afghan peace process. I wish to take this opportunity to
brief the Council on the outcomes of this consultation.

The four sides exchanged Views on the current
situation and joint efforts aimed at realizing a political
settlement that would advance peace, stability and
prosperity in Afghanistan and throughout the region.
They emphasized the importance of their trilateral
consensus on the Afghan peace process reached in
Moscow on 25 April. They welcomed recent positive
progress, as the crucial parties concerned have advanced
in their talks and increased contacts with each other.
They also welcomed the intra-Afghan meetings held in
Moscow and Doha.

The four sides called for relevant parties to
seize the opportunity for peace and immediately
start intra-Afghan negotiations among the Taliban,
the Afghan Government and other Afghans. They
reaffirmed that negotiations should be Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned and further agreed that these
negotiations should produce a peace framework as
soon as possible. This framework should guarantee
the orderly and responsible transition of the security
situation and set out the details of an agreement on a
future inclusive political arrangement that is acceptable
to all Afghans.

The four sides encouraged all parties to take
steps to reduce violence, leading to a comprehensive
and permanent ceasefire that starts with intra-Afghan
negotiations. The four sides agreed to maintain the
momentum of the consultations and will invite other
important stakeholders to join them on the basis of the
trilateral consensus agreed on 25 April in Moscow.
This broader group will meet at the start of the
intra-Afghan negotiations.

China supports the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and other competent entities
in playing a greater role on the issue of Afghanistan.
Alongside the international community, China is
ready to continue contributing to security, stability,
development and prosperity in Afghanistan.

