I have the pleasure to submit this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries - Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and Denmark. Today's important debate comes at a time when many countries are working tirelessly to navigate new waves of the pandemic. We have seen that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) constitutes a potential conflict driver. This is also the case with other global challenges such as climate change, rising inequality and food insecurity, human rights violations and abuses, and sexual and gender-based violence. These risk triggering or exacerbating conflict, displacement and irregular migration, and reversing peacebuilding and development gains. This year also marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations and its Charter. Today's threats to international peace and security are different and more complex than those in 1945. Climate change is but one of these new threats. The Security Council needs to recognize this. To address complex transnational challenges, such as pandemics and climate change, and mitigate their potential impact on conflict and insecurity, a renewed, collective commitment to multilateral solutions is required. Allow us to make three proposals. First, solutions must be coherent and integrated across the United Nations humanitarian, development, peace and security, and human rights work, taking into consideration that root causes and drivers of conflict and instability often are deeply interlinked. We know that efforts to prevent conflict and sustain peace are more effective when they go hand in hand with sustainable development, including concerted climate action, and represent the whole population, including women and men, girls and boys. From the ground up, joined-up approaches must be the default way of working - from comprehensive analysis and policy frameworks through streamlined funding modalities to collective action and outcomes, all including a gender lens. We also know that societies are more resilient when all human rights are respected, protected and fulfilled. Advancing the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda must be a priority. Ensuring women's full, equal and meaningful participation across the peace continuum is not just desirable but necessary. Women, youth and marginalized groups have the right to a seat at the table where decisions are made. Secondly, we strongly support the United Nations reforms and are committed to the follow-up of the Declaration on the Commemoration of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations (General Assembly resolution 75/1). We therefore need to maintain momentum on the implementation of the sustaining peace agenda, the repositioning of the United Nations development system, the Action for Peacekeeping agenda as well as the cross-cutting emphasis on conflict prevention. These reforms need to be translated into tangible results on the ground through joined-up prevention and peacebuilding efforts in non-mission settings, under the leadership of the newly empowered Resident Coordinators and through effective integration between peace operations and United Nations country teams, in mission settings. Ensuring sustainable, coherent and adequate financing for sustaining peace is critical, in line with good peacebuilding donorship. The Nordic countries have committed unearmarked contributions to rapid and flexible funds such as the United Nations COVID-19 Response and Recovery Fund and the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF). The PBF's work is an example of bringing the United Nations system together, and we urge new donors to support its activities. It is to the benefit of the Security Council to increase its interaction and cooperation with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). The PBC is a unique platform that gathers together a diverse set of actors, enabling closer cooperation and coordination across the United Nations system and together with local actors on the ground on a broad range of complex and emerging challenges to peace and security. Thirdly, and lastly, it is essential that we draw on all tools, capacities and expertise at our disposal. To that end, we need a networked and inclusive multilateralism in which the entire United Nations family, the World Bank and other international financial institutions, regional organizations, civil- society organizations and the private sector work together. In that regard, it is vital for the Council to listen to, and further engage with, civil society, not least women's organizations. In conclusion, while the COVID-19 pandemic has tested multilateral cooperation and its institutions, it has also simultaneously proved our joint purpose and interests in sustaining a strong multilateralism. The Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire, with strong support from States Members of the United Nations and civil society, is evidence of the potential of our collective efforts to act and turn the tide on conflict and insecurity. We - the Nordic countries - reiterate our call on all warring parties, State- and non-State actors alike, to heed that appeal and put an end to hostilities. In line with the commitments undertaken in the Declaration on the Commemoration of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations, we must catalyse our power for reinvigorated multilateralism, increased cooperation and global solidarity. As we continue to respond to the crises that unfold across the world, this is our opportunity to build back better and greener for a sustainable, climate-resilient and peaceful future, in full support of the Sustainable Development Goals, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the Decade of Action.
