Mr. M'Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): Allow me
to begin, Mr. President, by congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November. You can obviously count on
the cooperation of our delegation. We also congratulate
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal of Guatemala, who carried
out his duties as President of the Council last month
with distinction.

I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her briefing, which provides information on the
situation in Libya before the Court from the point
of view of both cooperation and the principle of
complementarity.

With respect to cooperation, Togo is pleased
with the willingness of States parties and non-parties
to the Rome Statute, as well as international and
non-governmental organizations, to help the ICC in the
framework of its investigations of the alleged violations
in Libya.

While appreciating the cooperation between Libya
and the ICC, Togo hopes that the renewal of the mandate
of the person in charge of liaising with the ICC will
make possible full cooperation between the Office of
the Prosecutor and the Libyan Government. My country
believes that, in the spirit ofthe debate on 17 October on
the relations between the Security Council and the ICC
(see S/PV.6849), ways and means should be explored to
find a solution that would promote the implementation
of cooperation requests, pending or future.
We take note of the commitment, often repeated,
of the Libyan Government to proceed to a fair and
equitable trial for those responsible for alleged serious
human rights violations and violations of humanitarian
law, and we note that the Government affirms that the
investigations that it has carried out have allowed it
to obtain a great deal of evidence that will constitute
a set of charges identical to what the ICC Prosecutor
has presented. The Togolese Government hopes that
appropriate arrangements will be made to guarantee
that the alleged perpetrators of crimes will have
an equitable trial in accordance with international
standards.

Furthermore, Togo is concerned about the
information it has received on acts of torture or other
forms of mistreatment of the detainees and urges the
Libyan Government to make every effort to put an end
to it.

With respect to the principle of complementarity,
Togo believes that the prosecution and trial of those
responsible for the crimes in question is up to the
Libyan authorities first and foremost. My country is
convinced that there could not be any reconciliation or
stabilization in Libya unless light is shed on the crimes
in an equitable trial, so that the perpetrators can be held
accountable for their actions both before the ICC and
before national courts, in accordance with the principle
of complementarity that is the very foundation of the
ICC.

However, it would seem that for the time being the
Libyan judicial system is still under construction. Of
course, the expected decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber
on the admissibility challenge in the Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi case is not an assessment of the Libyan
judicial system in general. But that decision, which will
deal with the determination of the Libyan authorities
to deliver justice, could be an indicator as to the ability
of the system itself to guarantee an equitable trial,
ensuring, inter alia, everyone's right to a defence as
well as the protection of witnesses. That is why we hope
that cooperation between the Libyan authorities and the
Office of the Prosecutor will make possible, in the final
analysis, the judicious implementation of the principle
of complementarity so as to guarantee an equitable trial
for the detainees sought by the ICC.

