Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would first
like to thank Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Home Affairs Ahmad Zahid Hamidi and the Malaysian
presidency for organizing this important open debate.
We appreciate this opportunity for the Security Council
to focus on promoting the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) and to reaffirm its resolve against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs).
I would also like to join others in thanking Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, Special Representative Roux,
Mr. Koblentz and Under-Secretary- General Kim Won-soo
for their briefings.

Since its adoption in 2004, resolution 1540 (2004)
has been an important part of the global security
architecture. It has helped enable the international
community to meet emerging security challenges
coming from the possibility of non-State actors using
WMDs for terrorist purposes. Yet it can and should
play a greater role in the face of daunting challenges.
Rapid advances in science and technology have
increased accessibility to WMDs and related materials
by non-State actors. International terrorists groups,
such Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), are watching for loopholes in the
non-proliferation regime. On our efforts to secure the
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), I would
like to make three points.

First, we must further cement partnerships with
regional and international organizations, academia
and civil society. In particular, the role of industry
is essential in preventing WMD proliferation, as it is
often at the front line of dealing with sensitive and
dual-use items. In that regard, the Republic of Korea
will host the first regional Wiesbaden Conference in
Asia for industry outreach on resolution 1540 (2004).
The Conference aims to enhance communication
between Government and the private sector and to
strengthen regional implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). We will share the results of the conference
with the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) with a view to contributing specific
recommendations from industry.

Secondly, we must enhance the 1540 Committee's
role in providing assistance to Member States. This
is crucial for the broad spectrum of obligations to
be effectively met. As noted during the formal open
consultations in June, the number of assistance
requests from Member States has been declining, and
the responses to those requests modest. We need to
strengthen the matchmaking role of the Committee
to support national capacity-building in collaboration
with various regional and international organizations.

Thirdly, we need a more coordinated and holistic
approach to countering WMD proliferation. Identifying
new trends in the security environment and responding
in a timely manner cannot be achieved by the 1540
Committee alone. In that regard, we welcome the 1540
Committee's efforts to coordinate with the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2254 (2015).

Before concluding, I would be remiss if I did
not mention the threat posed by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's nuclear programme. The
Democratic People's Republic of Korea continues to
defy the international community by refusing to end
its pursuit of a nuclear-weapon capability. That was
demonstrated by its fourth nuclear test, on 6 January,
and the 17 ballistic missile launches conducted this year.
North Korea's persistent violations of international
obligations, including Security Council resolutions,
call into question its qualification as a United Nations
State Member. We must take united action to ensure
that North Korea complies with its obligations.
Once again, I would like to reaffirm the Republic
of Korea's commitment to the full and universal
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We will
continue to support and work closely with the 1540
Committee.

