Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his comprehensive
briefing on the latest developments in the humanitarian
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. We also thank
Ms. Susannah Sirkin for her informative briefing.

C6te d'Ivoire once again welcomes the agreement
establishing a demilitarized zone in Idlib, signed on
17 September 2018, between Russia and Turkey, which
has made it possible to avoid the large-scale offensive so
dreaded by the international community. Unfortunately,
the agreement has only been partially respected, in
some measure because of the refusal of armed groups
to withdraw from the demilitarized zone. In addition,
my country regrets that, since 29 April, there has been a
resumption of fighting in Idlib governorate, which has
further exacerbated the already precarious conditions
of approximately 3 million people.

According to estimates from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the new
outbreak of violence has claimed many lives and led to
the displacement of more than 400,000 people, while
approximately 11.7 million displaced persons will need
urgent assistance, including 5 million who face extreme
hardship. The humanitarian situation has become
increasingly worrisome, given the recurring attacks
over the past few months on vital civilian infrastructure
in north-western Syria, in particular health facilities
and schools, as well as water treatment plants. In that
regard, Cote d'Ivoire again calls on the parties to the
conflict to put an immediate end to hostilities and to
strictly respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law. We encourage them in particular
to take all measures necessary to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure.

With regard to the serious plight of refugees and
internally displaced persons, my country urgently
appeals to the international partners to honour the
funding pledges they made at the third Brussels
Conference on Supporting the future of Syria and
the region, held from 12 to 14 March. According to
Ms. Najat Rochdi, Senior Humanitarian Adviser to the
Special Envoy to Syria, of approximately $3.3 billion
needed to provide assistance for more than 11 million
Syrians, only 23 per cent has been raised thus far
this year.

The serious humanitarian crisis faced by Syria
has been inextricably linked for many years to the
conflict in the country. The responds to the needs of
people facing extreme hardship must therefore be
accompanied by greater efforts aimed at achieving
an immediate ceasefire, which is essential to the safe
delivery of humanitarian aid and the resumption of
political dialogue, which is the sole prerequisite for a
peaceful and lasting solution to the crisis in Syria.

In conclusion, C6te d'Ivoire reiterates its support
for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and
encourages him to pursue his mediation efforts with a
view to relaunching the political process, in line with
the relevant provisions of resolution 2254 (2015).

