Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Delegations have been sitting here for more than two
hours, so I will try to be very brief, and not speak for
longer than 30 minutes. Allow me to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month and by
thanking the Secretary-General for his latest report on
the situation in Afghanistan (S/2008/434). I would also
like to express our gratitude to Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for his hard work and for his
commendable vision. It is indeed a pleasure to see the
Foreign Ministers of the brotherly countries of
Afghanistan - His Excellency Mr. Spanta - and
Pakistan in the Security Council today. I also thank
Mr. John Holmes for his briefing to the Council today.

Afghanistan, under the wise leadership of
President Karzai, and despite all the daunting
challenges facing it, has achieved remarkable
accomplishments in the past several years. The launch
of the Afghanistan National Development Strategy at
the Paris Conference last month, which will function as
a road map for the development, security and
prosperity of the country, under Afghan leadership, is
yet another sign of the fact that the Afghan people and
Government are prepared, capable and willing to lead
the efforts to rebuild their country. The Paris
Conference, which Iran, as in previous conferences on
Afghanistan, actively attended at the highest level, also
served as another occasion for the international
community to display its commitment to, and
partnership with, Afghanistan. We have noted that

progress continues in several important sectors,
including in health services, investment in the natural
resources of the country, capacity-building,
infrastructure, education and growth in gross domestic
product.

Despite those remarkable accomplishments,
Afghanistan is indeed still facing certain threats and
challenges, particularly those posed by terrorist acts
and the production and trafficking of narcotic drugs.
Al-Qaida, the Taliban and other criminal and terrorist
groups continue their malicious terrorist and criminal
acts aimed at undermining the achievements of the
Afghan people and Government. We are concerned
that, as mentioned in the report at hand, the level of
insurgent and terrorist activity in Afghanistan has
increased to the extent that May 2008 recorded the
highest number of security incidents in the country
since the overthrow of the Taliban regime in 2001. We
condemn all acts of terrorism perpetrated in
Afghanistan, especially the most recent one that
occurred at the Indian embassy in Kabul, and express
our condolences to the Governments and peoples of the
countries affected and to the families and relatives of
the victims.

The deteriorating security situation throughout
the country attests to the fact that more serious
consideration should be given to full Afghan national
ownership of the security of their country and that the
independence and integrity of the Afghan national
security forces should be strengthened. Those
measures, together with increasing home-grown
security in the country, are essential to tackling
insecurity in Afghanistan.
Another threat that has put the security of
Afghanistan, the region and beyond at great risk and
that requires more concerted efforts to uproot it, both
on the part of Afghanistan and the international
community, is the menace of the production and
trafficking of narcotics, which has unfortunately
increased in recent years. As mentioned in the report of
the Secretary-General, countering that serious
challenge must remain an ongoing priority. We concur
with the Secretary-General that, to be effective,
measures to counter the illegal production and
trafficking of narcotics should be integrated into wider
efforts, such as those related to security, governance,
rule of law, economic and social development and rural
development. Iran has fought, and continues to fight,
the menace of drug trafficking that originates from
Afghanistan with the utmost seriousness - and almost
single-handedly.

The stability, security and prosperity of
Afghanistan are of high importance to Iran and are
vital for our own security and development as an
immediate neighbour. We have therefore extended our
sincere and full cooperation and assistance to the
Afghan Government. The Islamic Republic of Iran has
helped the Afghan people and Government to rebuild
their country by contributing to the construction of
various infrastructure projects. We are happy that many
Afghan citizens feel the results of that sincere
assistance in their day-to-day lives. We have also
hosted millions of our brother Afghan refugees - and
illegal immigrants as well - in recent decades and are
working with the Afghan Government for their timely
and dignified return.

I wish to conclude by reiterating our support for
the central and essential role that the United Nations
plays in Afghanistan. We support the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative to
promote regional cooperation, which in the report at
hand has been rightly identified as a priority for the
activities of UNAMA. UNAMA and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General can count on
our support in their endeavours to help Afghanistan.

