Mr. Bebars (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. We are
confident that you are capable of conducting the affairs
of this Council, as far as this important issue is
concerned, so that the Council can assume its
responsibility as spelled out in the Charter for
maintaining international peace and security. I also
wish to commend and thank the Permanent
Representative of China, who ably presided over the
Council last month.

We meet today at a time when the international
community is gravely concerned over the serious
developments in the occupied territories, particularly
Jerusalem. The hope for peace indeed faces an acute
crisis. Since last September, the Palestinian people
have been subject to violent and aggressive Israeli
practices that have resulted in hundreds of martyrs and
thousands of wounded. Property of the Palestinian
people has been destroyed and the Palestinian economy
is in shambles. This has led to frustration and despair.

The problems facing the peace process are due
mainly to Israel's reneging on its commitments reached
in bilateral agreements, its ongoing occupation and
settlement activities, and its disregard for international
legitimacy and United Nations resolutions and for the
bases and principles of the peace process, which are
"land for peace", including Holy Jerusalem.

The crux of the problem in the occupied
Palestinian territories today is the Israeli occupation.
The practices of the Israeli occupation in the
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, constitute
grave violations of resolutions of international
legitimacy, as represented by the United Nations and
the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949, in those areas. It is inconceivable and
unacceptable that the United Nations, particularly the
Security Council, should turn a blind eye to these
practices at a time when calls resonate from all
directions for respect for human rights.

Security is a legitimate demand of all peoples of
the Region. No one can deny any people the right to
security. However, the security of one population
cannot be realized at the expense of the security and
rights of its neighbours and the murder and the
assassination of their children, the demolition of their
houses, the burning of their farms, the cutting off of
their livelihoods, and their torture and starvation.
Security can be achieved only in a situation based on
legitimacy, justice and equality.

Consequently, Egypt has been persistent in
calling on the international community to act firmly
and quickly to push the parties to resume the peace
process on a sound basis, and not emphasize the
security aspects alone, without dealing with the crux of
the problem: the need for peace based on justice,
equality and respect for the full legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people.

Egypt has emphasized the need to send observers
to Palestine to help calm the situation within the
framework of implementing the Mitchell
recommendations, in order to reach negotiations on
final status, based on Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973); the principles and guarantees of
the Madrid Conference, particularly the principle of
"land for peace"; and the agreements concluded
between the two parties and guaranteed by world States
concerned. Egypt also emphasizes that without the
settlement of that dispute, which is the crux of the
Israeli-Arab conflict, in a just and comprehensive
manner, and without Israel's full withdrawal from the
Syrian and Lebanese territories, the Middle East,
strategically important to the whole world, will remain
an area full of tension and instability that will in turn
threaten the legitimate interests of those countries and
all other countries concerned.

The present crisis has been triggered by a
provocation related to a very special area of the
occupied territory - Jerusalem and the Al-Aqsa
Mosque. These are centrally important to the Arab and
Muslim worlds, which do not accept the desecration of
any of their holy places. These places have been
transgressed, contrary to all heavenly and worldly
laws. This represents an insult to the sentiments and
rights of the millions of believers who have been
taught to respect other people's faiths. We must
reaffirm to the whole world, represented by the
Council, the need for Israel to withdraw from all Arab
occupied territories occupied since June 1967,
including Jerusalem, and for Israel to respect the holy
status of that city and to return it to the Palestinians to
faithfully safeguard it.

I wish to emphasize that the recent bloody events
confirm one fact: occupation has no future, however
mighty the occupier, and that a just and balanced peace
is the basis for all stability and security in the region.
Thus, we hope that the Israeli side will commit itself to
the resolutions of international legitimacy and will
work seriously to stop aggressive practices in the
occupied territories, including Jerusalem. We hope it
will stop perpetrating violence against Palestinian
institutions and property in East Jerusalem, particularly
the illegal occupation of Orient House and the
confiscation of its archives, which are an essential part
of the history, heritage and memory of the Palestinian
people.

Egypt still hopes that a peaceful, comprehensive
and just settlement to the Arab-Israeli conflict can be
realized despite the setbacks caused by the Israeli side.
Consequently, Egypt calls for Israeli conduct to be
commensurate to and in conformity with all attempts to
realize our objective: a firm, just and lasting peace. We
hope that Israel will recognize this.

