Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for his clear and
precise statement, which provided a perfect account of
the superb work carried out by the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
under the direction of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello. We
are sure that after independence, his successor -
whom we know well, Ambassador Kamalesh
Sharma - will show himself to be equal to the task.

I should like to welcome President-elect Gusmao.
We are deeply honoured that he has chosen New York
for one of his first trips abroad. The independence of
East Timor - so long awaited and so desired - will
leave the Council with just one regret: that the future
Ambassador of East Timor will replace the leaders of
East Timor in the Chamber. However, the doors of the
Council Chamber will always remain open to the East
Timorese leaders. I would also like to welcome Mr.
Mari Alkatiri. The presence side by side today of the
President and the Chief Minister is the clearest proof of
the balance of the East Timorese institutions.

The impeccable manner in which the presidential
elections of 14 April were carried out, with a record
rate of participation of more than 86 per cent,
confirmed the great political maturity of the young
Timorese democracy. The President and the Chief
Minister will be able to tackle with confidence the
great priorities of an independent East Timor: national
reconciliation, the integration of the country into its
regional and international environment, and economic
development. I extend France's best wishes to them.

The Ambassador of Spain will later make a
statement on behalf of the European Union. We fully
associate ourselves with that statement. I will therefore
limit my statement to a few comments.

First, on 20 May, East Timor will become
independent. The United Nations will gain its 190th
Member. What a long way we have come in two and a
half years. The United Nations was able to adapt to the
situation. The working groups in Dili and New York
have done a good job. The recommendations of the
Secretary-General now meet our expectations.

Secondly, a genuine exit strategy has been
presented to the Council. It will make it possible to
assist the new State effectively. All the elements are
included: a specific timetable spanning two years,
stages accompanied by measurable objectives, a
division of competences between the United Nations
Mission, the Bretton Woods system and the
international financial institutions. Other actors who
are not mentioned in the report can also make their
contribution. I am thinking in particular of the regional
organizations, the Association of South-East Asian
Nations and the Asian Development Bank.

Thirdly, France will fully support the draft
resolution containing all these elements, which the
United Kingdom delegation announced it would soon
submit. But we also expect that things will not end
there. The Secretariat must continue to assess the
situation periodically in order to make the necessary
adjustments.

The next time the Council addresses the issue of
East Timor, East Timor will be independent. We must
work on this new success with the authorities of East
Timor. The international community will see its role
thoroughly transformed. Less than in the past will it be
a task of substituting for the East Timorese authorities;
rather, there will be a greater need to assist them. Other
actors will also see their role grow. It would be useful
to hold discussions on this with them. I propose that at
our next discussion an invitation be extended to
representatives of the United Nations Development
Programme, the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank to discuss the issue of East Timor, as we
have done in the past.

