Mr. Locsin (Philippines): The Philippines aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative
of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Seventy-one years ago, General Carlos P. Romulo
addressed the General Assembly and said,

"We are not here to make the peace, but to
build for peace. We are not here to avenge the
injuries of the past, but to fulfil humanity's hopes
for the future. We are not here to reap and divide
the harvest of victory, but to make ready the hearts
and minds of men for the seeds ofpeace." (A/PV.41, 
p. 18)
We are all here today not only to meet head on
the challenges to peace, but also to answer the call for
sustaining and investing in peace. Peacekeeping remains
the flagship agenda of the United Nations enterprise.
For 50 years, the Philippines has consistently played
an important role in United Nations peacekeeping
operations in countries that are too numerous for me to
list here. The Philippines' participation demonstrates
the country's enduring commitment to work with key
actors and stakeholders to ensure peace and stability in
the affected areas.

With regard to the deployment of Filipino
peacekeepers, the Philippines has consistently
observed the following parameters: the sole prerogative
of the Philippine President to decide on Philippine
participation; the authority of the Security Council; a
clear and achievable mandate; a definite time frame
and exit strategy; and the consent of the receiving State.
Allow me to provide the Philippines' recommendations
on key elements of today's open debate.

Concerning the overall policy framework, the
Philippines reiterates its strong support for the
Secretary-General's recommendation that peacekeeping
operations will need to be politically adept in identifying
options to support coherent, international strategies for
negotiated settlements, while building collaborative
partnerships with key stakeholders in each conflict
context. We believe that more effort must be invested in
local political solutions to conflicts, with peacekeeping
in support.

With regard to conduct and discipline, viewed in the
context of the protection of civilians, the issue of sexual
exploitation and abuse must be addressed aggressively
through the following measures: robust pre-deployment
and in-mission training programmes that underscore
leadership responsibility and accountability throughout
the chain of command; appropriate information sharing
in connection with context-specific responses to cases;
and innovative capacity-building initiatives based on
best practices in overcoming a culture of impunity.
The Philippines strongly supports the new policy on
the protection of children in armed conflicts and hopes
that the mandate will be mainstreamed into United
Nations operations.

With regard to safety and security, we cannot
emphasize enough the importance of ensuring the
safety and security of peacekeepers, while protecting
civilians and building protective environments. The
Philippines recommends that peacekeeping missions
work more closely with local communities and
non-governmental organizations.

With regard to strengthening operational capacity,
the Philippines supports calls by Member States for
the Secretariat to be more transparent in selecting
contingents from troop- and police-contributing
countries. The Philippines stands in solidarity with
the community of responsible nations and remains
steadfastly committed to contribute to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, cognizant of their strategic
contributions to sustaining peace.

