Mr. Gala Lopez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes to join the expressions of solidarity
with the British people following the bombing attack in
London's public transportation system, which caused
the death of dozens of individuals and hundreds of
casualties. As expressed by the President of my
country in a message to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth
II, the people of Cuba, which has been the victim of
terrorism for more than four decades, shares the pain of
the British people and condemns that unjustifiable
attack.

Under the increasing international pressure
generated by the accusation by Cuba, and following
more than a month of complicit silence, on 17 May
2005 the United States immigration authorities were
obliged to detain the terrorist of Cuban origin Luis
Faustino Clemente Posada Carriles, who had entered
the country illegally and had applied for political
asylum on the basis of the services rendered to the
United States during more than 40 years as a member
of the Central Intelligence Agency and the United
States armed forces.

Most appropriately, the Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela requested the
extradition of the terrorist Posada Carriles so that he
could be submitted to trial in that South American
country in connection with a heinous crime committed
against a civilian aircraft belonging to Cubana de
Aviacion, which caused the loss of 73 lives and for
which he was on trial when, in 1985, he escaped from
the Venezuelan prison where he was being held.

My country takes this opportunity to reaffirm its
belief that the only right action the United States
Government could take is to agree to the extradition
requested by the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
that, in addition to being in compliance with the
relevant norms of international law, is covered by a
treaty in force between the two countries.

If the United States Government wants to lend a
sliver of credibility to its proclaimed war on terror, it
has no option but to proceed to the extradition of a
criminal who, it is worth recalling, was the author of
numerous other terrorist acts, including a bombing
campaign in Havana hotels in 1997 that caused the
death of the Italian tourist Fabio Di Celmo. In addition,
he has planned numerous attempts on the life of
President Fidel Castro, for one of which he was
sentenced in Panama, where he was fraudulently
pardoned on 26 August 2004 by former President
Mireya Moscoso.

Resolution 1373 (2001), adopted by the Council
based on a proposal by the United States, clearly
establishes, in invoking Chapter VII of the Charter, the
obligation of all States to ensure that any person who
participates in the financing, planning, preparation or
perpetration of terrorist acts or in supporting terrorist
acts is brought to justice, as well as to take effective
measures to prevent the movement of terrorists and
deny refuge not only to terrorists but also to those who
protect them.

We hope that the case of the terrorist Luis Posada
Carriles does not end up like that of Orlando Bosch
Avila and of other self-confessed terrorists of Cuban
origin - responsible for plunging dozens of Cuban
families into mourning - who live freely in the United
States and stroll along the streets of Miami.

We would consider it to be a very serious matter
if Washington were to decide to give asylum to Posada
Carriles or if it were to adduce sophistic legal
arguments to allow him to stay in the United States.
That would constitute an affront to all the victims of
terrorism throughout the whole world and to their
relatives, including the people of the United States
themselves.

My Government urges the international
community to demand that the United States
Government fulfil its obligation to extradite Luis
Posada Carriles to Venezuela.

My Government reiterates once again its request
to the Counter-Terrorism Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) to proceed to an
assessment of the information submitted by my
country, in, among others, documents S/2002/ 15,
S/2004/753 and S/2005/341, in the hope that its work
will help put an end to the impunity enjoyed on the
territory of the United States by those who have carried
out, and continue to carry out, terrorist actions against
Cuba.

Cuba reaffirms its position of principle against all
terrorist acts, methods and practices, in all their forms
and manifestations, wherever, whenever, by and
against whomever they are committed, including those
in which States are directly or indirectly involved.

