Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): It is a pleasure to have you presiding over
a second Security Council meeting after yesterday's,
Mr. President, and one that is no less important.

Spain has now been on the Security Council for one
year, during which the region has unfortunately been
facing some enormously serious conflicts. In some
of those conflicts, such as the civil war in Syria, the
Council has managed to make some progress towards a
solution, in this case through its adoption of resolution
2254 (2015). In others, particularly the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, no progress has been made. And
not just no progress; what we are seeing is actually a
gradual loss of confidence in the Viability ofa two-State
solution, considered by the international community to
be the only one capable of ensuring sustainable and
lasting peace.

I would like to emphasize that violence and
acts of terror, wherever they occur and in whatever
circumstances, deserve to be condemned as firmly as
possible. The parties must refrain from any kind of
incitement to violence and, if a response is required,
it must be a proportionate one. In any case, security
measures alone are not enough to bring an end to the
violence. We need to create a political vision and a
negotiating framework that can give hope back to the
Palestinian people while ensuring Israel's security.
That is the international community's responsibility,
and Spain believes that the Security Council can and
must play a central role in that regard, as many other
speakers have also said.

The international community in general, and the
Council in particular, has various possibilities for action,
and two in particular, the first being a declaration on the
part of the Council. It has been more than seven years
since the Council adopted a resolution on the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, which is too long. Of course, it
is not a matter of merely adopting a resolution for its
own sake. On the contrary, the Council must reflect on
the issue and find a way to adopt a text that provides
added value. Secondly, Spain believes it is also worth
exploring the possibility of holding an international
conference that would restore the spirit of the 1991
Madrid Peace Conference, through which we could try
to revitalize the peace process based on what we think
are two key elements, the Arab Peace Initiative and a
regional approach to a new security framework in the
Middle East.

Today, making progress towards implementing
a two-State solution requires that we preserve its
viability. The construction of settlements - especially
settlements that have an effect on the final status of
Jerusalem - in the occupied territories, which is
illegal under international law, is one of the main
threats to that viability. Ending the demolition of
houses, people's forced displacement, confiscations of
land and adopting transformative measures in Area C
would be unequivocal signs of Israel's commitment to
a two-State solution. Besides that, the disunity in the
Palestinian camp and the weakening of its institutions
are also structural threats to the possibility of building
a Palestinian State. The international community must
work to advance the reconciliation process between the
various Palestinian factions and promote the holding
of democratic elections in which all Palestinians can
take part. The still unaccomplished reconstruction of
the Gaza Strip and the continuing risk of a dangerous
escalation of the violence highlights how important it
is that the Palestinian Authority resume its governing
functions in the Strip and ensure that it is part of a
future Palestinian State. The launching of attacks on
Israel from Gaza must end.

I will now touch briefly on the situation in Syria.
The burden is now on us to build on the opportunity
to bring an end to the conflict there, moving forward
simultaneously on the three parallel tracks established by
resolution 2254 (2015). First, regarding an intra-Syrian
dialogue, we call on the Government and the opposition
to show full commitment to the round of talks that
will begin in Geneva this Friday, paving the way for
a process of political transition. Secondly, with regard
to confidence-building measures, freeing prisoners and
ending aerial attacks are now more necessary than ever
if the negotiations are to seem credible. Thirdly, we
must not lose sight of the goal of achieving a nationwide
ceasefire to be monitored by the United Nations. We
are close to the fifth anniversary of the war in Syria and
we need to be able to create prospects for hope for its
people. Based on resolution 2254 (2015), Spain believes
that the United Nations should play a central role in this
process, and we have every confidence in the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Staffan de
Mistura, the mediator who must establish the timetable
and parameters for each stage of the negotiations, with
the Council's support.

Regarding the humanitarian situation, almost
everything has already been said. I will limit myself to
calling on all the parties to ensure uninterrupted and
unconditional access to the besieged areas of Syria.
Tomorrow, at the request of New Zealand, Spain and
Egypt, the World Food Programme and the Regional
Humanitarian Coordinator for the Syria Crisis of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
will brief the Council in what will undoubtedly be a
very important meeting. Our priority right now is
preventing any future repeats of the situations in
Madaya and Kefraya.

