Mr. Hale (United States of America): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, and Secretary-General
Guterres for today's briefing. I also wish to thank the
representatives of France, Germany and Cote d'Ivoire
for coordinating the recent Security Council trip to
Mali and Burkina Faso. Council members witnessed
first hand the security and political challenges in both
countries. A frank dialogue about the realities of the
situation will enable the Council to help advance peace
and security and improve the lives of the people of
the region.

The Council must recognize the gravity of the
security situation in Mali. While the troops ofthe United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) wear blue helmets,
they find themselves in an environment far outside
the bounds of traditional peacekeeping. MINUSMA
peacekeepers are consistently and purposefully attacked
by extremists who are mobile, smart, well organized
and not about to give up. MINUSMA has suffered as a
result. MINUSMA is the most dangerous peacekeeping
mission in the world and has borne an unprecedented
rate of casualties. Too many peacekeepers have been
killed or had their lives, and those of their families,
shattered by life-altering injuries. America honours
their sacrifices and offers its gratitude and appreciation
to the troops, police and civilians of MINUSMA, along
with their families, who sacrifice daily to promote
peace and stability in Mali.

That violence, together with increasing
intercommunal and inter-ethnic violence, particularly
in Mali's centre, is accompanied by an unacceptable
lack of progress in implementing the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the
Algiers process. In resolution 2423 (2018), the Security
Council requested that the Secretary-General deliver a
special report on progress in implementing seven key
provisions of the agreement. The Council requested
the Secretary-General to provide recommendations for
significant adaptations of MINUSMA's mandate in the
absence of significant progress on those benchmarks.
The 5 March report (S/2019/207) notes some progress on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR),
and the successful conduct of Mali's 2018 presidential
election. However, we are disappointed that the report
does not provide a clear assessment of the lack of
significant progress on all remaining items. That gap
contrasts with the independent observer's report, which
acknowledge preliminary progress but sounds the alarm
on the lack of political will to implement the accord.
Given the gravity of the situation in Mali, we have
made clear to all parties our disappointment at the
lack of significant progress, with only one of seven
benchmarks fully completed. Now is not the time to
give up, nor is it the time to pretend that peace in Mali
is advancing sufficiently. We expect to see progress on
the outstanding measures before the Security Council
negotiates the renewal of MINUSMA'S mandate in
June. In particular, we will carefully review progress
and seek completion in three areas.

First, Mali should expand the inclusivity of the
constitutional reform process, leading to a legitimate
constitutional referendum. That step is key to the
viability of the agreement and the future of Mali
beyond MINUSMA. The armed groups, opposition and
civil society must have input into an inclusive process.
Secondly, the parties to the Algiers accord should
accelerate the integration, training and deployment
of fighters participating in the DDR programme in
northern Mali. Thirdly, the Government should codify
the northern development zone into law and provide
greater resources to interim administrations in the
north. The Government should ensure that interim
administrations are not merely token presences, but can
actually deliver services. Inclusivity and transparent
political progress have been delayed for far too long.

While we have focused on the north, security in
the centre of Mali is also deteriorating. In the first
few months of this year, we have witnessed just how
precarious things have become, with, as previous
speakers have noted, the deaths of more than 160
people just this past Saturday, the loss of 23 soldiers in
the Diourra attack and continuing threats to civilians.
United Nations agencies are now reporting that in the
first two months of 2019, 70 per cent of human rights
violations and 80 per cent of civilian deaths in Mali
occurred in the centre of the country. The Government
and MINUSMA are responsible for protecting
civilians throughout the entire country, not just in the
north. We are encouraged by the changes that Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Annadif and
Force Commander Gyllensporre have made since last
year's mandate. They are strong leaders whose teams
have focused the Mission on its core mandate and made
it more integrated and effective.

No matter how valiant their efforts are, however,
MINUSMA cannot fill the gap while the Government
and parties to the Algiers accord fail to make progress
in its implementation, and the Council has tried during
MINUSMA's six years to get the Mission to perform
optimally and minimize risks to peacekeepers. The
inability ofthe parties to make significant progress after
signing the 2015 Mali peace agreement has inhibited
the Mission's ability to implement the mandate. That
failing has put civilians, peacekeepers and domestic
and international forces at greater risk from terrorism
as communal violence has spread throughout the region.
Despite some progress in the past several months, and
after only modest progress in prior years, it is time to
evaluate whether a peacekeeping mission in such an
environment is the appropriate or effective solution to
the problem set in northern Mali.

In determining MINUSMA's future, we ask the
Secretary-General to proceed with the Council's
request, outlined in paragraph six of resolution 2423
(2018), to provide us with options for a significant
adaptation of MINUSMA in time for the negotiation
of its mandate this June. Six of the seven benchmarks
have not been completed, and most have seen no
significant progress. We ask for a plan that positions
MINUSMA to address the security and counter-
terrorism environment, protect personnel and support
political progress more effectively than at present. The
plan should include options for significant adaptation
so that the Council can consider the best way forward
in such a precarious environment. The plan should
outline options to address the significant instability in
Mali's centre.

Turning to Mali itself, inclusive constitutional
change will require tremendous political courage
and significant input from all concerned. Inclusive
constitutional reform will result in more voices being
heard in Mali's institutions, the decentralization of
power and genuine political dialogue, which are all
important steps towards re-establishing security and
governance throughout the country. We call on Mali's
leaders to work together towards achieving real and
lasting power-sharing. Progress will benefit the region,
but above all else it will benefit the people of Mali.
Only by building a bridge between Mali's diverse
communities will leaders pave a road leading towards
a more secure future for all - a road upon which there
will be opportunity and a more prosperous future for
Mali and its people.

