Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me too begin by thanking
the German presidency for convening this open debate.

Discussions on this agenda item invariably leave
us with a mounting sense of despair at the deteriorating
situation in the region. Escalating violence, worsening
humanitarian crises and untold human suffering have
seriously undermined the long-cherished vision of
a peaceful Middle East. In Libya, regional rivalries
and external interference have imperilled a United
Nations-sponsored peace process, hurling the country
towards another protracted conflict and magnifying
the threat of a grave humanitarian crisis. International
efforts to find a political solution in Syria and ease the
humanitarian situation there have yet to accomplish the
desired objective. The political crisis in Yemen has also
produced an unprecedented humanitarian challenge.
Millions remain on the brink of famine.

This situation has been aggravated by the emergence
of a dangerous trend - the systematic erosion of the
established norms of international law and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, which is worsening
an already fragile regional situation. Inclusive political
processes founded on respect for international law
are being abandoned in favour of military solutions,
plunging the region into deeper instability and chaos.
Competing interests pursued by external powers are
further accentuating regional fault lines.

Another grim manifestation of this trend is evident
in attempts to erode the long-standing international
consensus on the status of Jerusalem, as well as the
unilateral decision to recognize Israel's sovereignty
over the Syrian Golan. These measures have dealt a
severe blow to the rule of law and international norms,
besides frustrating the international community's
efforts to find a long-term and peaceful solution to the
conflict in the Middle East.

Concern about the plight of Palestinians has
resonated in this Chamber for over seven decades now.
Regrettably, the suffering of the people of Palestine
continues to this day, with no hope of abatement. The
demolition of Palestinian homes continues across the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, while
Israel's illegal settlements are expanding in blatant
disregard of international law and numerous Security
Council resolutions. Israeli control of and restrictions on
access to Muslim and Christian holy sites have further
inflamed tensions. In the midst of these disturbing
developments, the threat of the annexation of the West
Bank now looms large.

In the besieged Gaza strip, civilian lives, particularly
those of children and young people, remain under threat
amid another intensifying cycle of violence that risks a
broader escalation of the conflict. These infringements
of the collective will of the international community are
taking us further from the goal of a two-State solution,
which underpins the vision of a peaceful Middle East.

The Secretary-General has often reiterated
that there is no plan B. A viable, independent and
contiguous State of Palestine, on the basis of the
internationally agreed parameters, the pre-1967 borders
and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, remains the
only sustainable guarantee for enduring peace in the
region. On the humanitarian front, the mobilization
of resources to ensure sustainable funding for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East remains critical for over
5 million Palestinian refugees.

The Palestinian question, along with the Kashmir
issue, remains on the United Nations agenda and has
been so since its very inception. It is indeed regrettable
that the international community and the United
Nations have been unable to realize just and lasting
solutions to these disputes. As a result, the peoples of
the occupied lands in Palestine and in Kashmir have
endured prolonged repression and the denial of their
legitimate right to self-determination.

Lack of progress on the Palestinian issue has not
only frustrated the hopes and aspirations of generations
ofPalestinians, but has also resulted in endless hostility
and dissonance in the region. The continued erosion of
international law and the fundamental principles of
the Charter of the United Nations seriously undermine
the Council's credibility and further highlight its
incapability of resolving long-standing disputes.
Lasting peace in the Middle East and elsewhere cannot
be accomplished without fully respecting the principles
of international law and embracing the fundamental
tenets of the Charter, which remains our sole instrument
of hope against injustice and oppression.

In conclusion, we would like to call on the
international community to uphold these principles and
to play its part in realizing the shared goal ofa peaceful
Middle East.

