Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Slovenia welcomes today's
consideration of the issue of terrorism in the Security
Council. About a year ago, in reaction to the devastating
terrorist attacks in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam, the Security
Council adopted its resolution 1189 (1998) and emphasized
its strong commitment to the combat against terrorism.
Today the Council is expressing a more comprehensive
view regarding this problem. My delegation is grateful to
you, Mr. President, for the initiative, and to the delegation
of the Russian Federation for the preparation of the draft
resolution to be adopted today.

International terrorism has many manifestations and
many sources. The multilateral efforts aimed at developing
international cooperation to counter terrorism have a
relatively long history. The League of Nations attempted
to confront the challenge of individual or group terrorism
by means of the 1937 Geneva Convention for the
Prevention and Punishment of Terrorism, which,
unfortunately, never entered into force. But the dealings
of the international community with the terrorist menace
have, in the subsequent decades, given rise to a certain
crystallization of the main policy elements for combating
terrorism and formed a set of applicable principles and
rules of international law.
Progressive development of international law is
important. Thus, by virtue of their human rights
guarantees, the Universal Declaration of Human rights
and the two International Covenants from 1966 are, in
essence, also anti-terrorism legal instruments in
themselves. Furthermore, specific legal documents relating
to the prevention and suppression of specific terrorist acts
have been adopted. The existing conventions deal in
particular with terrorist acts directed against civil aviation
and maritime navigation and against internationally
protected persons, as well as hostage-taking and the use
of certain substances or devices for terrorist purposes.

In recent years terrorism has become one of the
serious threats to individuals and Governments in many
parts of the world. Since terrorist acts often, albeit not
always, take place on an international scale, terrorism
cannot effectively be combated by the isolated action of
individual States. International cooperation and
coordinated effort are essential elements of combating
international terrorism. Apart from universal adherence to
the 11 existing international counter-terrorism
conventions, along with adherence to various legal
instruments adopted at the regional level, new legal
instruments are needed to counter specific forms and
manifestations of terrorism. Slovenia welcomes the
progress achieved on the draft convention on the
suppression of terrorist financing, which will, hopefully,
be adopted during the current, fifty-fourth session of the
General Assembly. At the same time, we hope that the
negotiations on the draft convention on the suppression of
nuclear terrorism will move forward successfully.

Global action to prevent and suppress terrorist acts
requires enhanced cooperation among States, especially
through exchange of information, mutual legal assistance
and cooperation among police forces. Furthermore,
concerted cooperation is needed among international and
regional organizations. The criminal nature of terrorist
acts, methods and practices, demands the prosecution and

 

punishment of their perpetrators. To this end the basic legal
standard, "extradite or prosecute", aut dedere aut judicare,
should be respected in all cases. Moreover, all States should
have a duty to refrain from supporting or acquiescing to
activities directed towards the commission of terrorist acts,
whatever the motives of their perpetrators.

The entire evolution of this matter since 1972 - that
is, since the time when the United Nations started to deal
with the problems of terrorism in a systematic manner -
has confirmed the validity of an all-inclusive approach. As
I have already said, to effectively combat terrorism requires
the broadest possible international cooperation. The General
Assembly provides the most genuine opportunity for
Member States to participate in designing the platform for
international cooperation against terrorism. The international
conventions drafted by the General Assembly so far are of
critical importance. They represent a genuine legislative
achievement and a fine example of the implementation of
the role of the General Assembly in the maintenance of
international peace and security, as envisaged in Article 11
of the Charter of the United Nations.

All these aspects need to be borne in mind when we
approach the question of the role of the Security Council in
the international combat against terrorism. It is clear that
the Security Council should not duplicate the work of the
General Assembly. Therefore, the Council has pronounced
its general views only a few times thus far, and with great
care. This approach seems to be a wise guide for the future.
The Security Council should be careful and should avoid
creating any impression of departing from the path
developed throughout the preceding decades by the General
Assembly.

On the other hand, the Security Council should be able
to identify those situations involving acts of terrorism that
amount to threats to international peace and security, and to
act accordingly. This is a difficult task, because the scale of
violence and the immediate effects of terrorist acts do not
necessarily suggest the existence of such a threat.
Furthermore, the responsibility for terrorist acts may be
difficult to establish, and it may be difficult to reach
agreement as to the most effective and appropriate
response. All these problems are inherent in the effort to
address the issues of terrorism through Security Council
action. The Security Council has addressed issues of
terrorism in the Lockerbie and UTA cases, and, more
recently, in its dealings with the situation in Afghanistan.
The experience gained is varied and important, and could
help the Security Council in its future decision-making.

When terrorist acts reach proportions, or have
effects, that make them comparable with the use of force
prohibited by the Charter of the United Nations, the
question of lawful countermeasures may arise. In such
situations, available options should be considered on the
basis of the criteria established in international law,
including those of necessity and proportionality of
response. Careful consideration should be given to the
question of which type of response is necessary and to the
need to respond in a proportionate manner with means
which are chosen wisely.

The draft resolution to be adopted today sums up the
experience gained in United Nations actions against
terrorism. It adds an important role for the
Secretary-General, who will be requested to pay special
attention to the need to prevent and fight the threat to
international peace and security as a result of terrorist
activities. There is no doubt that the Secretary-General
will exercise his judgement with full appreciation of the
seriousness of the problem and of the experience the
United Nations has gained thus far. My delegation is
convinced that cooperation among all United Nations
Member States will be developed further, and that such
an evolution will enhance the effectiveness of the
international struggle against terrorism.

