The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Ireland.

I thank Special Representative Ngongi for
introducing the report of the Secretary-General. I also
thank Foreign Minister She Okitundu for participating
in today's meeting.

I will confine my remarks to this latest report of
the Secretary-General, his vision of the future role of
the United Nations in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the steps the parties themselves must take to
facilitate a role for the United Nations.

The Permanent Representative of Belgium will
speak shortly on behalf of the European Union. My
delegation associates itself with that statement, and I
make the following points in my national capacity.

Ireland welcomes and supports the proposals in
the report of the Secretary-General. We agree on the
need to move to phase III, but on the prudent and
incremental basis outlined by the Secretary-General.
The success of the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo lies in the hands of the parties.
Any future assistance which the United Nations can
give to the peace process is dependent entirely on the
parties themselves sustaining and giving momentum to
a process which the United Nations can support.

While we agree with the assessment of the
Secretary-General that the overall situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to
develop in a largely positive direction, the magnitude
of the obstacles yet to be overcome cannot be
overestimated. Nonetheless, we are willing to take the
steps set out in the report - these risks, if you like -
in support of the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, if the parties themselves are
willing to pursue peace and to meet their obligations.

To this end, first, we call on the Governments of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zimbabwe
to cease any support for any armed groups operating in
the east of the country and to cooperate with the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) by providing all
information available to them on these groups.

Secondly, we call on the Governments of Rwanda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to reach
agreement, both politically and practically, through the
establishment of a joint coordination mechanism on the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR) process, as
called for by the Secretary-General.

Thirdly, we call for an early resumption of the
inter-Congolese dialogue, and we call on all the parties
to the dialogue to participate in a spirit of cooperation
and compromise. The success of the inter-Congolese
dialogue and the early agreement of the Congolese
parties to a new democratic political dispensation is
crucial to the peace process.

Fourthly and finally, we call on all States which
have not yet done so to begin withdrawing their forces
from the territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in accordance with their commitments under
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.

I will now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Belgium. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

