Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I should like to express my appreciation for
this opportunity to make a few brief comments on the
resolution just adopted by the Security Council.

I should like at the outset to express my country's
appreciation for the efforts made by many States
members of the Council to prevent the adoption of a
resolution contravening international law, the
principles of the Charter and the role of the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security.

I would like to reiterate that, despite the full
cooperation shown by Syria within the framework of
its sovereignty and the rights of its citizens, in
accordance with international law and humanitarian
law, certain States, because of their narrow interests,
insisted on saying that we have not positively
cooperated with the International Independent
Investigation Commission or with respect to the
implementation of the relevant resolutions in a record
short time, even though many of the resolutions on the
Middle East that have been adopted over the past 38
years have yet to be implemented.

It is regrettable that, although we have clearly
stated that contacts between Syria and the Commission
were under way and that efforts were being made by
both sides to reach mutual agreement on issues relating
to the questioning of Syrian citizens, some have chosen
to overlook everything we have stated, have reached
selective conclusions based on the Commission's
report, and have used them in a distorted way against
my country.

Syria has discharged its responsibilities in a spirit
of sincerity, certain as it was that a professional and
objective investigation would lead to Syria's being
cleared. We have not cooperated with the Commission
just to please certain parties, but because we wanted to
cooperate.

During the preceding period, we informed the
Council, via letters to all of its members, about all of
our actions and efforts. Regrettably, some Council
members did not even want to take note of these
letters.

To bring pressure to bear and to attempt to
impose one's will on others runs counter to the
principles governing relations among States, which
must be based on mutual respect, constructive dialogue
and openness to others.

Lastly, let me reiterate Syria's firm commitment
fully to cooperate with the Commission during the
coming period.

