Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation supported the adoption
of the resolution 2366 (2017) on the establishment of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
This new resolution symbolizes a new step on the
path to consolidating sustainable peace in the country
through a political process and national dialogue. This
has been possible exclusively thanks to the efforts of
the Colombians themselves.

We welcome the achievement by the participants of
a settlement that has led to the important result of the
laying down of weapons by the partisans of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC),
which has opened the path to their full integration into
civilian life. In this regard, we note the coordinating
role of the United Nations and the contribution of
guarantor countries, Cuba and Norway, together with
the assistance of Venezuela and Chile.

We welcomed the communique of the Government
and the FARC of 29 May and what followed on 7 June,
namely, the letter of the President of Colombia to the
Security Council on the achievement of additional
agreements supporting the peace process. We support
the request in these documents for the launch today,

10 July, of a new phase of the special political mission,
in order for the parties to be able to look to tomorrow
with confidence and understand what international
assistance will be provided to them.

In working on today's resolution, we assumed that
the synchronization of the Mission's mandate with
progress in the peace process would be carried out
seamlessly. The current mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Colombia will therefore continue to act as
planned until September, and its financing and staffing
will be fully maintained. At the same time, in a step-
by-step fashion, the Mission will move to fulfilling
isolated monitoring tasks associated with the next
step. We hope that this smooth transition will allow the
Mission to adapt without rush.

We will continue to carefully monitor the security
situation. It is important that we do not allow a vacuum
to form. We hope that the parties will work in good faith
and fulfil in a timely manner all of their obligations
according to the existing agreements. For our part, we
intend to continue our efforts, including along the lines
of the United Nations Mission in Colombia, to support
the Colombian people and Government in building a
stable peace and in post-conflict development.

