Mr. Fall (spoke in French): "Occupation
corrupts. More accurately, occupation has already
corrupted us. Discrimination has become our norm and
insensitivity our way of being."

These bitterly perceptive words, it may be
assumed, are hardly my own nor those of a traditional
foe of Tel Aviv. It was quite simply - and this makes
the accusation even more damning - the President of
the Knesset, Avraham Burg, who made this very
edifying point, as reported in a major European daily
that can hardly be suspected of pro-Palestinian
leanings.

Clearly, ever since the provocative visit of the
future Israeli Prime Minister to the forecourt of the
mosques on 28 September 2000 and the beginning of
the ensuing intifadah, the occupying forces have fallen
back on systematic and disproportionate reprisals,
destroying the infrastructures of the Palestinian
Authority, increasing their acts of territorial aggression
and imposing on President Yasser Arafat an
unacceptable house arrest in Ramallah, with, it has
been suggested, the tolerance, or even unspoken
blessing, of certain allies.

Under the impotent, evasive and embarrassed
gaze of the international community in the face of
attacks by terrorist groups on Israeli civilians, and
particularly of the martyrdom of the Palestinian people
subjected to unbearable suffering, humiliation and
unjustified collective punishment, the peace process
seems to be definitively deadlocked, even doomed,
despite the fact that it emerged from the 1993 Oslo
consensus and the Declaration of Principles on Interim
Self-Government Arrangements, which were the bases

S/PV.4478

 

of mutual recognition between Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization and of the subsequent
establishment of the Palestinian Authority in Jericho
and Gaza.

Some have even gone so far as to suggest that the
peace process, to which those who favour a negotiated
solution at all costs cling so desperately, has
irretrievably collapsed under Israeli raids and bombing,
burying the Mitchell and Tenet plans, with the active
connivance of hardliners from both camps,
paradoxically united by the apocalyptic dream of total
war engulfing all the Middle East and bearing away the
regimes scorned by these impenitent extremists.

We must therefore act very quickly to eliminate
the dangers of a generalized conflagration that will
have predictable if incalculable consequences for the
region and the world. That is why many people of good
will have generously committed themselves to and
focused their energies on our admired and esteemed
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, together with the
quartet of mediators, with a view to resurrecting the
peace process.

For its part, our Committee wishes to recall that
the road to peace is indissolubly connected to the end
of the Israeli occupation and to the creation of an
independent and viable Palestinian State coexisting
with the State of Israel. At the same time, the
Committee believes that the conclusion of a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement agreement,
on the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), remains linked to the partition of
Jerusalem and its declaration as an open city and
capital of the two States of Israel and Palestine, as well
as to a solution that is fair and equitable for all to the
problem of refugees and their right of return.

We strongly urge the parties, Israel first among
them, to adhere strictly to those resolutions and to the
1949 Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War. We solemnly call on
the protagonists and stakeholders to undertake a
salutary return to the negotiating table and exhort the
donor community to mobilize significant economic
assistance and large-scale emergency help for the
Palestinian people in its extreme distress.

In that spirit, it should be noted - neither with
displeasure nor with wide-eyed optimism - that there
has been movement, as yet timid, on the peace horizon,
based on the perpetuation of the American dynamic
unleashed in Louisville towards the recognition, now
irreversible and unanimous, of the need to create a
State of Palestine within secure and internationally
guaranteed borders.

In this particular case, we need only refer to the
positive views once again reiterated by President
Arafat in The New York Times or to the declaration of
Israel proclaiming its adhesion to resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and to the Mitchell and Tenet
plans, as we have just heard. Furthermore, we need
only recall the forward-looking thinking of certain
leaders of Arab countries - I am thinking here of
Saudi Arabia - regarding the principle of
normalization in exchange for total withdrawal; the
very wise European proposals for mutual recognition
between the Israelis and Palestinians; or the most
recent contacts between African leaders, following the
example of the President of Senegal, with regard to a
possible continental initiative within the framework of
the United Nations.

The Security Council, the co-sponsors of the
Madrid process and the United Nations thus find
themselves standing at the crossroads. Intentions to
attain peace have been proclaimed, the desire for
negotiation has been made clear, and the support of the
international community is no longer in question. The
stage having thus been set, it is up to all of us to play
our part and translate the commitments that have been
undertaken urbi et orbi into clear and unequivocal
actions, with the support of the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council. We must free the peace
process from the hellish cycle of violence, fuelled by
political impasse and diplomatic immobility bound to
the Procrustean bed of military and security exigencies.
Thus, the coherent and realistic proposals that have
already been submitted to the Council enjoy the full
support of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

I would like warmly to congratulate you, Sir, and
your predecessor, the Ambassador of Mauritius, for the
very fruitful work done in the context of the presidency
of the Security Council. I am particularly grateful to
you, Sir, for having provided me with an opportunity to
take part in this important debate - the result of the
laudable initiative of our colleague from Yemen on
behalf of the Group of Arab States.

As we renew our support for President Yasser
Arafat, the Committee demands, in the interests of

S/PV.4478

 

peace, that his freedom of movement be fully restored,
of which he has been deprived in such an outrageous
manner.

I would like to conclude with the words of
philosopher and historian Yirmiyahu Yovel, Professor
Emeritus at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem and at
the New School for Social Research in New York. He
stated:

"We are in the worst situation that we have been
in since the foundation of the State of Israel,
because of the lack of hope, from the right and
the left In a society that is resigned to living
with violence, we must resuscitate the hope for a
way out of the impasse".

The words of President Arafat, isolated in
Ramallah, echo this thought, and I would like to close
my statement with them. He said,

"I am hopeful We are ready, for our part, to put
an end to the conflict and to negotiate with the
head of the Israeli Government, whoever he may
be and without regard to his past I reiterate my
steadfast commitment to a just and
comprehensive peace - the peace of the brave".

