The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Bangladesh, Colombia, Cuba, Egypt, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Norway, Oman,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gold (Israel)
took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Baali (Algeria),
Mr. Hossain (Bangladesh), Mr. Garcia (Colombia),
Mr. Benitez Verso'n (Cuba), Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr.
Wibisono (Indonesia), Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic ofIran), Mr. Hasan (Iraq), Mr. Abu-Nimah
(Jordan), Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait), Mr. Moubarak
(Lebanon), Mr. Rastam (Malaysia), Mr. Ould Deddach
(Mauritania), Mr. Snoussi (Morocco), Mr. Kolby
(Norway), Mr. Al-Sameen (Oman), Mr. Al-Khalifa
(Qatar), Mr. Al-Ahmed (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Erwa
(Sudan), Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr.
Hachani (Tunisia), Mr. Samhan Al-Nuaimi (United Arab Emirates) and Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) took the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 26 June 1998 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as a document of the Security Council
under the symbol 8/1998/587 and which reads as follows:

 
"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the Security
Council invite Dr. Nasser Al-Kidwa, Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations, to
participate in the upcoming meeting of the Security
Council on Tuesday, 30 June 1998, with regard to
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the current debate in accordance
with the rules of procedure and previous practice in this
regard.

There being on objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 29 June 1998 from the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, which reads
as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, I have the honour to request to
participate, under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council, in the debate
relating to the decision of the Government of Israel
to expand the physical and administrative structure
of Jerusalem."

On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice in
this matter, I propose that the Council extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 29 June 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of Bahrain to the United Nations, which
reads as follows:

 

"I have the honour to request the Security
Council to extend an invitation under rule 39 of the
rules of procedure to Mr. Ali Al-Salafi, Charge
d'affaires of the Office of the Permanent Observer for
the League of Arab States to the United Nations, to
participate in the Security Council's formal open
debate on the situation in the occupied Arab
territories, which will take place on Tuesday, 30 June
1998."

This letter will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/1998/588. If I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to extend
an invitation under rule 39 to His Excellency Mr. Al-Salafi.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in
response to the request dated 23 June 1998 from the Charge
d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of the
Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/ 1998/558).

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/ 1998/481,
S/l998/511, S/l998/535 and S/l998/557, letters dated 8, 15,
18 and 22 June 1998, respectively, from the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General; and S/ 1998/579, letter dated 26 June
1998 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the
Permanent Mission of the Sudan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the Permanent
Observer of Palestine, to whom I give the floor.


