Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes you, Mr. Minister, to New York and would like
to thank you for presiding over today's meeting. I thank
Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing. China has
listened carefully to the statements by Mr. Ozerdem
and civil society representative Ms. Elman.

The Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. Thanks to the efforts of all parties and the
support of the international community, the United
Nations and the Security Council have made unstinting
efforts to maintain regional stability and promote
international peace and security. Positive results have
been achieved.

That said, there are many issues that merit further
consideration, including how to sustain and consolidate
peace. Achieving reconciliation is an important element
in ending conflicts and promoting lasting peace and
stability. If the parties concerned do not resolve their
differences and give up past grievances, peace will not
be truly sustainable and conflict may break out again.
Achieving national or intercommunal reconciliation
requires thejoint efforts of all the parties as well as the
support and assistance of the international community,
in particular the United Nations. I wish to emphasize
the following points.

First, respect for national sovereignty is the
primary prerequisite for reconciliation. Countries
differ in terms of their national characteristics, judicial
systems and culture. There is no one-size-fits-all
reconciliation process. The support and assistance of
the international community must therefore be based on
respect for national sovereignty and ownership, as well
as independence, unity and territorial integrity. The
countries concerned must be supported in advancing a
reconciliation process that meets its national conditions.
A bold guest overshadowing the host or imposing
external plans must be avoided in that regard. No one
should be the judge or the teacher.

Secondly. dialogue and consultations are the only
way to achieve reconciliation. With international and
regional hotspot issues appearing one after the other,
China supports peaceful means such as dialogue and
negotiation to resolve international disputes and hotspot
issues. The parties concerned must remain committed
to frank and in-depth dialogue so as to enhance mutual
trust and reduce mistrust. They must refrain from
needlessly resorting to the threat or use of force. It
is essential to embrace the vision of a shared future,
resolve disputes through dialogue, settle differences
through consultations, promote security cooperation
and respect and address each other's legitimate concerns
so as to achieve reconciliation and peace.

Thirdly, good offices and mediation are significant
means for achieving reconciliation. Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations should be fully leveraged
regarding the good offices and mediation roles of the
Organization. The authority of the Security Council
must be safeguarded and the role of regional and
subregional organizations must be fully utilized. The
peaceful settlement of disputes through, inter alia,
dialogue, negotiation, mediation and good offices
must be supported. The international community must
remain objective and impartial, play a constructive
role in facilitating peace talks in order to find a proper
solution to regional conflicts and promote national
reconciliation with a view to de-escalating and,
ultimately, resolving hotspot issues. All United Nations
agencies must discharge their duties as mandated,
strengthen coordination and ensure synergy.

Fourthly, sustainable development is a fundamental
strategy for reconciliation. Development is the key to
all issues. Secretary-General Guterres has said on many
occasions that sustainable and inclusive development
is an effective solution to the root causes of conflict.
Most international and regional hotspot issues are the
result of poverty and underdevelopment. The way out
is therefore sustainable development. It is vital to pay
equal attention to development and peace, achieve
peace through development, facilitate development
through peace, address both the symptoms and the
root causes of conflicts and lay a solid basis for
sustainable reconciliation and peace by strengthening
development capacities.

President Xi Jinping has said that the world in
which we live is full of hopes and challenges. We
must not give up our dreams just because the reality is
complex or stop pursuing our goals just because they
are remote. China was the first country to sign the
Charter of the United Nations. In a world with constant
challenges and increasing risks, as a founding member
of the United Nations and a permanent member of the
Security Council, China will always support peace
and justice, actively explore and implement solutions
with Chinese characteristics to hotspot issues, play
a constructive role in striving for reconciliation and
mutual trust among parties and contribute to building a
world of lasting peace and universal security.

