Mr. Adorn (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes this briefing on the latest
developments in the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. We thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, whose
briefing challenged us once again on the need to
continue collective efforts to restore peace and stability
in a region affected by numerous crises, of which the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the oldest and one of the
most worrisome.

The breakdown of the relative calm, followed
by the resumption of violence between Israelis and
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip, is a source of concern
for the Security Council. In that regard, C6te d'Ivoire
reaffirms its consistent position in favour of a peaceful
and negotiated solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict through dialogue. Therefore, we call on all
parties to exercise restraint and urge them to refrain
from unilateral actions that would irreparably harm the
chances ofa peaceful settlement of the conflict.

My country values the security of the State of
Israel, just as we recognize the inalienable right to
self-determination of the Palestinian people. That deep
convictionis reflectedinmy country's continued support
for the two-State solution - Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security, in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

cote d'Ivoire remains concerned about the
continuing deterioration of the humanitarian situation
in Gaza, in particular clashes and an increasingly
unfavourable socioeconomic situation characterized by
one of the world's highest youth unemployment rates,
increasingly difficult access to health care, continuing
water shortages and very limited electricity supply. In
addition, there is irregularity in the payment of civil
servants' salaries.

My country would like to express its gratitude to
all State and non-State actors that, despite the obvious
difficulties on the ground, are making every effort
to ensure that the suffering population can maintain
hope for a better tomorrow. In view of the gravity of
the situation, cote d'Ivoire calls for the mobilization
of the international community to provide substantial
humanitarian assistance to people in need.

In that regard, we welcome Qatar's provision of
resources to supply 200 megawatts of electricity and
financial assistance for the payment of salaries of
Palestinian civil servants. We would also like to thank
Kuwait for its multifaceted assistance to the desperate
Gaza population, which is on the brink of a troubling
situation. Cote d'Ivoire is also concerned about the
funding difficulties facing the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, and urges the United Nations and international
partners to address them in order to ensure continued
assistance to Palestinian refugees.

It is undeniable that the critical humanitarian
situation and the risks of a major regional confrontation
will be averted only if the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
finds a lasting and mutually acceptable solution. cote
d'Ivoire therefore calls on the Israeli and Palestinian
sides to return unconditionally to the negotiating table
as part of the good offices and missions led by the
United Nations.

Against that backdrop, my country supports Egypt's
commendable efforts to promote reconciliation between
Fatah and Hamas, which will ensure the Palestinian
Authority's meaningful involvement in peace
negotiations and better handling of humanitarian issues
in Gaza. We also welcome the ceasefire following the
recent mediation by Egypt and the United Nations. We
hope that this cessation of hostilities will be sustained
in order to create the conditions for a resumption of
dialogue between Israelis and Palestinians.

In conclusion, C6te d'Ivoire affirms its support
to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, in his untiring efforts
to promote a dialogue aimed at settling the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, which is a key to the restoration
of lasting peace and stability in the entire Middle East.

