Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank President Obasanjo for his briefing.
A number of us recall with a great deal of pleasure the
privilege of listening to him in Abuja, when the
Security Council mission went to Nigeria.

It is clear from his presentation this morning that
we all share the goal of preventing conflict, ending it
very quickly where it exists, and building peace. The
commitment of the Council and the United Nations to
Africa - in particular, to support President Obasanjo
and the efforts of the African Union - is, I hope,
obvious. That applies not just to peacekeeping and
establishing peace, but to the whole range of issues.
We have heard President Obasanjo at least twice this
week make clear how important the Millennium
Development Goals are and why it is that we need to
support the New Partnership for Africa's Development
and the efforts being made within the continent. I think
that imposes on the Council and on the entire
membership of the United Nations a particular
obligation to support Africa and to support his
leadership.

I would like to ask him specifically whether we
are doing enough as we try to firm up the institutional
links between the African Union (AU) and the United
Nations, and as he tries to develop his capacities. What
can we do to help him to provide the means to enable
him to take on and actually tackle successfully the
roles and objectives that he set out so clearly this
morning?

Secondly, in looking at the goal of peace and
security throughout the continent, we have, of course,
underscored very clearly some of the issues that the
High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change
is addressing today. How do we tackle the issues in
good time? How do we stop conflict before it breaks
out? How do we bring forward those difficult cases so
that the African Union can address them and so that the
Security Council can do so as well? I am thinking of
cases such as the situation in northern Uganda, where
there are real issues, which are being dealt with
domestically, but where there is also an international
dimension. How can we focus on those and bring the
Council into coordinated action with the African
Union?

In terms of Darfur, I thank President Obasanjo for
his encouraging account this morning. Our immediate
priority, of course, is to stop the killings and the
deaths. Successive resolutions have set out the
requirements of the Council. What is clear is that the
Government of the Sudan needs lots of assistance. We
have encouraged in particular the efforts of the African
Union. But I would like specifically to encourage the
Government of the Sudan and the African Union in the
coming days - very quickly - to identify exactly
what reinforcements are needed on the ground in
Darfur, what the Government of the Sudan is prepared
to accept, what the African Union can provide and
then, crucially, what it needs need in order to get the
monitors and the troops on the ground.

I think that our joint objective is clear, as is the
obligation on us to provide the means and the support
so that the troops and the monitors can actually get
there and stop the killing.

My last question relates specifically to policing,
where so far the African Union has not been tasked
with a police mission - and to date that has not been
suggested. But there is a very serious lack of policing,
as well as of military deployment. In the longer term, it
is policing that is more important. The European Union
is intent on sending a fact-finding mission to work in
parallel with the AU on policing. What are President
Obasanjo's views specifically on filling that gap, so as
to provide much-needed police cover and, especially,
security, to the displaced people who at the moment
feel so insecure?

