Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): We
commend you, Mr. President, for holding this open
debate to consider and assess the working methods of
the Security Council, the organ primarily responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
That is the reason for the particular significance of the
working methods the Council uses to carry out its
duties and responsibilities, and their ability to help it
improve its efficiency in view of its increasing
workload and the growing number of peacekeeping
operations and political missions. I should like to
commend the role played in this by the delegation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, especially its Permanent
Representative Ambassador Barbalie, and the
important follow-up undertaken by the group of five
small nations and the proposals they have submitted.

The Security Council's working methods have
evolved considerably in the past few years. We are
pleased to note the action it has taken to increase
transparency and interaction between Council members
and non-members, and we would like to see more of
this approach. Improving the Council's working
methods, in our view, should be a means to enhance its
effectiveness in implementing its resolutions without
selectivity or bias, pending the comprehensive reform
that we all desire and that should, of course, include
the issue of membership. The issue of the right of veto
and the way it is exercised should also be revisited.

We stress the importance of increasing the
number of open debates and reducing the number of
closed meetings, which would enable the Council to
listen to and interact with non-members' proposals and
ideas, and add to the transparency of its work. We do
recognize, however, the need to strike a balance
between transparency and efficiency in order to ensure
that such meetings are productive and non-routine. We
also welcome the coordinating meetings that the
Council holds with troop- and police-contributing
countries, which are among the instruments that enable
the Council to implement its policies. Such interaction
should be strengthened so as to include host countries.

In accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter, it
is essential that we increase cooperation between the
Council and regional organizations, especially on
matters concerning international peace and security.
We also call for strengthened interaction between the
Security Council and the heads of other United Nations
organs, particularly the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council and
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission.

We also believe that the Security Council's
annual reports and the monthly reports prepared by the
rotating presidencies should include more detailed
analysis useful to non-members of the Council. The
monthly informational briefings that the President of
the Council holds for non-member States are a
beneficial practice, while informing the media as to the
basic thrust of closed consultations also enables other
Member States to follow the Council's activities.

Finally, we support the ongoing review process of
the Council's agenda items by the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. This process must be more flexible and
dynamic. In this context, all documents should be
issued in all six official languages in a timely manner,
which is an important step towards strengthening
transparency.

In conclusion, I am grateful to the President for
the concept note (see S/2011/726, annex) prepared by
the Portuguese delegation for this debate.

