Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I shall try
to be as brief as my colleague from Benin. First of all, I
should like to congratulate the mission's members and,
at their head, Ambassador Emyr Jones Parry on the
quality of the work accomplished in a relatively short
period of time.

As a result of their visit to the West African
subregion, they returned strengthened in the conviction
that development, peace and security are closely linked
and that it would therefore be futile to plan for
development without providing it with the prerequisite
of peace, and vice versa. They also noted first-hand the
regional aspect of domestic crises that, assisted by
circumstances, spread swiftly to other countries, which
themselves have often just emerged from devastating
conflicts.

Those quick observations enable us to believe
that the dynamic approach to conflict prevention called
for by the mission's members can only be
comprehensive and collective. It must, of course,
involve the countries of the region, but also the United
Nations system, whose strategy must range from
peacekeeping to supporting measures to ensure that the
peace is deeply rooted.

From that perspective, it is important to observe
that, in the countries visited by the mission, the key
words now seem to be reconstruction and
reconciliation and that priority has been given to the
organization of free and transparent elections, to
development and to good governance. Likewise, in
each of the countries, the challenges are more or less
identical, although not always of equal intensity. They
include a lack of financial means, social and economic
problems, issues of disarmament, demobilization,
rehabilitation and reintegration (DDRR), the
repatriation of foreign combatants, the restructuring of
armed forces, corruption, impunity, the circulation of
light weapons, the recruitment of child soldiers, human
rights violations and the threat of uncontrolled crises
spilling over borders.

Mobilizing the donor community and the Bretton
Woods institutions to provide financial resources and
technical assistance as well as to ensure the success of
political, economic and social reforms in these
countries is more essential than ever before. Therefore,
it would be desirable for the pledges of contributions to
those countries to be quickly implemented.

I should like to say a word about Cote d'Ivoire.
The impasse over the implementation of the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement and the paralysis of the
Government of National Reconciliation could, if we are
not careful, gravely compromise the entire peace
process. Although we welcome the commitments
undertaken by President Gbagbo during the mini-
summit presided over by the Secretary-General on 6
July at Addis Ababa, my delegation believes that, in
order to break the deadlock and to ensure the adoption
of the legislative reforms envisaged by 28 July, the
international community - particularly the Security
Council - must ensure that the commitments are
respected. We await the holding and the results of the
regional summit planned for 29 July in the Ghanaian
capital.

Here, I should like to commend the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) for its
active and valuable role in peace-building in the
subregion and to call for an intensification of the
cooperation among ECOWAS, the United Nations
system and other regional organizations to address the
subregional and cross-border problems in West Africa.
We also believe it essential to strengthen the United
Nations Office for West Africa so that it can fully play
its role in an effective and consistent regional approach
with regard to conflicts.

Finally, I should like to welcome the efforts made
at the continental, regional and subregional levels to
increase peacekeeping capacities in Africa. The
establishment of the African Union's Peace and
Security Council, the active role played by subregional
organizations, particularly ECOWAS, and the
deployment of African peacekeeping missions are the
most striking illustrations.

