Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, Mr. Antonio Guterres, and the Secretary-
General of the Arab League, Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit,
for their enlightening briefings, which made it possible
to draw up a precise overview of cooperation between
the Arab League and the United Nations, as well as for
the very promising approaches they proposed to deepen
this cooperation.

I would also like to thank the Kuwaiti presidency
for taking the initiative to organize today's meeting and
to welcome the presence among us of the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Kuwait and Poland.

Today's meeting provides a new opportunity
for the Security Council to exchange views on the
common issues and challenges of the Arab world in a
cross-cutting manner, following on from the informal
interactive dialogue that France organized in March as
part of our presidency of the Council, in order to seek
points of agreement and convergence between us.

First of all, I would like to return to the scale of
the political and security challenges facing the Arab
world today, which more than ever justifies a sustained
dialogue between the United Nations and the Arab
League. These issues concern us all because of their
impact on international peace and security.

On the security front, I am thinking in particular of
the terrorist threat, with the persistent menace of Da'esh
and the radicalization ofminds. I am also thinking ofthe
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery to both State and non-State actors.

At the political level, it is essential to support
the United Nations efforts aimed at finding political
solutions to the conflicts in the region, particularly in
Syria, Yemen and Libya. These solutions must allow for
the strengthening of institutions and respect for the rule
of law, as well as inclusive and sustainable development
that benefits all, without discrimination. I am thinking
in particular of Syria, where military operations in the
Idlib region must be brought to a definitive end and
progress must be continued towards a political solution
under the aegis of the United Nations and on the basis
of resolution 2254 (2015). I am also thinking of Yemen,
where we actively support United Nations mediation
and call on all parties to engage constructively with it
in the implementation of all the commitments made in
Stockholm in December 2018.

On method, it is essential that we reaffirm together
our commitment to dialogue and regional cooperation
in the very spirit of the Charter of the United Nations.
Yesterday, I had the opportunity to reaffirm our full
support for the role of the United Nations in conflict
prevention and mediation (see S/PV.8546). Today,
I would like to highlight the key role of regional
organizations, in particular the Arab League, whose
action is more essential than ever to build consensus
among Arab States and respond to global challenges
affecting the region and beyond.

In a context marked by the worrying rise in
tensions in the Gulf, as illustrated by the new incidents
against two tankers in the Arabian Sea today, which
are of deep concern to us, restraint and de-escalation
are more necessary than ever. As the Secretary-General
has just pointed out, the world simply cannot afford
a major confrontation in the Gulf region. It is all the
more essential to work together to gradually establish
a regional dialogue that could be the appropriate
framework for structured exchanges on all areas
of concern. In this regard, I would like to commend
Kuwait's long-standing commitment to keeping the
channels of dialogue open and to building bridges
despite the differences we are experiencing. This is
also the meaning of France's action.

Finally, I would like to stress the importance of
respect for the fundamental principles of international
law, which determine international peace and security.
Any unilateral decision that deviates from them would
be doomed to failure and would considerably weaken
the order based on international legality. In this regard,
I recall the first and foremost the political settlement of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and our full commitment
to the two-State solution. In this context, too, the
Arab League and the United Nations have in common
that they have defined clear parameters within the
resolutions of the Security Council and the Arab Peace
Initiative. Any effort, particularly economic, must be
carried out within this framework.

In that context, close cooperation between the Arab
League and the United Nations is more necessary than
ever and must be further developed. In this regard, I
would like to welcome the forthcoming opening of
a United Nations liaison office at the Arab League
in Cairo, which has just been announced. This is an
important step towards further collaboration between
the United Nations and the Arab League.

The strengthening of exchanges between the
members of the Security Council and the Arab League
is also an important point. In this regard, we welcome
the Council's commitment to invite the Secretary-
General of the Arab League to come and brief it on an
annual basis.

Finally, I would like to reiterate our desire to
promote a better understanding by the Security Council
and the United Nations of regional dynamics. This
involves, in particular, creating spaces for cross-cutting
discussions, as we are doing today and as we did in
March during our presidency. The Council could also
meet informally with the Special Envoys and Special
Representatives for the North Africa and Middle East
region once a year, in the presence of a representative
of the Arab League. The meaning of these efforts is to
move away from a logic of division or even confrontation
that is as futile as it is risky and to create a dynamic of
partnership. For this reason, there is no alternative to
dialogue. There are no shortcuts. That is why it is so
important to disconnect our automatic controls and to
constantly seek convergence between us.

It is in that spirit that France will continue to
support the strengthening of the partnership between
the United Nations and the Arab League. It is in the
same spirit that France will continue to exchange with
the countries of the region as well as with the Arab
League both bilaterally and within the European Union
to provide a common response to its challenges. The
Summit of the Two Shores, which we will host in
Marseille on 23 and 24 June, will be another opportunity
to foster such dialogue.

