Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I am
particularly grateful to the briefings we have just heard
from Lord Ashdown and Judge Meron.

It was good to have such an upbeat presentation
setting the context for describing the positive progress
which has been achieved. I will now elaborate on some
particular United Kingdom points, while identifying
myself very closely with the statement to be issued
later by the President of the European Union.

The United Kingdom shares the objectives which
have been set out by the High Representative. We
welcome the priorities and the means of expediting
progress, particularly the Commissions and the results
they are achieving. The reforms now being produced
need to be both legislated and implemented. If
Bosnians themselves can show leadership to that end,
so much the better.

I was struck by what Lord Ashdown said about
partnership. Bosnia and Herzegovina has for too long
and recently, been caught in a dependency culture.
There is a tension between the strong leadership, which
is necessary from the Office of the High Representative
in order to make progress, and the risk that such
leadership itself increases the dependency.

This morning it sounds as though the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina are assuming more
ownership and greater control of their own affairs and
that is good news. The path to Euro-Atlantic
integration is obviously having a crucial impact on that
achievement. What I mean, without the jargon, is that
the prospect of membership of the European Union and
of NATO is actually changing the facts on the ground.
Clearly, we need less government, fewer prime
ministers and, perhaps specifically, defence sector
reform moving to central one-government control and
unitary command of one set of armed forces. Some
years ago that would have been unimaginable. The
prospect now looks more possible and is certainly
highly desirable.

Cooperation in Bosnia and Herzegovina within
the State, and then between Bosnia and Herzegovina
and its neighbours is crucial. I very much hope that the
European Union dimension will accelerate that.
Meanwhile, cooperation on a number of particular
areas deserves priority.

I especially want to emphasize what is being done
in the area of criminality. The fact that the internal
market in organized crime in the Balkans is more
efficient than any other internal market is actually a
remaining indictment, and thus I welcome the signs of
progress Lord Ashdown has been able to allude to. But
let us be clear that much more progress needs to be
done in the entire region.

I was struck by a passing reference that the
European Union Police Mission is now taking on the
role of monitoring the local police from the
International Police Task Force (IPTF). A wider
application is demonstrated here which is that when the
United Nations, or a multinational body takes on
policing or military responsibilities, and we get to a
level of maturity so that the regional organization can
take it over, that is seen as a highly desirable trend.
There are encouraging signs of that, not just in the
Balkans, but in Africa. The more one can sub-contract
out to others - actually getting on with the job that
needs to be done - the better.

Lord Ashdown spoke of the rule of law and Judge
Meron developed what is being done in that area. This
is vital to achieving the correct sort of end-state for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Both Lord Ashdown and
Judge Meron have illustrated this morning the
importance of the work on the rule of law - the
transition to justice - which the Security Council
embarked on here last month.

The lesson for the Balkans and for all sorts of
areas emerging from conflict is that justice for
victims - bringing to justice the perpetrators of war
crimes and then establishing a body of law, both
civilian, criminal and, I would add, financial and
economic - is crucial to taking a State through the
process. What we heard this morning from the High
Representative is an object lesson in how we need to
bring justice to victims if the organs of a State are to
function and if the State is to end up as the sort of
democratic free nation that this United Nations stands
for.

The reasons for pursuing war criminals are not
only evident, they are shared fully by this Council. The
logic, specifically of Security Council resolution 1503
(2003), which we passed in late August, was to stress
the importance, among other things, of bringing to
justice those indictees still out there who have, as Lord
Ashdown described, "a baleful influence". My
adjectives would include "pernicious", among others. I
think the impact remains bad, but more importantly
justice demands that these people actually be taken to
The Hague.

Security Council resolution 1503 (2003) also
called upon the donor community to support the work
of the new Special Chamber. The United Kingdom has
committed some 600,000 euros to that cause, but it is
right that we should support it because there is a
balance now between what can be done nationally,
within the State, and what should properly be done by
the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
(ICTY).

The transition to a greater responsibility within
Bosnia and Herzegovina and by its people is right. It is
not so much as to permit the closure of the ICTY
procedures, desirable though that is, but it is to permit
reconciliation and justice for the victims of war crimes
to actually happen within the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is a sign of maturity, and I hope in
passing that it is a sign of increased efficiency as well,
that the application of justice would be done more
efficiently than has been the case before with some of
the Tribunals.

I conclude by pointing out the obvious, that the
test of the success of Lord Ashdown and Judge Meron
and the institutions which they represent is that we
should see far fewer reports in the future, and,
preferably, that very soon we should not be having a
report at all - that these two gentlemen should
succeed in their goal of making their jobs no longer
necessary. The United Kingdom wishes them every
success in their endeavours.

