Mr. Butagira (Uganda): Allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of your
important post and to wish you well. Equally, I thank
your predecessor, the representative of the United
Kingdom, for work well done.

I thank the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, Ambassador Arias, for the excellent work
being done by his Committee.

I would like to thank the Security Council for
organizing this important debate. Issues of peace and
security are a shared responsibility of members of the
Security Council and non-members alike. The dialogue
should continue on this and other important issues of
international concern.

I will begin with a simple story. About a month
ago, my wife and I travelled to Toronto, Canada, to see
our daughter, who had just produced twins. At La
Guardia airport, we went through a security check. I
was told to remove my shoes and so was my wife. As I
was going through the metal detector, something made
noise. I did not know what it was. I was told to remove
my trouser belt, which had a metal clip, and in the
process my trousers nearly dropped down. Still, the
noise sounded. I had no metal on me anymore. It was
an awkward situation. They would not let me go.
Suddenly, I remembered that, in my right leg, there are
metal nails which doctors had used to piece together
my broken bones as a result of an accident I had
sustained. I explained to the security personnel and I
was scared that they would not let me go unless, of
course, the nails were removed and I were made to go
in a wheelchair, unable to walk. Eventually I was let to
go. Such, then, was my embarrassment and humiliation
and I am sure many here have gone through similar
experiences at airports. That is the price we have to pay
to counter terrorism.

A lot of money has been spent on gadgets to
alleviate the terrorist threat. People have reduced their
travel, affecting tourism earnings. The terrorists are
forcing us to change our way of life and they should
not be allowed to do so. The money diverted to fight
terrorist threats could have been used for development
purposes and to advance mankind's potential. A lot of
lives have been lost and properties destroyed in
terrorist attacks. Uganda condemns the indiscriminate
use of violence against civilians and its authors.

Here, I want to extend Uganda's condolences to
the families of those brave Americans who died for a
noble cause just a few days ago in Gaza.

The terrorist threat will not even spare those
misguided elements or rogue nations that sponsor
terrorism. Terrorists have gradually upped the stakes
over the years. From conventional weapons, now they
are reaching for weapons of mass destruction. The
growing availability of nuclear, biological and
chemical weapons has increased the chance of those
weapons falling into the hands of non-State actors and,
particularly terrifyingly, into the hands of these
mindless merchants of terror. Should this prospect
come to pass, the world will be brought to a deadly and
terrifying precipice.

The time to act is now. The international
community needs to work more urgently to ensure the
non-proliferation and eventual total elimination of
nuclear weapons, as well as the elimination of all
weapons of mass destruction. We must also develop
verifiable mechanisms for the control and tracing of
conventional weapons, including small arms and light
weapons, to ensure that they do not fall into
irresponsible hands.

In Africa, many of our countries have been
victims of terrorist acts perpetrated from both within
and without. My own country, Uganda, has had to
defend itself at great cost, both in human lives and
financial resources, against terrorist attacks by thugs
and bandits based beyond our borders. That is why we
were compelled to send our troops to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in exercise of the right of self-
defence and in accordance with bilateral agreements, in
order to destroy the camps and supply lines of these
bandits. That is also why we have had to send our
troops to southern Sudan, with the agreement of the
Government of the Sudan, in order to eliminate the
terrorists of the so-called Lord's Resistance Army, who
for the past 17 years have used that area as a
springboard to terrorize the innocent villagers of
northern Uganda. Similar stories are occurring daily in
many areas of Africa.

Today, we would like to call upon the
international community, particularly the Security
Council, whose primary mandate is to ensure
international peace and security, to assume their
responsibility and to address in a substantive way the
growing menace of international terrorism. In addition
to the elaboration of multilateral mechanisms and
instruments to combat terrorism, our countries should
be assisted financially and technically in building
capacity for the detection, prevention and combating of
the scourge of terrorism.

In Uganda, we have passed an anti-terrorism act
that criminalizes terrorism and its financing. The
financial institutions are required to comply with the
act as far as the financing of terrorism is concerned. We
have also put into place anti-money-laundering
measures and soon will enact legislation to that effect.

Assistance is needed for the training of security
personnel, the acquisition of necessary equipment and
the restriction of the movements of terrorists and their
funds across borders. Otherwise, the very existence of
States, the livelihood of their citizens and, ultimately,
international peace and security are threatened.

Finally, Uganda has continued to submit reports
to the Counter-Terrorism Committee, as required under
resolution 1373 (2001). We support Germany's
proposal for creating the office of a coordinator to act
as a focal point for the United Nations effort to fight
terrorism.

