Sheikh Al Sabah (Kuwait) (Spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, it gives me pleasure to express Kuwait's
appreciation for the efforts of the United States and
its Permanent Mission during its presidency of the
Security Council this month. I am also pleased to
see you, Mr. President, in the Chamber for the first
time since you took office as Secretary of State, and
I appreciate the comprehensive and enriching briefing
you have just presented.

Today's meeting on non-proliferation and the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea comes only
24 hours after the Security Council summit meeting
(see S/PV.8362) at which the reduction of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs) was discussed by Heads
of State and Government. Such important meetings,
which complement many others held by the Council
this year, are a clear indication of the grave danger
posed by the threat of nuclear proliferation and WMDs,
as well as the utmost priority the Security Council
attaches to addressing this danger to humankind, in
line with its responsibility for conflict prevention and
the maintenance of international peace and security.

The situation on the Korean peninsula is one of the
longest-standing issues on the United Nations agenda,
as well as one of the most serious. A few months ago,
we all followed with great concern the rise in tensions
on the Korean peninsula, exacerbated by the danger of
military escalation in the region, following the conduct
of nuclear tests and the launch of ballistic missiles by
North Korea, in clear violation of relevant Security
Council resolutions.

But the strong and sincere political will
demonstrated by the United States and States of the
region to choose the path of direct dialogue resulted in
the convening of three presidential summits in a period
of just four months, in addition to the understandings
that emerged therefrom. These summits led to a number
of commitments that were supported by the State of
Kuwait and the international community and contributed
to defusing the threat of a military confrontation and to
de-escalating tensions in the Korean peninsula, with a
View to achieving the desired goal of denuclearization
and the establishment of a comprehensive and lasting
peace between the two Koreas.

It is also important to emphasize the key role of
the Security Council in launching these diplomatic
talks. Indeed, the cohesion and unity of Council
members in condemning all North Korea's illegal
programmes and activities, and in adopting a series
of international resolutions imposing the broadest and
most comprehensive sanctions in the history of the
United Nations, were central to the decision to start
negotiations, as had long been called for in relevant
Security Council resolutions.

Since the beginning of its membership of the
Council, the State of Kuwait has kept on working to
implement all the priorities we declared during our
election campaign. These priorities are at the core
of our foreign policy, which is founded on the basic
principles of international law, promoting the role of
preventive diplomacy and redoubling efforts to prevent
and resolve conflicts peacefully.

On that basis, the State of Kuwait believes that
the right way to deal with the issue being discussed at
this ministerial meeting of the Security Council is to
Show full support for direct talks to reach a peaceful
solution to the crisis related to North Korea's nuclear
programme and to establish a sustainable peace on the
Korean peninsula. At the same time, we emphasize
the need for North Korea to comply fully with all its
international obligations pursuant to relevant Security
Council resolutions, including the elimination of its
nuclear weapons and illicit programmes, and to re-join
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
as a non-nuclear State.

The State of Kuwait also stresses the importance
of holding these direct talks in parallel and conjunction
with the full implementation of relevant Security
Council resolutions by United Nations Member States,
which will provide support for the current course of
negotiations. Full commitment to the implementation
of Security Council resolutions and the resolution of
issues through dialogue and negotiations is the wisest
choice and only solution for all parties to resolve
this issue.

Before concluding, I would like to emphasize
that the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and
other WMDs can be guaranteed only through their
destruction and total elimination. I recall the first
resolution of the General Assembly, resolution 1 (I)
of 24 January 1946, which was adopted by consensus
and aimed at eliminating all nuclear weapons. The
commitment to achieving consensus to put an end to
the grave threats posed by such weapons confirms our
conviction that the continued unity of Security Council
members is the most important element of nuclear
disarmament on the Korean peninsula. The State of
Kuwait will remain committed and eager to support
dialogue and negotiations so that we can eliminate all
nuclear weapons and thereby fully implement the first
United Nations resolution.

