Mr. Hain (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
the Netherlands for its initiative in convening this important
debate, and also to thank the Secretary-General for his
introduction and for his report on the causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa (S/ 1998/318), in which he set out
the benchmarks in this area. His progress report 18
months on (S/ 1999/ 1008) makes clear the enormous
challenges that we continue to face. Today, his leadership
shows the way forward.

As a son of Africa, I am especially delighted to be
presenting to the Council our new British Government
policy on Africa. I was actually born in Nairobi and
brought up in Pretoria. My parents fought for freedom in
South Africa, and I carried on fighting for that freedom
as a leader of the British anti-apartheid movement after
they had been imprisoned and then forced to leave, when
we went to London.

Now, after centuries of slavery, economic
exploitation and colonial and neo-colonial behaviour that
have left Africa the poorer, I am determined to build a
new partnership between the African continent of my
birth and my adopted homeland of Britain. Certainly,
Africans must take responsibility today for endemic
corruption, for human rights abuses and for ubiquitous
violence, as the representatives of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) said this morning.

But Africa still suffers from international policy
neglect. After manipulation by both sides through proxy
wars and client States during the cold war, at the end of
the cold war both West and East Virtually turned their
backs. No longer an arena for surrogate battles between
the big Powers, Africa was callously sidelined as
strategically unimportant. Yet, common humanitarianism
aside, the success of Africa is Vital to Western interests.
That success would create a much safer, more
environmentally sustainable world; it would reduce aid
budgets and, indeed, the United Nations budget; it would
open up new markets; and it would remove havens for the
terrorism that will otherwise increasingly threaten the rest
of the world.

At the General Assembly last week I was privileged
to discuss with senior members of the United States and
French Governments the need to put Africa high among
the world's policy priorities.

Britain will support African Governments that stand
up for democracy and human rights. We will help those
Governments that want to reform and modernize their
economies. We will support just African solutions to

 

African problems. We will work with those African leaders
who commit themselves to freeing their peoples from
poverty. And we will work with the people of Africa who
are making their continent a better place.

But Britain will not support corrupt Governments. We
will not subsidize economic mismanagement. We will not
fund repression or bankroll dictatorship. Those evils have
failed Africa, and we do not wish to back failure. I want to
endorse the vision of President Thabo Mbeki of South
Africa: of an African renaissance to help ensure the
realization of his identification of the century ahead of us
as the Africa century.

The cornerstone of our policy is to work actively and
closely with the United Nations as a friend of Africa. We
will continue to work within the Security Council to
support the resolution of conflicts. Where United Nations
action can stop war or build peace, Britain will back it to
the hilt. We have done so in Sierra Leone; there, we need
to deploy a United Nations peacekeeping force as soon as
possible, because the situation remains fragile. I hope that
the Council will give rapid backing to the Secretary-
General' s proposals.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo we need to
sustain the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. We welcome the
deployment of United Nations observers to the region, and
we look forward to further recommendations from the
Secretary-General in due course.

We applaud the success of the United Nations in
facilitating peaceful elections in the Central African
Republic and in helping to consolidate stability and promote
democratization there.

The Council has rightly backed OAU proposals for
ending the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea. It is time
for both sides to accept them without further delay or
conditions.

We also support Ambassador Fowler's work in the
Angola sanctions committee. We must continue to clamp
down on the illegal trade in diamonds, and much more
needs to be done to address the challenge posed by the war
in Angola.

There are other massive challenges facing Africans
today. First, Africa has more than half of all war-related
deaths worldwide. We have got to prevent wars from
starting. That means tackling the root causes of conflict:
oppression, injustice and poverty. After cuts under our
Conservative predecessors, our Labour Government has
increased Britain's aid budget and has also promoted
international debt relief. We also fund security reform to
improve the quality, supervision, training and democratic
accountability of African armies and police forces, which
too often have been responsible for arbitrary and brutal
exercise of force. For example, we are providing help to
reshape Nigeria's military as a bulwark of democracy
rather than as an alternative to democracy. We are also
helping to track down the billions of dollars stolen from
the Nigerian people by the Abacha junta.

Guns are another of Africa's curses. That is why the
British Government will not supply defence material
where this could start, sustain or stoke internal oppression
or external aggression, and why we are backing the West
African Moratorium on the Import, Export and
Manufacturing of Small Arms. We must stop the illegal
trade in diamonds and other precious commodities which
pay for the small arms, and all too often the mercenaries,
which sustain conflicts.

I want to see the United Nations engaged earlier and
more actively in peacekeeping and conflict prevention, as
the Secretary-General proposed last week. We will back
African regional organizations in their own roles as
peacekeepers and peacemakers.

We also need to take action to tackle the problem of
AIDS. Every day, around 5,500 Africans die of AIDS.
More money has to be found to help. And money can
indeed help, as the well funded, well thought-out
prevention response in Uganda has shown.

Another challenge is to lift the debt burden which is
crushing Africa. We have led the international community
in pushing for faster, deeper, wider debt relief. But our
support is conditional: debt relief will work only where
African Governments are themselves committed to
tackling poverty and to implementing the modern
economic policies necessary to encourage growth. Where
they are, we will back them to the hilt and support them
in international financial institutions.

The challenge for Africa is not just to be attractive
to traders and foreign investors, but to offer opportunities
more attractive than anywhere else in the world.
Globalization can be an opportunity rather than a threat.
New multinational trade negotiations are due to take place
next year; I hope that African countries will actively
 

engage with the World Trade Organization and the key
international players and help set the terms of the debate.
We will support that.

Clean government means extra foreign investment.
Human rights are not just a moral imperative: where they
are respected, economies can flourish. Human rights make
humans rich. Good governance means good international
relations. More reform means more international
development aid. With a renaissance based on such
principles, and with tangible support from the European
Union, the United States and the rest of the industrially
advanced world. Africa could have a bright future. Britain
will work through the United Nations to help achieve it.

