Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
join in thanking Romania for convening and presiding
over this ministerial meeting of the Security Council to
deliberate on measures to support the International
Independent Investigation Commission established by
Security Council resolution 1595 (2005). I extend
fraternal greetings and apologies from my Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, the
Honourable Jakaya Kikwete, who is unable to attend
this meeting because of pressing national commitments
at this period of presidential and general elections in
Tanzania.

The United Republic of Tanzania joined the
consensus and voted for the resolution after several
amendments were accommodated by the cosponsors.
The amendments brought more focus and aligned the
draft resolution with its central objective of ensuring
compliance with the work of the independent
investigation established by resolution 1595 (2005) of
April 2005, on the assassination of former Lebanese
Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and 22 others, in Beirut on
14 February 2005.

The bombing in Beirut was unmistakably a
criminal terrorist act. The interim report of the
investigation has revealed that it was carefully planned
and executed with professional precision. Like similar
terrorist bombings before, and the recent terrorist
bombings around the world, the Beirut bombing,
amidst a politically volatile atmosphere in Lebanon and
the region, constituted a threat to regional and
international peace and security. Thus, the Security
Council had the responsibility and obligation to initiate
an investigation as part of its global effort to combat
international terrorism.

Lawlessness and impunity at national and
international levels should not be allowed to undermine
international peace and security. Those responsible for
the crime in Beirut must be held accountable for the
sake of justice, and in response to the demand of the
Lebanese people.

The Investigation Commission has done
commendable work so far, in collaboration with the
Lebanese and Syrian authorities, as requested in
resolution 1595 (2005). The investigation is not yet
complete. In order to complete its work, the
Commission requires more cooperation from Syria, as
well as from all States and parties. That is not only a
legal obligation, but also a moral and ethical obligation
incumbent upon all States that may be called upon by
the Commission to cooperate in identifying the
individuals, groups and organizations behind that
heinous crime.

The United Republic of Tanzania acknowledges a
serious pledge to extend further cooperation to the
Investigation Commission, whose mandate has been
extended to 15 December 2005. In full exercise of its
sovereignty we encourage Syria to use the opportunity
offered by the resolution to deliver what the
Commission asks. In that regard, we further note that
Syria has established a national investigation
commission to look into the matter. In those
investigations, it is important to respect the
presumption of innocence for the individuals
concerned, until proven guilty by due process of law.

We trust that cooperation with the International
Independent Investigation Commission and the latest
initiative by Syria will advance to a satisfactory
conclusion, in accordance with the letter and the spirit
of the resolution.

