The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Sweden.

I want to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing to the Council and for his
tireless efforts on the ground.

We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union later
in this meeting.

A year and a half ago, in resolution 2334 (2016), the
Council reaffirmed the steps needed to achieve a lasting
Israeli-Palestinian peace. The Council demanded
that both parties stop all activities impeding such
progress. Since then, unfortunately, the situation has
continued to deteriorate. Israeli settlement expansion
has continued and there is an imminent risk of further
violent escalation.

In Gaza in recent months, violence has killed
over 152 Palestinians and injured more than 16,499,
including many children. We have repeatedly demanded
that any use of force must be proportionate. The firing
of rockets and the launch of incendiary balloons and
kites from Gaza into Israel by Hamas and other militant
groups are absolutely unacceptable. We welcome the
recent truce and the planned reopening of the Kerem
Shalom crossing.

Efforts to achieve a lasting peace and an end to the
occupation must be intensified. There is a humanitarian
imperative to alleviate the suffering of the 2 million
Gazans. Interventions with quick, direct and immediate
impact on daily lives are urgently needed. This must be
given utmost priority, while recognizing that the causes
of the humanitarian crisis are political in their nature.
We urge Israel to lift its closure regime, and we call
for Palestinian reconciliation and the return of the
Palestinian Authority to Gaza. I will focus on three
issues today i the important role of women in peace
and security; children and the engagement of young
people; and the negative developments on the ground.

First, with regard to women and peace and security,
women are too often excluded globally from efforts
to resolve conflicts, to the detriment of solid and
sustainable peace. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
unfortunately no exception. That must change. A peace
process cannot merely be about ending the occupation
and the conflict. It must also be about building peaceful,
vibrant, inclusive societies that are less susceptible to
the threat of extremism. Empowering and including
women and girls is an essential part of that. Through
our extensive international development cooperation
programme with Palestine, we will continue to work
for enhanced political influence and the full enjoyment
of human rights for women, young people and children.
The same work is being done through dialogue with civil
society and other actors in both Israel and Palestine.

Secondly, turning to young people and children,
the conflict between Israel and Palestine has a negative
effect on children on both sides. Many in the post-
Oslo generation, both Israelis and Palestinians, have
lost hope for the realization of a two-State solution.
We need to show those young people that there is an
alternative to violence and oppression. Last month
the Council adopted resolution 2419 (2018), on youth,
peace and security, which called for increasing the
role of young people in negotiating and implementing
peace agreements. The voices of young Israelis and
Palestinians must be heard.

Ensuring a safe childhood for all children is
essential to peaceful and prosperous societies. The
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which among
other things secures the right to education for young
Palestinians, plays a crucial role in that regard, not least
in Gaza. It is now facing an unprecedented financial
crisis, owing to a lack of contributions. We call on all
donor countries to step up their efforts and meet their
pledges, and we reiterate our call to other countries
to contribute financially to UNRWA at this critical
juncture. Sweden is UNRWA's third-largest contributor,
and we remain committed to it. Ensuring the care,
health, education and protection of children today
is essential to laying the foundations for preventing
further conflict in the future.

Finally, Israeli policy and actions in the occupied
West Bank are severely undermining the possibility
of a contiguous Palestinian State. They include the
demolition of homes, and notably the imminent
threat of the demolition of Khan Al-Ahmar and the
recent demolitions in Abu Nuwar and other places in
Area C. Demolitions further increase the risk of forcible
transfers of the Palestinian population, which are illegal
under international law. They also include the current
Israeli settlement policy, which continues despite the
international community's repeated condemnations.
We reiterate that settlements are a flagrant violation
under international law. Israel's actions further include
recent legislative changes and proposals and their
implications, which raise concerns about the right to
self-determination and non-discrimination. Lastly,
they include economic hindrances, restrictions and
limitations imposed on Palestine that make a viable
Palestinian economy unattainable.

We must reinvigorate the efforts for a two-State
solution based on international law, United Nations
resolutions, previous agreements and well-known
parameters, with Jerusalem as the future capital for
two States and three religions. We must redouble our
support for a contiguous Palestinian State, including
the return of the Palestinian Government to Gaza, and
we must act urgently together for the people of Gaza.

To sum up, a credible peace plan is urgently
needed, and the two sides have to prepare for peace in
a completely different way - in what they say, what
they do and how women and young people are involved.
Confidence between the parties must be built now.
Both Israelis and Palestinians have to realize that either
peace is gained together or both will lose. The situation
in and around Gaza is untenable. Millions of people are
caught between Hamas and other militant groups, on
the one hand, and the crippling Israeli closure regime,
on the other. Mediation has temporarily put a Band-Aid
on the wound, but it will never heal unless there is a real
solution. While that solution is being explored, urgent
measures are needed to alleviate the humanitarian
situation. We are working with all Council members to
see how that can be achieved.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I would like to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
To that end, I want to take this opportunity to remind
speakers that the presidency will use the flashing lights
on the microphone collars in order to prompt speakers
to bring their remarks to a close. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate

them in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber. I want to inform
everyone that we will be continuing the open debate
right through the lunch hour, as we have a large number
of speakers.

I now give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.

