Mr. Bylica: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia; the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; the
European Free Trade Association country Norway,
member of the European Economic Area; as well
as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

The European Union wishes to thank the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea for
organizing and presiding over this important event. In
accordance with your wish, Mr. President, I am limiting
my oral remarks, while the full text ofthe EU statement
is being made available in writing.

At the outset, I would like to stress that, from the
beginning, the European Union has been a staunch
supporter of the robust and effective implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and subsequent resolutions
1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008), with the objective of
strengthening global efforts to prevent the acquisition
and use by terrorists of nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons and materials and their means of delivery.

Today's event represents a perfect opportunity to
assess both the work that has been achieved and the
great challenges that remain ahead of us. As the EU
has a long history of supporting non-proliferation
and disarmament, both politically and financially,
the resolution allowed us to give our efforts another
dimension.

In December 2003, the EU adopted its strategy
against the proliferation ofweapons ofmass destruction
and their means of delivery, which, inter alia, spells
out the objective of strengthening the role of the
Security Council and enhancing expertise in meeting
the challenges of proliferation. Following the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004), a thorough re-examination
of the EU dual-use regulation took place, which led
to the entry into force in 2009 of a revised regulation,
including export controls and controls on transit,
brokering and transhipment issues, which served to fill
any potential loopholes in former regulations. Within
the EU, since 2000, export controls and dual-use goods
have been regulated in our member States by community
law, which has since then been repeatedly amended to
respond to the growing and specific challenges in the
field of export controls. In order to give more clarity and
to contribute to a more common policy, the four export
control regime lists - the Wassenaar Arrangement,
the Australia Group, the Missile Technology Control
Regime and the Nuclear Suppliers Group - were
merged in 2009. That merger turned out to be a success,
as it led to easier applicability and practical value. The
merged list has therefore become an example followed
and effectively implemented by many countries outside
the EU.

Looking outside of Europe, the EU strongly
supports regional and national efforts towards the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), including
through information-sharing, enhanced cooperation
with the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs and the
provision of effective assistance to those States that
require it. Since 2004, the EU has invested €17 million in
an outreach programme in the area of non-proliferation
and dual-use goods export controls with 28 partner
countries, which aims to enhance the effectiveness of
export-control systems for dual-use items.

Two European Council joint actions have been
adopted, in 2006 and 2008, respectively, and a new
European Council decision was adopted in July 2013 in a
total amount of€1.5 million. The EU long-term strategy
is consistent with the three broad obligations under the
resolution: the physical protection of nuclear facilities
and materials; dual-use export control; and border
security. The assistance clause has been recognized
by the EU as a major dimension of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), and therefore was explicitly
included in the most recent European Council decision
on resolution 1540 (2004) .

To develop its strategy on the ground and assist
countries, the EU has defined its actions around
five pillars, under which all the relevant fields of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) are covered:
the subregional workshops with a focus on physical
protection and accounting; country visits at a country's
request; experts' meetings and events; the training of
the relevant Government authorities and stakeholders
in the private sector; and public relations efforts, for
example, through the support for the publication of the
electronic journal on issues related to resolution 1540
(2004). As those actions are implemented by the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, I would like
to take this opportunity to thank the Office for their
efforts and effective collaboration with the EU.

In parallel with the European Council decision
adopted under the Common Foreign and Security
Policy, in 2009 the EU adopted a chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear action plan that consists of
133 internal measures to prevent, detect and respond
to chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
threats and risks. Approximately €100 million has
been dedicated to the implementation of that package.
The project, under the Instrument for Stability, also
contributes to the objectives of resolution 1540 (2004)
through its chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear centres of excellence initiative, which is aimed
at reinforcing the institutional capacity of partner
countries to fight such risks.

We would also like to underscore the issue of
adopting national action plans. In that regard, the EU
welcomes the significant progress achieved. As for
the EU, all our member States have reported on their
implementation to the 1540 Committee, and a number
have issued their national action plans. We encourage
other United Nations States Members to follow those
good examples, report to the 1540 Committee on
measures undertaken to ensure the implementation of
the resolution and consider adopting national action
plans if they have not yet done so. We also encourage
those States to take full advantage of the range of
assistance available to help them to do so, if required.

The EU also believes that the perspective of
resolution 1540 (2004) and its implementation should
not be limited to preventing terrorists from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction. That is the primary
objective; however, measures taken to fulfil it offer
numerous other advantages in a more holistic and
comprehensive dimension. Capacities built with regard
to border control serve well beyond the purpose of
detecting one type of sensitive material or another.
They significantly enhance and improve a country's
security, but also collective security in a broad sense.

The EU recognizes the importance of cooperation
with partners from other regions in that respect. As
already mentioned, our action is guided in that respect
by the 2003 EU strategy against proliferation, which
is based on the promotion of effective multilateralism
and the relevant international instruments and is
carried out through specific cooperation and assistance
projects with regional organizations. In particular, the
EU welcomes the combined efforts undertaken with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

Moreover, in 2011, the EU and the United States of
America signed ajoint EU-United States declaration in
which they both committed to undertaking continuous
efforts aimed at the implementation of resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1977 (2011).

As the mandate of the 1540 Committee has been
extended until 2021, we would like once again to recall
our full commitment and continuous support to this
issue. Our global struggle against the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles is
far from over. Numerous ongoing crises remind us that
our actions in that field are needed more than ever. I
would like to assure you, Mr. President, that you can
count on the EU to continue these efforts, along with
the 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts.

