The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Peru.

I would also like to extend our condolences to the
people and the Government of Japan following the death
of Mr. Amano, Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency.

Our country is deeply concerned about the
developments surrounding the question of Palestine.
We deplore the persistent hostile environment, the
indiscriminate violence of Hamas, the disproportionate
Israeli response and the confrontational rhetoric on both
sides. It all creates an unsustainable and destabilizing
situation for the Middle East and the international
community. We must deplore the fact that unilateral
decisions and actions have led to an even greater
escalation of tensions and violence, including the
recurrent and growing practices of settlement-building,
demolitions and evictions in occupied Palestinian
territories. Those actions contravene the provisions of
resolution 2334 (2016) and make the prospects for the
two-State solution increasingly uncertain.

We are duly alarmed by the political and social
impact of the ongoing demolition of Palestinian homes
in Sur Baher. We echo the Organization's calls for
the Israeli authorities to stop those acts and instead
implement planning policies that meet the housing and
development needs of the Palestinian population in the
occupied territories.

We also underscore the urgent need to pursue
efforts to address the serious humanitarian crisis in
Gaza, which has been exacerbated by funding cuts
to assistance programmes and the unilateral decision
of the Government of Israel to withhold a significant
amount of Palestinian tax revenue. In such dramatic
circumstances, we encourage the international
community to increase its financial contributions and
the United Nations to continue to align humanitarian
assistance with development plans that offer hope
and opportunities to the youngest in order to divert
them from radicalization and extremism. We hope
that the global investment fund outlined in Bahrain
and a strengthened United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East will
also contribute to that end.

We believe that the urgent relief of human suffering
must be complemented by a renewed commitment by
the parties to the peace process and the resumption
of negotiations leading to a two-State solution based
on the pre-1967 borders. That will require Palestinian
and Israeli political, religious and social leaders
and authorities to conduct themselves responsibly
and with prudence and restraint and to promote the
re-establishment of high-level dialogue that will allow
their respective peoples and the entire Middle East to
move towards lasting peace.

To that end, we underscore the special responsibility
that lies with the Council and countries with real
influence over the parties, which can and must do more
to ensure that the parties resume bilateral negotiations,
strictly respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law and human rights and support the
efforts of the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process to promote the easing of tensions.

I would also like to briefly address developments
in the Strait of Hormuz, an area that is crucial to the
global economy and to global security. Peru notes with
deep concern the military actions that occurred in
recent weeks, which pose a major threat to the stability
of the region and to international peace. We urge all
actors involved to exercise restraint in those dangerous
circumstances, avoid any unilateral act that could
trigger a conflict in that troubled part of the world and
return to diplomatic channels as the only possible way
out of the current impasse. We encourage the Secretary-
General's good offices to reduce current tensions and
build the confidence needed, in line with the powers
granted to him by the Charter of the United Nations.

I shall now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The representative of Equatorial Guinea has
requested the floor to make a further statement.

