Mr. Lassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank the New Zealand
presidency for convening this debate on the security
challenges facing small island developing States
(SIDS). My delegation is convinced that this debate will
help to deepen our consideration of how to strengthen
peace and security in those countries.

The topic we are discussing today enjoys high
priority on the agenda of the United Nations. The
convening of this meeting is timely, comes as it does
after the adoption of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
on financing for development and as we are pursuing
negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda, as
well as during preparations for the Paris Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change. We therefore trust that
our debate shall formulate recommendations reflecting
the international community's commitment to taking
tangible steps to remedy the vulnerability of small
island developing States, notably in terms of security
and the challenges of transnational crime.

International action aimed at strengthening the
resilience of those States to security challenges should
be taken in parallel with the implementation of the
Action Agenda and the Mauritius Strategy for the
Further Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States. The strengthening of the relevant
constructive partnerships must take into consideration
the establishment of specific projects for the benefit of
the sustainable development of small island developing
States.

The adoption of the Barbados Programme of
Action in 1994 and the Mauritius Strategy in 2005
kindled great hope and launched an impetus that must
be maintained. However, these two instruments have
not enjoyed the anticipated success, despite the good
results achieved thanks to the consistent commitments
of the Government of the small island developing
States. Today, small island developing States continue
to face security challenges coupled with other
socioeconomic problems, limiting their capacity for
growth and development. That is reflected, inter alia,
in an infrastructure deficit, weak productive capacities
and poor integration of those countries into the world
economy, as shown in their still very low volume of
trade and increasing vulnerability to the effects of
climate change.

Indeed, for years the devastating impact of climate
change that threatens the various ecosystems of the
planet has had detrimental repercussions on those
countries, which already face such problems as rising
sea levels, natural and environmental disasters, waste
management, and the need to preserve coastal and
maritime resources and biodiversity. Those countries'
economies remain dependent on a few sectors, such
as tourism, which has been affected by the impact of
climate change and natural disasters, or the export of
basic commodities, the prices of which have suffered
significant fluctuations on international markets,
making their economic growth even more vulnerable
to external shocks.

Diversifying the economies of those countries in
order to enhance the share of the manufacturing sector
and improving their productive capacities remains
the most appropriate way to achieve lasting growth in
those countries and to bolster their resilience. In order
to achieve the change necessary to supporting their
growth, SIDS need a significant mobilization of official
development assistance, foreign direct investment,
technology transfer and access to markets. With respect
to climate change and natural disasters, it is necessary to
bolster both the prevention and the adaption capacities
of those countries, whose environmental vulnerability
has grown in recent years. National policy support
programmes must be conceived and implemented with
the support of international institutions. To that end,
we need to build on the results of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development of June 2012,
particularly in terms of global governance, sustainable
development, the biodiversity of the oceans and seas,
and financing for sustainable development.

For the Kingdom of Morocco, South-South
partnership is a strategic choice, and it has always been
mindful of the problems of the small island developing
States, with which it shares aspirations as formulated in
the Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius
Strategy. Morocco remains convinced that increased
cooperation in regard to clean technology transfer, the
utilization of renewable energies and the financing of
sustainable development projects will substantially
contribute to the economic recovery and stability of
those countries. My country has always been aware of
the challenges facing SIDS and contributed actively at
the first meeting with the Pacific SIDS, held in Rabat
on 13 December 2012. The work undertaken at that
meeting was endorsed by ajoint press release concering
the strengthening of bilateral relations, cooperation and
coordination with all those States.

The resurgence of terrorism and transnational
crime requires the international community to take the
necessary precautions and appropriate measures to spare
these vulnerable countries from such activities and to
help them integrate into the world economy. Morocco,
which shares the security concerns of small island
developing States, has therefore always advocated for
for efficient cooperation andjoint efforts at the regional
and international levels to bolster safety and security
systems around the world. For that reason, my country
will continue to support international efforts to improve
cooperation with those States in the field of security
and remains willing to share its own experience and
to place at their disposal its own expertise in various
sectors related to socioeconomic development. That
cooperation is also reflected through a multitude of
human development projects linked to the demands of
globalization and democracy and in terms of access,
duty-free and quota-free access to its markets.

