Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): I should like first to join other speakers in
welcoming Mr. Carneiro, who is heading the high-ranking
delegation of Angola.

We are pleased to note that very encouraging
progress has recently been made in the internal Angolan
settlement. To a large extent this has been helped by the
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Beye, and all those who have worked in this
area in Angola and in the Secretariat. The visit to the
region by Ambassador Mahugu, the Chairman of the
Sanctions Committee, was also very important.

To date the Government of Angola has essentially
fulfilled its commitments under the Lusaka Protocol and
has now proceeded to the further disarmament of the

 

civilian population. For its part, the leadership of UNITA
has declared the demilitarization of that organization, which
will henceforth be granted the status of a legal political
party. The question of the special status of the leader of
UNITA, Mr. Savimbi, has also been resolved and the
activities of UNITA's Radio Vorgan have ceased.
Preparations are also under way to set up UNITA
headquarters in Luanda, and agreement has been reached on
the appointment of governors, vice-govemors and
ambassadors from among its members.

At the same time serious problems remain in the peace
process, which have prevented it from reaching a successful
conclusion. We are alarmed at the considerable discrepancy
between progress made in the political aspects of the
settlement and the situation with regard to providing safety
and security. In a number of regions in the country armed
units from the so-called residual forces of UNITA continue
to be active. A growing number of armed attacks are taking
place on local government authorities, the police, the
civilian population, United Nations personnel and
international humanitarian organizations and their personnel.
Such acts are in direct violation of the Lusaka Protocol and
should cease completely and immediately.

The continuing attempts by UNIT A in various ways to
drag out the implementation of the long-standing
agreements on extending the authority of the Government
of Angola to the entire territory of the country, including
Andulo and Bailundo, are absolutely unacceptable. We
believe it essential to issue a clear warning to UNITA that
the question of whether the sanctions imposed against it by
the Security Council will be lifted or stepped up will
depend upon a fundamental criterion: the timely and
complete implementation by UNITA of its commitments.
Success in the Angola settlement will depend to a large
extent on the commitment of the parties to the Lusaka
Protocol and on their constructive cooperation with the
United Nations. We decisively reject any attempt to resolve
the problems by force.

The draft resolution before us today faithfully reflects
the difficult but, we believe, final stage of the Angolan
settlement. The draft resolution clearly points the
Government of Angola, and UNITA in particular, towards
a prompt and successful implementation of the provisions
of the Lusaka Protocol, and also provides broad
opportunities for effectively controlling the course of the
peace process and adapting the actions of the Security
Council, depending on the development of events.

We believe that matters relating to the further
presence of the United Nations in that country after 1 July
will be resolved on the basis of real progress being
achieved in the peace process and in consultation with the
Government of Angola.

For these reasons, the Russian delegation will vote
in favour of the draft resolution.

