Ms. Lind (Estonia): As a member of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT)
Group, Estonia fully endorses the statement delivered
by the representative of Switzerland. Together with
Costa Rica, Estonia has been at the forefront ofthe ACT
group on the issue of appointing the next Secretary-
General. I would therefore like to emphasize a few
points on that subject.

Throughoutthecurrentprocess-whosetransparency
and inclusiveness have been historic - which has
successfully sought to implement General Assembly
resolution 69/321, we have witnessed the importance
of effective and substantive communication between
the Security Council and the wider membership. In
that regard, we consider the monthly meetings between
the President of the Security Council and the President
of the General Assembly and the reports from those
meetings to be very useful. In particular, the General
Assembly hearings, which, for the first time, allow all
Members of the Organization and a global audience
to assess candidates, attest to the Member States'
dedication to the vision set out by the Preparatory
Commission of the United Nations in 1945, that the
Secretary-General, more than anyone else, should stand
for the United Nations as a whole.

As a member of the ACT group, Estonia has
encouraged candidates to participate in all elements
of the selection process. The General Assembly
proceedings have been successful, and the Security
Council is planning to hold its first straw poll for the
candidates in a few days. We have emphasized the need
for the Security Council to keep the General Assembly
informed of any developments, and have encouraged
regular and close communication between the Presidents
of both organs. We expect that the overall change in
the process will bring with it an updated approach by
the Security Council. Furthermore, we are entering the
most decisive phase of the selection process, and would
like to see it conclude successfully.

We would also like to recall that it is the General
Assembly's prerogative to prepare the final draft
resolution on the appointment of the Secretary-
General. It is our understanding that a discussion of
the elements to be included in that draft resolution
will be taking place in the General Assembly soon.
For us, in addition to creating a more inclusive process
and broader ownership - in line with present-day
expectations - the aim has been to strengthen the
institution of the Office of the Secretary-General
by making it more representative. We hope that
the culmination of the selection process will be as
encouraging as the whole process has been so far.

