Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like at the start of my statement to thank you,
Mr. President, for having scheduled a wrap-up session
on our work this month. As you know, Sir, my delegation
strongly supports such an exercise. It gives us a welcome
opportunity not only to review our work during the
past month but also to look ahead. I also welcome your
initiative, Sir, of holding the meeting for the first time
since 2005 as an open meeting, which helps to enhance
the transparency of the Council's work. Finally, allow
me congratulate you, Mr. President, and your entire
team on the impeccable way in which you have presided
over the Security Council during the month of July,
which was particularly full of crises.

I will mention three issues that were prominent
on this month's agenda, starting with Syria. At the
initiative of Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg, the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
2165 (2014) on 14 July. That resolution is based on
the decisions taken by the Council in resolution 2139
(2014). Its adoption would not have been necessary if
resolution 2139 (2014) had been respected. By deciding
that the United Nations humanitarian agencies and
their implementing partners are authorized to use
routes crossing the lines of conflict and four additional
border crossings so that humanitarian assistance
reaches the people in need throughout Syria by the
most direct routes without requiring the consent of
the Syrian authorities, resolution 2165 (2014) gives
a glimmer of hope to a scenario that remains very
gloomy. The resolution could make it possible to help
as many as 2.9 million people currently beyond the
reach of humanitarian actors in Syria. This morning,
we heard a first encouraging briefing by Valerie Amos
on its implementation, but the Council should remain
vigilant and take additional measures in the case of
non-compliance with resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2139
(2014).

However, humanitarian assistance can still only
be palliative. Only a political settlement in line with
the Geneva communique of June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex) will put an end to the indescribable suffering
of the Syrian people. In that context, we welcome the
appointment of Mr. Staffan de Mistura as Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria and of his deputy,
Mr. Ramzy Ezzeldin Ramzy. We hope that the Security
Council will soon have the opportunity to review with
them their ideas with regard to relaunching the political
process for a democratic transition in Syria.

I will move on to Ukraine. While armed
separatist groups and their external support continue
to destabilize the country and to undermine its
sovereignty and territorial integrity, an additional
step in the horror was taken when Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-l7 was shot down over eastern Ukraine on
17 July. A total of 298 innocent civilians were killed in
that tragedy. While the Security Council was able to
reach a consensus on adopting resolution 2166 (2014),
prepared by our Australian colleagues, we continue
to observe the despicable behaviour of illegal armed
groups that refuse or restrict access to the site of the
accident and prevent the dignified treatment of the
remains of the victims. That cannot be tolerated, and
we urge all parties, especially the armed groups and
those who support them, to guarantee without further
delay safe and unimpeded access to the accident site for
the international investigation.

The tragedy of flight MH-l7 reminds us of the
importance of redoubling diplomatic efforts to create
conditions conducive to the implementation of the
President Poroshenko's peace plan. We must find a
solution to that crisis before it is too late.

Diplomacy is also called for and the Security Council
must fully play its role in another context - that of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which has erupted again
in Gaza. With more than 1,350 killed, the death toll
and humanitarian misery have already far surpassed
the suffering experienced during Operation Cast Lead
of 2009. Israel has the right to defend itself against
Hamas' indiscriminate strikes aimed at the Israeli
civilian population. However, that right to defend itself
in no way justifies the disproportionate use of Israeli
military force, which continues to inflict terrible
suffering on the Palestinian civilian population. I am
referring in particular to the more than 200 Palestinian
children who were killed in the past three weeks.

The first priority must be the achievement of a
ceasefire. However, any lasting solution to the crisis
in Gaza must address the deep-rooted causes of the
crisis and give the Palestinian people the chance to
live their lives with dignity. That should involve a
lifting of the blockade to put an end to the inhumane
conditions imposed on the people of the Gaza Strip,
but such a measure is not enough if we want to resolve
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The only way to live in
peace will be the acceptance of the two-State solution
by both parties. We hope that after the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2014/ 13) that we adopted on the eve
of the Bid celebration, at the initiative of our Jordanian
colleagues, the Security Council will continue to speak
out to actively contribute to settling the crisis in Gaza
and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

A great deal remains to be said on the various
hotbeds of crisis in Africa, which are on the Security
Council's agenda. I am referring, in particular, to
South Sudan where the security, humanitarian and
human rights situations are especially serious. South
Sudanese civilians are suffering as a result of the
obstinacy of the leaders of both camps in rejecting
all peace initiatives. Both parties should know that
the international community - the Council - will
tolerate no impunity for violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law committed during
context of the conflict. Perpetrators will be identified
and brought to justice.

I should like to again congratulate Rwanda on
having taken the initiative of organizing an open
debate on the partnership between the United Nations
and regional organizations in the framework of
peacekeeping (see S/PV.7228). Resolution 2167 (2014),
adopted the day before yesterday, will help us strengthen
that partnership, which is increasingly important.

In conclusion, I have no doubt that August will be
a decisive month for the settlement of the number of
crises that I have just mentioned. Luxembourg is ready
to work actively to that end under the presidency of
the United Kingdom. I want to, as of now, assure my
colleague, Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant, and his team
our full support.

