Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are also grateful to Mr. Guehenno for the
informative briefing he has given us about the situation
in Kosovo and the activities of the United Nations
Interim Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK).

Our debate today is taking place at a time when
the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General is taking up his duties - the new leader of the
United Nations Mission in Kosovo, Mr. Haekkerup. He
has inherited a difficult situation. As we have often
said, his predecessor, in our opinion, allowed several
distortions in implementing Security Council resolution
1244 (1999) and, virtually circumventing the Council,
took a number of serious measures which would have
led to separating Kosovo from the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.

But now a new stage is beginning, and we expect
that with the appointment of the new Special
Representative this flawed practice will be totally
ended. We are convinced that in his work the Special
Representative, whatever margin he may have for
independent action, will - and must - strictly respect
the principle of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Federal Republic, enshrined in resolution 1244
(1999).

Today there is a qualitatively new situation in the
region, and full use must be made of this. The new
democratic leadership of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has declared that it is interested in
establishing close contacts and cooperation with the
Special Representative. Use must be made of this intent
so that decisions on matters of great importance will be
taken in agreement with the authorities of Yugoslavia.

Russia welcomes the establishment of such
cooperation. To that end, thought might be given to
establishing some special mechanism, something along
the lines of a joint implementation commission, for
implementing the military-technical agreements. Also
important is the question of the status of the two
international presences. As we have often said, this
question must be settled by the signing of appropriate
agreements with the Federal Republic.

It is also important to help establish a dialogue
between Belgrade and the representatives of the
Kosovo Albanians. The moderates who supported
Rugova in the municipal elections must now show in
actions that their constructive position is to help get
negotiations with Belgrade started.

We also believe that the timing of the Kosovo-
wide elections and the parameters for substantial
regional autonomy are matters that must be decided on
in close cooperation with Belgrade. The elections must
not be an end in themselves. The holding and timing of
elections must be determined by the extent to which
they will help to achieve a comprehensive settlement in
Kosovo. Rushing the elections before an appropriate
level of security has been established and a solution to
the return of refugees and displaced persons has been
found, and before the creation of a multinational
society has been identified in Kosovo, would simply
strengthen the mono-ethnic nature of the area. That
would only complicate the prospects for achieving a
political settlement within the context of resolution
1244 (1999).

In this connection, we would draw attention to
reports we have received that, at a university in Bern,
on the recommendation of the Swiss Government, work
is supposedly under way to prepare a draft provisional
constitution for Kosovo. We should like to ask whether
the United Nations Secretariat has any information on
this? It is also rather important to determine whether
the Yugoslav authorities have been involved in or
asked to consent to the drafting of this document.

The disarmament of former fighters of the
Kosovo Liberation Army must be completed. Much
remains to be done. In this respect, we draw attention
to the most recent monthly report on the activities of
the forces in Kosovo, in which there was a reference to
suspicions that weapons found last November in caves
near Dac Mala had been brought across the border and
stored with a View to future use or sale. One might
conclude from this that all has not yet been done to end
the movement of weapons into Kosovo.

Turning to the situation in Presevo, we support
the approach taken by Belgrade to resolve the matter
through political dialogue with local Albanians. We
consider Belgrade's proposal to begin work on an
assessment of the Kumanovo Military-Technical
Agreement on the territorial scope and regime
governing the ground safety zone to be fully justified.

We cannot fail to refer to another problem that
has concerned the world in general in recent days. I
refer to the so-called "Balkan syndrome", caused by
the consequences of the use of depleted uranium
ordinance in Kosovo, and its impact on the health of
the local population and international personnel on the
ground. We consider it essential that thorough and
objective international expertise be made available to
establish the truth of the situation. We await the results
of research by the United Nations Environment
Programme and expect the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization to provide its full cooperation to that
work. This is not a minor issue for the Security
Council, but a problem that falls fully within its
competence. The Security Council established the
international presence in Kosovo and accordingly bears
responsibility for the security and health of
international personnel there.

In conclusion, we draw the attention of Council
members to the fact that, despite our frequent requests,
the Security Council has yet to receive the report of the
Finnish pathologists on the results of the tragic incident
in Racak. We are aware that the report is available to
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
but our frequent requests to the United Nations
Secretariat have had no response to date. We hope that
this matter can finally be brought to its logical
conclusion and that the principle of transparency of
which we have often heard speak in this Chamber, will
ensure that the necessary information be made to the
Security Council.

