Mr. Vrailas: European Union (EU) Foreign
Ministers adopted conclusions on the Middle East
peace process one week ago, on 18 January. I refer to
those conclusions as the latest statement of EU policy
on this issue.

The EU is deeply concerned that the continuing
cycle of violence has led to a serious loss of human life
in Israel and the Palestinian territory in recent months.
We firmly condemn the terror attacks and violence
from all sides and in all circumstances. The EU urges
all parties to refrain from any action that would worsen
the situation by way of incitement or provocation.
We commend both sides for upholding security
coordination. We welcome progress on the Duma
investigation and call for Israel to hold all perpetrators
of settler violence to account. The EU also calls on both
sides to jointly and resolutely fight incitement and hate
speech.

Only the re-establishment of a political horizon
and the resumption of dialogue can stop the violence.
Security measures alone cannot stop the cycle of
violence. The underlying causes of the conflict need
to be addressed. The EU reaffirms its support for the
Quartet calls for the taking of significant transformative
steps in order to restore confidence and rebuild trust.
We urge both sides to implement such measures at the
earliest possible juncture. A fundamental change of
policy by Israel with regard to the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in Area C, will significantly
increase economic opportunities, empower Palestinian
institutions and enhance stability and security for both
Israelis and Palestinians.

The EU is united in its commitment to achieving
a two-State solution based on parameters set out in the
Council conclusions of July 2014. We strongly oppose
all actions that undermine the viability of the two-State
solution and urge both sides to demonstrate a genuine
commitment to such a solution in order to rebuild trust
and create a path back to meaningful negotiations.

Securing ajust and lasting peace, ending all claims,
will require an increased common international effort.
The EU will work actively with all relevant stakeholders
towards a renewed multilateral approach to the peace
process. The establishment of an International Support
Group and a further international conference are both
possible ways to contribute to that end. The EU recalls
its willingness to engage further with regional partners
on the basis of the Arab Peace Initiative.

Compliance with international humanitarian
law and international human rights law by States
and non-State actors, including accountability, is a
cornerstone ofpeace and security in the region. We call
for the protection of children, highlight the importance
for the work of civil society to go unhindered, both in
Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory, and follow
recent developments in this regard with concern.

Settlements are illegal under international law,
constitute an obstacle to peace and threaten to make
a two-State solution impossible. The EU reiterates
its strong opposition to Israel's settlement policy and
actions taken in that context. We urge Israel to end
all settlement activity and to dismantle the outposts
erected since March 2001. Settlement activity in East
Jerusalem seriously jeopardizes the possibility of
Jerusalem serving as the future capital of both States.

The EU and its member States are committed
to ensuring the continued, full and effective
implementation of existing EU legislation and bilateral
arrangements applicable to settlement products. The
EU expresses its commitment to ensuring that, in line
with international law, all agreements between the State
of Israel and the EU must unequivocally and explicitly
indicate their inapplicability to the territories occupied
by Israel in 1967. This does not constitute a boycott of
Israel, which the EU strongly opposes.

The EU urges all Palestinian factions to engage
in good faith in the reconciliation process. The EU
will continue its support for Palestinian aspirations
to statehood. The positive results of the past must not
be lost, and Palestinian institutions must continue to
grow stronger, more transparent, more accountable and
more democratic. The EU calls upon the Government
to work towards genuine and democratic elections for
all Palestinians.

The EU calls on all parties to take swift steps
to produce a fundamental change to the political,
security and economic situation in the Gaza Strip,
including the end of the closure and a full opening of
the crossing points, while addressing Israel's legitimate
security concerns. Recent rocket fire by militant
groups is unacceptable and underlines again the
danger of escalation. All stakeholders must commit to
non-violence and peace. We urge the Palestinian sides
to make the reconstruction of Gaza an overarching
national priority. The Palestinian Authority must fully
resume its governmental functions in Gaza.

We welcome the steps that Israel has taken to
ease some restrictions on Gaza. However the lifting of
restrictions on the movement of people, services and
goods - particularly those designated as dual-use
items - is needed to allow reconstruction efforts
and basic service delivery. We call on all parties to
guarantee unimpeded humanitarian access to Gaza.
The EU remains ready to engage with the parties and
relevant stakeholders towards resolving the situation.
The EU reiterates its offer to both parties of a
package of European political, economic and security
support and of a special privileged partnership with the
EU in the event of a final peace agreement. The future
development of relations between the EU and both the
Israeli and Palestinian partners will also depend on
their engagement towards a lasting peace based on a
two-State solution.

The war continues to rage in Syria, with disastrous
consequences for the Syrian population. People
suffering and dying in Madaya, Deir ez-Zour, Fu'ah,
Kafraya and elsewhere show us the cynicism of using
starvation as means of warfare. Unconditional access
to Madaya and all other besieged areas is an absolute
prerequisite for alleviating the humanitarian suffering.
The bombings and targeting of civilian areas and
structures like hospitals and schools are unacceptable.
The EU calls on all parties to cease all attacks and
bombings of civilian targets, take all appropriate steps
to protect civilians - including members of ethnic,
religious and confessional communities - put an end
to sieges of civilian areas, fully respect international
humanitarian law and implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions, also recalling that the primary
responsibility to protect its population lies with the
Syrian regime.

It is urgent to halt the conflict in Syria. In this
context, the EU fully supports the work done by the
International Syria Support Group, in which it is an
active participant, and urges all parties to continue
their efforts in view of a credible and inclusive
transition process. Some progress has been made in
the fight against Daesh in Iraq. However, the terrorist
group cannot be fully defeated if the civil war in
Syria continues. Daesh bases its own survival and its
propaganda on sectarian strife and chaos in Syria and
in Iraq. The EU calls for the immediate implementation
of concrete confidence-building measures in support of
the upcoming intra-Syrian political talks, the release of
political prisoners and an end to attacks on civilians,
aerial bombardments and sieges of civilian areas.

The European Union supports the goal of resolution
2254 (2015) to bring together the broadest possible
spectrum of the opposition, chosen by Syrians, who
will decide their negotiation representatives and define
their negotiation positions so as to enable the political
process to begin. The EU commends, in this regard, the
work that is being done by Saudi Arabia and other States
to reach out to the Syrian opposition in preparation for
the first round of talks, and commends the opposition's
continued commitment to negotiating. The EU calls
on all the Syrian parties to adopt a constructive and
flexible attitude with a view to the timely start of an
inclusive and credible political process, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015), and to fully commit to the
political talks in order to come to an agreement on the
political transition in Syria.

The EU fully supports United Nations Special
Envoy for Syria Staffan de Mistura. The EU and its
member States will provide support to the intra-Syrian
talks and the entire Syrian-led transition process in
terms of mediation, expertise and consensus-building.
We will maintain close contact with the Envoy's team
to define ways in which we can support a ceasefire
and, once a ceasefire is in place, how we can step up
our aid to the Syrian people. This also includes local
governance needs, rehabilitation and the reconstruction
of the country. The EU will continue to encourage
the meaningful participation of women in the United
Nations-facilitated political process for Syria.

As Council members know, the EU is the biggest
donor to the Syrian crisis. We have already committed
to providing substantial support to Turkey and are
putting together comprehensive support packages for
Jordan and Lebanon. In addition, we need to step up
humanitarian and stabilisation aid inside Syria.

The implementation day of the agreement on
the Iranian nuclear programme demonstrates that
diplomacy and multilateralism deliver effective results
for peace and security. It shows that cooperation can
prevail over confrontation. The EU is committed to
continuing its active engagement in the International
Syria Support Group and in the Global Coalition to
counter ISIL/Daesh.

