The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of
the members of the Security Council, I vigorously
condemn the atrocious terrorist attack committed in
Tehran. The members of the Security Council express
their deepest condolences to the families of those who
have lost their lives and their solidarity with the people
and Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

The members of the Security Council observed a
moment ofsilence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between

1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994

Letter dated 17 May 2017 from the President
of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/434)

Letter dated 17 May 2017 from the President of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia

since 1991, addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2017/436)

The President (spoke in Spanish): : In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia to participate in
this meeting.

On behalf ofthe Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Davor Ivo Stier, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign and European Affairs of the
Republic of Croatia. I request the Protocol Officer to
escort him to a seat at the Council table.

Mr. Davor Ivo Stier, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign and European Affairs of
the Republic of Croatia, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.


The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Judge Carmel Agius, President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia;
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals; and
Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and Prosecutor
of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/ZOl7/434, which contains the text of
a letter dated 17 May 2017 from the President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals addressed to the President of the Security
Council. I also wish to draw the attention of members
to document S/2017/436, which contains a letter dated
17 May 2017 from the President of the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991, addressed to the President ofthe
Security Council.

I now give the floor to Judge Agius.


