Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful for the statement of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. We thank the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Yury Fedotov, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Antonio
Guterres, and the Director-General of the World Health
Organization, Ms. Margaret Chan, for their reports on
the work of the entities they head.

Our discussion today shows that the number of
threats facing humanity as we step across the threshold
of the second decade of the twenty-first century has not
diminished; quite the contrary. Along with the
emergence of new threats, the old ones have worsened.
Recently the trend towards aggressive interference in
the internal affairs of sovereign States has increased.
The complex processes occurring in some of these
States and the conflicts that sometimes result require
the establishment of a dialogue between the authorities
and the opposition, with the participation of all civic
and political groups, based on a refusal to use any form
of violence and with the aim of achieving political and
economic reform.

For that it would be useful to have the support of
the international community and regional
organizations. We sometimes see an arbitrary and
detached treatment of the concept of legitimacy,
provocative calls for further confrontation, and open or
veiled threats of the use of force in the guise of
humanitarian slogans. The path to intervention leads to
chaos in various regions and in international relations
in general.

All the above contradict the basic norms and
principles of modern international law, the United
Nations Charter and the very essence of the work of
our global organization.

We recognize the evolving nature of new
challenges to international peace and security. We see
increasingly closer and persistent links among the
various kinds of transnational crime, in particular
terrorism and drug trafficking. That list includes the
threat of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, piracy, the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons and cybercrime.

The true danger of those threats and challenges is
recognized by the Council, but we need additional
analysis of their links, which have driven the threat to a
new and increasingly dangerous level. Indeed, that is
how we see the Council's future work on the issue,
bearing in mind its responsibility under the Charter to
maintain international peace and security.

The basis for that work is set out in a number of
the Council's earlier decisions, in particular the
presidential statement of 24 February 2010
(S/PRST/2010/4). We reiterate the special relevance of
that statement and the Council's invitation in it to the
Secretary-General to consider the interconnected threat
of drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
as a factor in conflict analysis and in the assessment
and planning of integrated missions, as well as in
analyzing the role of those threats in situations on the
Council's agenda.

Such challenges are increasingly prominent, in
particular with regard to the drug threat from
Afghanistan, which remains extremely serious. The
devastating influence of Afghan drug trafficking,
exacerbated by terrorism, extends far beyond the
region. Here we are dealing with a threat to
international peace and stability brought about through
the interconnection among various kinds of criminal
activity. The response to such a threat must be
comprehensive and coordinated, including through the
adoption a system-wide United Nations track on new
challenges.

In that context, we positively assess the steps
already taken by the Secretary-General to strengthen
interdepartmental cooperation within the United
Nations, including the establishment of a
multidisciplinary task force of the Secretariat on
transnational crime and drug trafficking as threats to
security and stability, led by UNODC and the
Department of Political Affairs.

The new threats are creating illegal arms flows in
various parts of the world. We note that phenomenon in
the example of Libyan arms. It would be particularly
dangerous if those weapons were to fall into the hands
of terrorists. At Russia's initiative, the Council adopted
resolution 2017 (2011). It conveyed the required
message and designates the necessary frameworks to
counter that new threat.

In an era of globalization, a negative aspect of
information and communications technology
developments is the growing new threats from
cybercrime. Russia advocates adopting more effective
measures to regulate the use of such technologies and
the Internet, while maintaining the appropriate
freedoms. The Council has already expressed its
concern about increasing cybercrime. We believe that a
universal convention on cooperation to combat
information crime and cybercrime and on rules for a
code of conduct in cyberspace must now be developed.

We look forward to supporting initiatives and
agreements of Member States in that area through
UNODC and other structures of the Secretariat task
force on implementing the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in particular the Working
Group on Countering the Use of the Internet for
Terrorist Purposes.

Another new threat is piracy off the coast of
Somalia, a well-organized and profitable business.
Piracy is now spreading to the western shores of the
African continent. Combating that phenomenon
requires serious and comprehensive measures by the
international community. For Russia, an important
aspect of that fight is putting an end to impunity for the
pirates, at the level not only of perpetrators but also of
their industry bosses. We will continue to strengthen
our efforts on that issue.

With respect to climate change and diseases, the
United Nations structure that has developed to consider
such issues allows us to provide a appropriate response
to growing threats in that area. We are convinced that
the priority role here belongs and should belong, first
and foremost, to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and the World Health
Organization as the universal mechanisms to counter
global threats in those areas. Those bodies have the
necessary and adequate machinery to develop effective
and long-term strategies for international cooperation,
as well as concrete measures for a prompt response.

