The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

Like others, we were pleased to vote in favour of
this text. We commend the work of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) in helping to
maintain calm and stability along the Blue Line. It
is vital for the peace, stability and security of both
Lebanon and Israel. We call on all parties to respect
UNIFIL's mandate and the Blue Line.

The Security Council has today reaffirmed its
commitment to Lebanon's sovereignty, territorial
integrity and stability, condemned all violations of
the Blue Line and re-stated that it is the Lebanese
Armed Forces (LAF), along with Lebanon's other State
security agencies, that are the only legitimate defenders
of Lebanon.

We look forward to receiving the outcomes
requested on decreasing the Maritime Task Force and
transitioning responsibilities to the LAF. We look
forward to seeing tangible outcomes.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of
August, Iwould like to express the sincere appreciation of
the delegation of the United Kingdom to the members of
the Council, in particular my Permanent Representative
colleagues and the staffoftheir Missions, as well as to the
Council's secretariat for all the support they have
given us - and I include the Secretary-General, the
Department of Political Affairs, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and others.

It has not been the busiest of months because it
has been August. But I think we have been able to get
consensus on several important issues that we deal
with. Sadly, consensus on some of the most intractable
foreign policy problems, notably Syria, continues to
elude the Council. I am sure that is something we will
want to return to.

What success there has been is ascribed to all
of us. Without the hard work, support and positive
contributions of every delegation and representatives of
the Secretariat, things could not have been achieved. Of
course, I include the conference servicing officers, our
good friends the interpreters, the verbatim reporters
and our good friends the security staff.

As we end the British presidency, I know I speak
on behalf of the Security Council in wishing the
delegation of the United States good luck for the month
of September.

The meeting rose at 3.10 pm.
