Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): | wish to congratulate you and your friendly country, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council this month. We have full trust in your successful leadership of the work of the Council and in the positions of the Russian Federation based upon the principles of international law and the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. I thank you, Sir, for holding this open meeting on the so-called chemical issue. We agree with what you said a few days ago, indicating that we have nothing to hide and nothing to fear. Indeed, we have a great deal of information and truths on this issue. The public should have the opportunity to examine these truths, free of the biased and hostile views and lies that some Western countries and their media are spreading. I wish also to reiterate my country's support for the Russian Federation regarding the Western allegations on the so-called Navalny affair and, earlier, the Skripal affair. Uponawelcome initiative of the Permanent Missions of the Russian Federation and the People's Republic of China, the Security Council, on 28 September, held an Arria Formula meeting on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) and the role of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). That meeting was an extremely important opportunity to hear testimony and briefings by experts in related areas, including Mr. Ian Henderson, one of the most experienced OPCW inspectors who has been working for more than 12 years with that body. Mr. Henderson was the head of the team that participated in the investigation into the Douma incident and visited Syria in the context of the fact-finding mission's visits several times. Those experts also included Mr. Theodore Postol, emeritus professor of science, technology and international security at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Mr. Aaron Mate, an independent journalist and contributor to The Grayzone and to The Nation. Those briefings and the reliable scientific and very important information they provided have proved the degree of politicization imposed by certain Western Governments in order to use the OPCW's as a platform to fabricate accusations and then justify aggression, sometimes unilateral and sometimes trilateral, against Syria, and to finish what they were unable to achieve through their investment in terrorism and_ their unlimited, multifaceted support for that terrorism, and to try to suffocate the Syrian people through unilateral coercive measures. Naturally -and as the well-known proverb says, "You can lead a horse to water, but you cannot make it drink" - the representatives of certain Western Governments did not want to hear undeniable scientific truths, quite simply because they are relentlessly pursuing, in principle, their hostile positions and attempting to cover up the crimes committed by terrorist organizations and their use of chemical weapons and toxic gases against the civilian population. They also refuse to recognize the plain truth that was corroborated by Ms. Sigrid Kaag - who at the time was the Special Coordinator of the joint mission of the OPCW in charge of eliminating chemical weapons in Syria - in her briefing to the Council in June 2014. Ms. Kaag came to the Council to present her final report and stated that Syria had abided by all of its commitments, leading to the full destruction of its chemical arsenal on board the American ship M/V Cape Ray and other ships. The OPCW stated that all 27 production facilities had been destroyed and that Syria had therefore upheld, in both letter and spirit, its commitments and no longer possessed any chemical weapons. That is the established fact upon which we should base ourselves, not the question posed by my colleague the Ambassador of France, who asked where the chemical weapons that are being used in Syria are coming from. That is a valid question in terms of form, but the response is a simple one: we have sent more than 200 letters, over a number of years now, to the Security Council since the very first use of chemical weapons against civilians, in Khan Al-Assal, near Aleppo, in March 2013. Since March 2013 - that is seven years now - we have sent the Council more than 200 letters replete with detailed information on the parties that are bringing chemical products into my country for use by terrorist groups in Idlib and elsewhere. Most of the parties that deliver those products are foreign intelligence agencies, including Western and French intelligence entities, that are working in my country, but it seems that some do not wish to see things as they are. It is regrettable that certain Western delegations, during the aforementioned meeting, used the most heinous and virulent language to attack respectable scientists who tried to help the Council find the truth. Some of those statements were far from courteous and civil, because they do not want the truth. Rather, they invest in terrorism, misinformation and aggression. It is equally regrettable that the OPCW, which received the Nobel Peace Prize in 2013 for working to eradicate chemical weapons and helping the Syrian Government rid itself of its chemical stockpile, has become a tool to be used by a handful of Western countries to target specific countries, including mine. This greatly detracts from the OPCW's credibility, professionalism and technical nature. That leads us, as member States, to work to rectify its trajectory and return it to its mandated role. The activities of the OPCW in my country and several of its reports show that fictional miracles remain possible. Those miracles could be produced in OPCW laboratories in The Hague and in some Western intelligence centres. It is possible to use these miracles to target States Members of the United Nations. That was the case with Iraq. At the time, the American Administration exploited lies that it had propagated in the Council in order to invade Iraq and occupy it, destroy its institutions and plunder its wealth. Has the Council forgotten that? Is it going to allow similar lies to justify targeting my country and other countries as well as the destruction of those countries, just as some destroyed Libya? Will the Council allow the truth to be buried in the basement of the United Nations, in vaults that will be opened only 60 years from now, as with the documents relating to the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission, the United Nations Special Commission and the Hans Blix and Scott Ritter reports on Iraq? That prevented two generations from knowing the truth about the British- American invasion of Iraq. Who knows, but perhaps some will replicate the assassination of British biological weapons expert David Kelly, a United Nations inspector in Iraq who died, allegedly by suicide, after having declared to the BBC that his Government had exaggerated its statements on Iraqi military resources and the threat posed by those biological weapons in order to convince the British people to unleash a war against Iraq. We call on all States members of the OPCW to speak out against the politicization of the organization's mandate. We call on them to work to resolve that issue, which represents a major shortcoming that is jeopardizing its work and undermining its credibility and stance. We ask the Director General of the OPCW to resolve current violations and change direction, rather than bending to Western pressure and implementing the agendas of Governments that wish to keep open this so-called chemical dossier as a card to play against the Syrian Government and its allies. Ona number of occasions, my country has affirmed that it has not used chemical weapons and will not use them. We have also stated that we are committed to cooperating with the OPCW, the Technical Secretariat and the Declaration Assessment Team to resolve outstanding questions and close the file definitively and as soon as possible. That is why, on 16 September, my country presented its eighty-second monthly report to the Technical Secretariat on activities regarding the destruction of chemical weapons and their production facilities. We have even prolonged the tripartite agreement among the Syrian Government, the United Nations and the OPCW for another six months, starting on 30 September 2020. Moreover, between 28 September and | October, the twenty-third series of consultations was held between the Syrian Government and the Declaration Assessment Team, which recently visited Damascus and was able to fully implement its programme, thanks to the assistance offered by the Syrian Government. That Syrian cooperation has been met with an effort by Western countries to put in place illegitimate mechanisms adopted counter to the laws and provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention, such as the Identification and Investigation Team. Moreover, the American Administration has presented an escalatory draft resolution in the Security Council to spread lies and impose them through intimidation and pressure, which confirms some Western countries' attempts to instrumentalize this platform for their own expansionist, aggressive agendas. That once again reveals the double standards of the American Administration when it comes to chemical weapons, particularly since it is the only State party to the CWC that retains huge stockpiles of such weapons from the Second World War that it continues to refuse to destroy.To add to that hypocrisy, successive American Administrations and their NATO allies never talk about the chemical, nuclear and biological arsenals of Israel, which is left out of international conventions in that regard and is a threat to peace and security in our region and in the rest of the world. By way of conclusion, our colleagues from Western countries wish to replace Flaubert, Voltaire, Jane Austen, Shakespeare, Goethe, Brecht, Hemingway, Edgar Allan Poe, Mark Twain and all the wonderful authors of their countries - these eternal international jewels of literature - with a new kind of literature, that of lies. We heard fallacious, erroneous readings full of lies, which might be good for sentimental novels but are unbalanced. They are unbalanced because they are influenced by the coronavirus disease pandemic, which dominates our minds at the moment. I am not going to comment on what some Western colleagues have been saying, or on their false accusations against my country with regard to the use of chemical weapons. I simply note that it is their countries that have used nuclear, chemical and biological weapons. It is their countries that have arsenals and stockpiles of weapons that could destroy the entire planet and the solar system. It is their countries that are imposing unilateral economic coercive measures against the Syrian people and other peoples. It is their countries that are hindering the reconstruction process for what terrorism caused in my country; they who invented Al-Qaida and Da'esh; they who exploiting Islamist - not Islamic - trends promoted by people who use religion as a commodity to implement confrontation agendas between cultures, civilizations and agendas. They have destroyed Iraq and Libya, and have propagated the culture of blockade, invasion, servitude, occupation and intimidation. Those who have committed all of these actions against humankind are not a model for us or for others. They are afraid to hear from the first Director General of the OPCW here in the Council. They are afraid of having the truth unveiled and laid bare, and of having the erroneous information and manipulation of Security Council and OPCW mechanisms unveiled - all with a view to distorting the reputation of my country and that of the Russian Federation and preventing this chemical file, which has been open for over seven years, from being closed. The Security Council has organized 84 official meetings on this issue, not including unofficial meetings.
