Mr. Voronkov: Let me thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on
this very complex and evolving issue. I grateful to take
part in the discussion together with my colleague and
friend Ms. Coninsx, Executive Director of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.

Allow me to start by remembering the tens of
thousands of victims of terrorism around the world. I
particularly express my solidarity with the Governments
and the peoples of Egypt, Mali and Nigeria, who most
recently suffered horrific terrorist attacks. My thoughts
and prayers are also with our colleagues from the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, who are bravely defending the United
Nations principles and values at the cost of their lives.

The threat from foreign terrorist fighters affects
all Member States, even those far away from the
conflict zones. Recent reports suggest that at one
stage over 40,000 foreign terrorist fighters from more
than 110 countries may have travelled to join terrorist
groups in the Syrian Arab Republic and in Iraq. They
have prolonged and complicated the conflicts in both
countries, and they have increased the brutality of the
fighting and the frequency of human rights violations,
including against women and girls.

As the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has
suffered a series of major military defeats and Member
States have implemented better measures to prevent
travel, the flow of fighters to the region has significantly
decreased. A significant number of terrorists have
tried to relocate to countries such as Libya, Yemen
and Afghanistan, which has fuelled existing conflicts
and further destabilized fragile regions. Those and
other affected countries need significant assistance and
support from the international community to tackle
that threat.

There are at least 5,600 fighters from 33 countries
who have returned home. Many returnees are very
well trained and equipped to carry out attacks in their
own countries. Others hope to radicalize and recruit
new followers to their cause. There are a number who
have rejected terrorist ideologies and pose no threat
to society.

This is a truly global challenge that demands an
urgent and concerted multilateral response. Member
States need to enhance their cooperation and exchange
information, develop effective border controls and
strengthen their criminal justice systems, in accordance
with the rule of law and human rights standards.

Following the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014),
in September 2014, the Security Council issued
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/11 in May 2015,
which mandated the Office of Counter-Terrorism to
develop a capacity-building implementation plan for
countering the flow of foreign terrorist fighters. The
Security Council strongly recommended that we set out
a list of priorities of capacity-building and technical
assistance projects as part ofthat plan. Taking an all-of-
United Nations approach, we developed a comprehensive
capacity-building implementation plan for countering
the flow of foreign terrorist fighters by mobilizing and
coordinating the efforts of 38 United Nations entities,
including the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the ISIL/Al-Qaida Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team.

As the threat from foreign terrorist fighters has
evolved, the implementation plan has also evolved. The
plan now addresses the full cycle of foreign terrorist
fighters, including a number of projects related to
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration to support
Member States in their efforts to address the issue
of returnees. New projects that specifically address
women and children have also been added. The latest
version, based on the all-of-United Nations approach,
includes 50 capacity-building projects submitted
by 13 United Nations entities, with a total budget of
$107 million over five years.

The Office of Counter-Terrorism is collaborating
with INTERPOL to enhance Member State information-
sharing on foreign terrorist fighters and to build the
capacity of Member States to use their social media
engagements to gather vital information. The Office
has also worked closely with a range of United Nations
entities to deliver a project on advance passenger
information for 43 Member States that are most
affected by the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon.
Many of those Member States are now implementing
national advance passenger information systems that
are fully compatible with their border management
infrastructure as well as international standards
and obligations.

The Office of Counter-Terrorism is working with
the Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights to assist Member States in complying with
international rights standards in their border security
and management. The Office has also engaged with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate to
support Member States in the management of violent
extremist prisoners and the prevention of radicalization
in prisons. The Office will also shortly begin a project
to assist Member States in developing comprehensive
policies to support child returnees through a human-
rights-based and gender-sensitive approach. I want to
thank those Member States that have supported projects
and urge others to follow their lead.

In order start several projects under the plan,
the Office of Counter-Terrorism provided a total of
9 per cent of the funding for the implementation plan
through catalytic seed funding. However, together with
contributions from Member States - and this is very
important - the implementation plan is still only 41 per
cent funded. However, the list of projects is very long:
there are 50 projects. That means that many crucial and
urgent projects have not yet been implemented. There is
much more that the United Nations can and wants to do
to build the capacities of Member States to counter the
threat from foreign terrorist fighters.
Returning foreign terrorist fighters pose an
enormous challenge, with no easy solution. A tempting
response, and certainly the easiest one, would be to
throw all returnees into prison, or even do what can
be done to stop them coming home at all. But full
compliance with international law is vital to combat the
threat of foreign terrorist fighters. As the Secretary-
General said in his speech in London earlier this month:

"Terrorism is fundamentally the denial and
destruction of human rights, and the fight against
terrorism will never succeed by perpetuating the
same denial and destruction."

There are also obvious benefits to developing
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes, alongside
prosecution efforts, for returning foreign terrorist
fighters. Such programmes can be integrated at various
stages of the criminal justice process, thereby helping
to reduce prison-based recruitment and complement
comprehensive strategies to counter violent extremism
conducive to terrorism. Ultimately, addressing the
threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters requires
addressing the underlying conditions that are conducive
to young men and women being lured by violent
extremism. I therefore welcome the growing emphasis
by Member States on drivers of violent extremism
at the global, regional, national and local levels to
prevent radicalization.

We also need to ensure that our counter-terrorism
efforts are based on solid evidence and lessons learned
from around the world. That is why my Office published
a report in July entitled Enhancing the understanding
ofthe Foreign Terrorist Fighters Phenomenon in Syria,
which was based on interviews with 43 individuals in
detention between August 2015 and November 2016,
representing 12 nationalities. The report provides
Member States with a strong knowledge base from
which to understand the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters, assess the risks they pose and develop effective
responses. The report confirmed that there is no single
foreign terrorist fighter profile. Those interviewed
left their countries of residence for different reasons.
Unresolved conflicts that include intercommunal
violence was one of the strongest factors. A sense of
shared identify with - and a desire to help - those from
the same religion who were perceived as victimized was
also common. The foreign terrorist fighters interviewed
were motivated to leave the Syrian Arab Republic

either by their genuine disappointment in the terrorist
organization they joined, or were disillusioned by their
hosts' lack of welcome, be it the Syrian people or the
terrorist group itself. While social networks played a
key role in motivating individuals to go to the Syrian
Arab Republic, their influence on the decision to return
was less evident. Instead, it was the family network,
particularly mothers, that exerted the most influential
pressure on foreign terrorist fighters to return home.

With the support of United Nations entities,
Member States are increasingly strengthening their
legal frameworks and criminal justice systems and
enhancing their collaboration to prevent and respond
to the threat from foreign terrorist fighters. During his
recent speech in London, the Secretary-General listed
stronger international cooperation on counter-terrorism
as one of his key priorities. There is an urgent need
for Governments and security agencies to collaborate
far more effectively in fighting terrorism, while
respecting human rights. That is why the Secretary-
General will convene the first-ever United Nations
summit of heads of counter-terrorism agencies in June
2018. That will be an excellent opportunity to enhance
cooperation, exchange information and to develop new
and innovative ways to tackle terrorism and address the
threat of foreign terrorist fighters. The United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism stands ready to further
support Member States to protect its citizens against
this threat.

