Mr. Pleuger: Thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me the floor to report to the Security Council on
the trip of the Security Council to Afghanistan. A
written report will be distributed shortly.

The Security Council mission to Afghanistan,
which concluded last Friday, took place almost two
years after a United Nations-sponsored conference in
Bonn laid the foundations for the peaceful future of
Afghanistan. It came at a critical juncture in this
process, as it coincided with the release of the draft
constitution that represents one of the cornerstones of
the Bonn Agreement. The mission thus had an
opportunity to canvas first-hand opinions from Afghan
interlocutors on the ongoing constitutional process.

The primary purpose of the mission was to send a
signal to the Afghan people that Afghanistan remains
high on the agenda of the Security Council and that the
international community continues to support the peace
process in Afghanistan. Furthermore, the mission sent a
clear message to the local and provincial authorities
that it is imperative that they stop factional fighting,
participate in the Bonn process and cooperate with the
central Government.

Before entering into the details of the political
talks, I should like to highlight that the Security
Council mission was greatly welcomed and appreciated
by all Afghan interlocutors, in Kabul as well as in
Herat and Mazar-e-Sharif. Its members felt that, after
decades of war, Afghans are grateful for all assistance
from the international community in rebuilding their
country. The strong signal of support, which was the
stated purpose of the mission, was warmly welcomed
by the Afghans.

The members of the mission were greatly
impressed by the eagerness of the Afghans to stand
together, rebuild their country and improve their living
conditions. In particular and in contrast to other crisis
areas, there is, despite continuing ethnic divisions and
factional fighting, an Afghan national identity and
there do not appear to be any separatist tendencies in
Afghanistan. At the same time, in order to give a
complete picture, I must mention that the Afghan
interlocutors voiced increasing frustration about the
lack of a peace dividend and tangible benefits, in
particular in the provinces.

In the last two years, the Afghan Government,
with the support of the international community, has
made significant progress in implementing the Bonn
Agreement and in recovering from the devastation
caused by more than two decades of war. The mission
noted strides made in many areas, including the
successful launch of a new national currency, the
ongoing reconstruction of roads, the reopening of
schools, progress in the reform of the security sector,
the start of a national disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) campaign, preparations for the
constitutional Loya Jirga and the release of a draft
constitution during the presence of the mission in
Kabul. That overall progress is clearly visible in every
corner of Kabul: construction is under way everywhere,
the markets are filled with goods, school children can
be seen everywhere and, last but not least, the city is
jammed and, unfortunately, also polluted by heavy
traffic.

Notwithstanding those gains, major challenges lie
ahead, and much remains to be done if the peace
process is to become irreversible and security in
Afghanistan is to be realized. Insecurity caused by
terrorist activities, factional fighting and drug-related
crime remain the major concerns of Afghan society.
The south and south-east were singled out by all
interlocutors in that regard, where insecurity, including
attacks against non-governmental organizations, is
contributing to a slowing of reconstruction. That
insecurity and the attacks were highlighted again just
today by the reports of the very unfortunate attack on
the United Nations office in Kandahar. The threats
faced by those regions limit access by the Government
and development agencies. Such insecurity also poses a
direct challenge to the full implementation of the Bonn
Agreement, as it constricts the political space necessary
for national political processes and blocks access to
many areas, threatening to disenfranchise parts of the
population, notably in Pashtun-maj ority areas.

In too many areas of Afghanistan, individuals and
communities suffer from abuses of their basic rights by
local commanders and factional leaders. The mission

heard vehement complaints by women's organizations
and civil society groups regarding intimidation,
harassment and exclusion from social, economic and
political activities.

Judicial institutions remain weak, and the
narcotics economy is largely unchecked. In particular,
the narcotics economy, because of its rapid growth in
recent months, has the potential to dwarf the legal
economy and threaten the small gains in the field of
reconstruction and economic stabilization achieved to
date. If progress in the fight against narcotic drugs
cannot be achieved in the near future, the resulting
long-term costs of addressing the consequences of drug
trafficking and instability and of the terrorist networks
that capitalize on them could potentially be far greater.

Successfully addressing the aforementioned
challenges, in particular in the security sector, will
ultimately depend upon further expansion of the
authority of the central Government to ensure its
control of all armed forces and weapons as well as
national revenues, and the establishment of
representative and effective national institutions
responsible for ensuring justice and security. In that
regard, the recent expansion of the mandate of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) was
unanimously welcomed by the Afghans.

However, most Afghan interlocutors considered
the envisioned deployment of a German provincial
reconstruction team to Kunduz as not sufficient and
called for a deployment of ISAF contingents
throughout Afghanistan. They emphasized that strong
support by international forces is necessary to provide
an enabling environment for the Bonn process, to build
up the national army and police and to extend central
governmental authority to the provinces. This view is
also shared by Ambassador Brahimi. Lasting peace and
security in Afghanistan cannot be achieved by the
Afghan authority alone. It also depends upon the
international community's continued and coordinated
political and financial support for Afghanistan.

I should now like to elaborate on some key issues
in greater detail. The first and foremost issue in
Afghanistan is security. Throughout the visit, security
was at the centre of the mission's discussions with all
interlocutors. The mission clearly saw how the lack of
security - some called it "the rule of the gun" -
affected the entire Afghan peace process. According to
Afghan interlocutors, the three main sources of
insecurity are terrorism, factional fighting and drug
production and trafficking.

In the provinces of the south, south-east and east,
insecurity is greatly exacerbated by terrorist attacks
from suspected elements of the Taliban and Al Qaeda
and from supporters of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. Those
elements pose a significant threat to the newly
established national police force and to the Afghan
National Army, to Afghans supportive of the central
Government and also increasingly to the assistance
community. These threats have significantly slowed
reconstruction by limiting access by Government,
international humanitarian and development agencies.
This, in turn, increases the risk that the predominately
Pashtun population - already frustrated by its
relatively low representation in the Government - will
become marginalized. In that regard, the mission was
encouraged to learn about and welcomed plans by the
coalition forces to deploy pilot provincial
reconstruction teams in the south and south-east and to
consider pilot projects for regional development zones.

Long-term stability for Afghanistan cannot be
achieved without the cooperation of the neighbouring
States. Many of the Afghan interlocutors consistently
spoke of instability caused by Taliban and Al Qaeda
elements believed to be crossing the border into
Afghanistan. However, in briefings by the Foreign
Ministry in Islamabad, during a necessary stopover,
and by the Ambassador of Pakistan to Afghanistan,
they assured the mission that Pakistan is doing its
utmost to control its border with Afghanistan and
emphasized the need for further international assistance
in this regard.

In too many areas of the country, the arbitrary
control exercised by local commanders and factional
armies has resulted in heavy casualties. Last month, the
heaviest factional fighting since the signing of the
Bonn peace process took place in Mazar-i-Sharif. In
meetings with provincial officials and factional leaders
in Herat and Mazar-i-Sharif, the mission emphasized
the vital importance of cooperation between the
provinces and the central Government. It also
emphasized the need for the respect of human rights
and the creation of a civil society. In particular, in the
meeting with Atta Mohammad and Abdul Rashid
Dostum, the mission underlined in strong terms the
need to implement the reforms outlined for the north.
These reforms include, in particular, the integration of
the local forces into a national army, the
demilitarization of Mazar-i-Sharif and the appointment
of professionals to key positions in the local
administration.

Many interlocutors, including President Karzai
and Foreign Minister Abdullah, listed drug production
and trafficking as a major source of instability. They
claimed that drug production and trafficking feeds
terrorism, criminality and corruption. Ambassador
Brahimi stressed that the magnitude of the problem
could lead to Afghanistan becoming a narco-State. As
described by Finance Minister Ghani, the production of
opium is draining resources from Afghanistan, as it
results in larger defence, health and economic costs. He
urged the international community to provide
prosecutable evidence, which would contribute to the
isolation of the perpetrators. Senior officials of the
Afghan Government and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) emphasized the need for a
comprehensive programme of action to combat drug
production and trafficking. Furthermore, they
highlighted the need for increased cooperation from
neighbouring States in this regard. As drugs originating
in Afghanistan have a significant impact on end-user
markets, there is a need to strengthen drug control
efforts beyond Afghanistan, including along the
borders. The mission commended the initial efforts
undertaken by the Afghan Government, assisted by the
United Kingdom as the lead nation, in counter-
narcotics, and called for a sustained, coordinated and
comprehensive effort to combat drug production and
trafficking.

Regarding international assistance in the security
sector, the mission reiterated that, ultimately, the
Afghans themselves must assume responsibility.
However, until Afghan security institutions can be
developed there will be a continued need for
international forces. In that regard, all interlocutors
warmly welcomed Security Council resolution 1510
(2003) and requested international deployments
throughout Afghanistan.

The mission was impressed by the positive
contribution of ISAF to security in Kabul and by the
role of the United Kingdom provincial reconstruction
team in Mazar-i-Sharif. It looks forward to ISAF's
further contribution to the Bonn process, in particular
in support of the Constitutional Loya Jirga and the
electoral process.

Furthermore, the mission was briefed on
initiatives to accelerate security sector reform. Efforts
aimed at the development of the national police
received a significant boost with the recent provision of
additional assistance from the United States. These
initiatives are of particular importance in providing the
necessary environment in which the Constitutional
Loya Jirga and electoral processes can be successfully
conducted. In that context, the Minister of the Interior
highlighted the importance of providing regular
funding to the Law and Order Trust Fund, which is
used in particular for the salaries of police officers.

With the appointment of 22 new senior-level
officials, the first step in the reform of the Ministry of
Defence has been implemented. The Afghan
interlocutors and their international partners
underscored that, while much more is required to
transform the Ministry into a truly representative body,
that progress allowed the pilot phase of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration exercise
to commence in Kunduz. The mission invites the
Afghan Government to build on those initial measures
to complete the reform process and extend it to other
key institutions - starting with the Ministry of the
Interior and the intelligence services - to ensure that
they are both broadly representative and professional.

To date, the benchmarks of the Bonn peace
process have been attained, largely on schedule.
However, Afghanistan has now entered the most
critical phase in the peace process: the Constitutional
Loya Jirga and election processes. By their nature,
those processes bring to the forefront issues that divide
society. In Afghanistan, the conditions necessary for a
credible national political process are not yet in place:
national reconciliation requires greater focus; political
parties need time to develop; national institutions must
undergo reform; and the power of the factional leaders
must be diminished. Furthermore, some local
commanders continue to ignore the demands of the
central Government vis-a-vis appointments of
provincial officials and the remittance of customs
revenue.

The mission, following discussions with the head
of the Electoral Unit of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), is of the view that,
notwithstanding the substantial efforts of UNAMA and
the Afghan electoral authorities, the ability to
undertake registration is made precarious not only by
the lack of security, but also by the dearth of funding.
The mission noted that the draft constitution - which
was released during the mission's Visit - provides for
a transitional arrangement that allows a gap of up to 12
months between the convening of presidential elections
and that of parliamentary elections. That time gap was
particularly welcomed by Special Representative
Brahimi, who was of the View that holding
parliamentary elections too early could lead to a
consolidation of the present political situation in the
provinces. In that context, the mission underscored the
need to hold parliamentary elections as soon as
possible after the envisaged presidential elections.

The mission met with representatives of civil
society and of the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission in Kabul, Herat and Mazar-i-Sharif. Many
of the representatives described vividly the general
situation in their areas, which was characterized by
pervasive abuse of a broad range of human rights. In
response to those claims, the mission emphasized in all
talks with regional leaders the importance of a Vibrant
civil society and respect for human rights for the
stability of Afghanistan.

Representatives of non-governmental organizations
and civil society called for an end to impunity and for the
establishment of a mechanism for transitional justice
and the deployment of human rights monitors. They
stressed that it was unacceptable that perpetrators of
grave human rights violations in the past continued to
hold high public office. However, senior officials of the
Afghan Government and other interlocutors suggested
that, at present, Afghanistan was too weak to face the
challenges of the past and that the focus should rather
be on the establishment of good governance practices.

Furthermore, the mission had an opportunity to
exchange views with the Minister of Women's Affairs
and received briefings from civil society
representatives on gender issues. The rights of
women - particularly their active participation in the
social, political and economic spheres - continue to
be seriously hampered by culture, custom and the lack
of security. The mission was shocked to learn about the
frequent death threats against women's rights activists
and that the rate of suicide among women was very
high: in the past six months alone, there were more
than 40 cases, often as women were reacting in
desperation against forced marriages. Civil society
representatives underlined the need for women's issues
to receive serious and immediate attention. In
particular, they were concerned about the present draft
of the constitution, which in their View does not
provide sufficiently explicit guarantees for women's
rights.

As a concrete outcome of the mission, we
recommend the following. First, all factional forces
should be withdrawn from Kabul as a matter of
urgency and in accordance with Annex I of the Bonn
Agreement. Secondly, the international community
should urgently commit further funds to the Law and
Order Trust Fund and should enhance assistance
activities in the security sector. Thirdly, the Afghan
Transitional Administration should follow through and
extend to other key institutions the recent reform of the
Ministry of Defence. Fourthly, the mission supports the
Afghan President's wish to convene a follow-up
conference to the Bonn process early next year and
invites the Secretary-General to study the possibility of
such a conference in order to ensure the necessary
financial support and political momentum for peace
and stability in Afghanistan. Fifthly, the Afghan
Transitional Administration should initiate a process of
national reconciliation directed at all Afghans willing
to help rebuild the country, irrespective of past events,
in order to strengthen the central Government and the
basic institutions of the State. Furthermore, it should
ensure broad and universal participation in the peace
process, in particular with regard to the role of women.

In conclusion, I should like to thank the members
of the Afghan Transitional Administration and
UNAMA for their hospitality during the visit. I should
also like to thank UNAMA and the members of the
Secretariat for their valuable support in the
organization of the mission and to commend all
UNAMA staff for their dedicated work to the benefit of
Afghanistan in an extremely challenging and insecure
environment. And lastly but not least, I should like to
thank the members of the Security Council for their
cooperation and team spirit, which made it a pleasure
to chair this mission.

