The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Belize, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia,
Croatia, Cyprus, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
Morocco, Myanmar, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Peru, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
Rwanda, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, the Sudan, Switzerland,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime; Ms. Maria Grazia
Giammarinaro, United Nations Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children;
and His Excellency Mr. Smai'l Chergui, Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union.

Mr. Fedotov and Mr. Chergui are joining today's
meeting via Video-teleconference from Vienna and
Addis Ababa, respectively.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following individuals to participate in this meeting: Her
Excellency Ms. Joanne Adamson, Charge d'affaires a.i.
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations; Her Excellency Ms. Madina Jarbussynova,
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Representative and Coordinator for Combating
Trafficking in Human Beings; and Mr. Ashraf El Nour,
Director of the International Organization for Migration
Office to the United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/20l7/939, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on trafficking in persons
in armed conflict pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2331 (2016).

I also wish to draw the attention ofCouncil members
to document S/ZOl7/972, which contains the text of
a letter dated 17 November 2017 from the Permanent
Representative of Italy to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.

I warmly welcome the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, and give him floor.

