Ms. Mueller: I appreciate this opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the humanitarian situation
in Somalia.

The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains
among the most protracted crises in the world. Ongoing
armed conflict and violence, as well as recurrent
climatic shocks, continue to drive humanitarian
needs. Governance challenges and underdevelopment
compound fragility and make it difficult for
communities to develop robust coping mechanisms. The
2019 humanitarian response plan, launched in January,
identified 4.2 million Somalis - one third of the
population - as being in need of life-saving assistance
and protection. That shows a decline in needs from 2017,
when famine was averted, raising hope that resilience
activities led by the Government and development
partners could make further gains. However, current
humanitarian indicators across the country are showing
deterioration. I would like to highlight three key areas
of concern - first, the humanitarian impact of the
ongoing drought; secondly, the situation of internally
displaced persons; and, thirdly, protection.

On my first point, the humanitarian situation is
rapidly deteriorating due to severe drought conditions
that have spread from northern and central areas
throughout the country. Two consecutive rainy seasons
have failed, resulting in critical water shortages,
widespread crop failure and diminished conditions
for livestock. At this point in the season, any rainfall
that is received will be too little and too late to reverse
the impact of the drought.

Since February, acute food insecurity has already
increased by 10 per cent. The situation is expected
to worsen. By July, 5.4 million people - including
1 million children - will be unsure of where their
next meal is coming from. This projection was made
based on the forecast that Gu rains would rebound
in May and June. But the rains did not rebound, and
undoubtedly the number of people in need will continue
to rise. Severe acute malnutrition rates among children
are increasing rapidly, particularly among internally
displaced persons. With limited access to clean water,
there is a heightened risk of outbreaks of diseases.

We must act now to avert a major humanitarian
crisis. Humanitarian partners stand ready to deliver aid
to those most in need and are capable of rapidly scaling
up responses, as was proven during famine-prevention
efforts in 2017. But significant funding shortfalls are
constraining response and leading to a reduction in
assistance in critical areas, including health, nutrition,
food security, water, sanitation and hygiene. More
needs to be done.

To address needs arising from the drought, a
scale-up in key life-saving areas is needed. On 20 May,
the humanitarian country team for Somalia launched the
2019 drought response plan, which seeks $710 million
to respond to drought-induced needs between now
and December. The majority of programming in the
drought response plan is already included within the
annual humanitarian response plan. The priorities of
the humanitarian response plan are being reorganized
and revised to account for the additional resources
required to respond to the drought.

Donors have been contributing to the humanitarian
response plan, which is today 20 per cent funded. I
want to take this opportunity to thank donors for their
continued support. In April, the Central Emergency
Response Fund and the Somalia Humanitarian Fund
allocated almost $46 million towards the delivery of
aid and scaling up of activities in drought-impacted
areas in northern Somalia and towards the provision
of life-saving assistance and protection in the southern
and central regions of the country.

I believe I was invited to brief the Security Council
today to draw attention to the elevated risk of a major
humanitarian crisis unfolding on the horizon. The
immediate scaling up of the humanitarian response is
essential to mitigating the impact of the drought and
to preventing the further breaking up of communities

that continue to be fragile from the drought in 2017.
I encourage the international community to urgently
increase support for life-saving drought-response
efforts and to protect gains made in 2018. It is my hope
that immediate resources will be received to help us
prevent a dramatic crisis from escalating.

The repetitive nature of climatic shocks is a stark
reminder that Somalia is becoming increasingly
vulnerable to the effects of climate change. To address
the drivers of crisis in Somalia, greater investment is
needed to strengthen the nexus between humanitarian
action and development programming. We must focus
our efforts on urgent life-saving responses, but we
cannot lose sight of the fact that development efforts
are critical to reaching the goal of ultimately bringing
an end to the negative impact of these cycles.

Internal displacement is the second area of concern
that I would like to address. There are more than
2.6 million internally displaced persons in Somalia,
which ranks fourth in internal displacement globally.
Displacement continues to be driven by ongoing armed
conflict, climate shocks and the search for livelihood
opportunities. As the severity of humanitarian needs is
projected to worsen over the coming months, there will
be a higher risk of drought-induced displacement and
worsening protection challenges, particularly among
women and children, as people are forced to leave their
homes in search of aid and livelihood opportunities.

To minimize drought-related displacement, where
possible, systems and structures are already in place
to enable a rapid scale-up of response nearer to the
hardest-hit regions. Conflict-induced displacement may
also increase as a result of the drought because there
is greater potential for communal and clan conflicts to
arise over competition for scarce resources. Displaced
communities are among the most vulnerable. They
face multiple acute needs and are exposed to higher
protection risks. Family separations make displaced
women and girls especially vulnerable and exposed to
sexual and gender-based Violence.

Internally displaced persons are at increased risk
of being evicted by force from settlement areas by
landowners. In 2018, over 300,000 displaced people
were forcibly evicted, which is a 36 per cent increase
over the previous year. With the trends we have seen
so far this year, we expect the evictions to continue.
The forced evictions perpetuate cycles of displacement
and consistently undermine efforts toward self-reliance
and resilience.

As to my third and final point, I would like to
highlight the fact that the humanitarian situation
in Somalia is a protection crisis. For years, Somali
civilians have borne the brunt of ongoing armed conflict
and Violence that has continued to drive humanitarian
needs and perpetuate internal displacement. Civilians
are exposed to targeted assaults, assassinations
and indiscriminate attacks. In grave violations,
children continue to be killed and maimed. In 2018,
Somalia recorded the highest rate of forced child
recruitment globally.

There are increased protection risks in connection
with the ongoing security reforms and implementation
of the transition plan, including risks resulting from
changes to the strength and posture of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). Although the aim ofthe
transition plan is the transfer of security responsibilities
from AMISOM. to Somali authorities, the success of
the transition will depend on other important factors
as well. It is essential that the Government of Somalia
develop sufficient capacity to address the protection of
civilians, implement appropriate governance structures
and mechanisms, and strengthen civil authorities to
ensure the delivery of basic services to communities.

Somalia continues to be a challenging operational
environment for humanitarian organizations. Conflict,
insecurity, bureaucratic constraints and limited
logistic infrastructure hamper our ability to reach
those in need. Targeted violence against entities with
political, development and humanitarian mandates
have to stop. So far this year, 18 Violent incidents have
affected humanitarian organizations, resulting in three
deaths, two injuries and seven abductions. I encourage
the Government of Somalia, with the support of
international partners, to advance efforts that facilitate
unimpeded humanitarian access to those in need,
especially at this critical time.

Responding to the worsening humanitarian
situation with life-saving interventions and protection
remains a priority, but I must stress that the chronic
vulnerabilities that underpin the crisis in Somalia
cannot be addressed by the delivery of humanitarian aid.
Progress in State-building and security, as well as
greater investments in development initiatives aimed
at building resilience, are essential to ultimately lifting
Somalis out of need.

