Mrs. Mungwa: Allow me to join previous
speakers in commending you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important debate, as well as to convey
to you the apologies of my Ambassador. She is away
from New York today to attend meetings for the
upcoming Assembly of the African Union in Sirte,
Libya. We would also like to join previous speakers in
thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/277). We also thank Under-Secretary-General
Holmes for his introduction of the report this morning
and for all the efforts he is making in order to promote
the protection of civilians in situations of armed
conflict, which is a particularly relevant issue for
Africa.

The protection of civilians - in particular of
women, children, the elderly and persons with
disabilities - during a situation of conflict is a basic
foundation of African culture, which is also
synonymous with international humanitarian law.
Indeed, barely three years into its existence, the former
Organization of African Unity enacted the 1969
Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee
Problems in Africa. In the same vein, since its
inception in 2002, the African Union, in seeking to
foster the protection of civilians in situations of armed
conflict in the continent, has established major policy
frameworks and institutions.

Indeed, article 4(h) of the Constitutive Act of the
African Union further conveys a mandate on the Union
to intervene in a member State pursuant to a decision
of the Assembly in respect of grave circumstances -
namely, war crimes, genocide and crimes against
humanity - in order to protect civilians. Furthermore,
the provisions of institutions comprising the African
Peace and Security Architecture - notably the Peace
and Security Council, the African Stand-by Force, the
Panel of the Wise and the African Continental Early

Warning System - also include important elements
pertaining to the protection of civilians in situations of
armed conflict. The African Union's Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development framework further
sets out principles for comprehensive post-conflict
recovery, rehabilitation and reconciliation in three
phases and six major pillars.

The adoption of that legal framework
demonstrates the commitment of African States to fully
play their role in efforts to protect civilians in
situations of armed conflict. Various frameworks have
been established aimed at their implementation. We
continue to call on the Security Council to continue to
lend its support for the implementation of those
frameworks, which include, in particular, the office of
the special representative of the African Union for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, which
advocates with both State and non-State actors at the
highest level in respect of international humanitarian
law and the protection of civilians in situations of
armed conflict. African Union leaders also maintain a
vigorous system of special envoys and representatives
who work closely with member States to conduct early
preventive diplomacy and other good offices to help
prevent conflict and to de-escalate tensions, working
closely with other international partners.

Overall, following the efforts of the African
Union to promote peace and security and democratic
governance around the continent with the support of
the Security Council, we believe that there is renewed
confidence and hope among millions of civilians who
are affected by conflicts in Africa that those efforts will
significantly improve their situation as the Security
Council continues to focus on this particular issue.

The African Union is also pursuing other
activities and thematic questions that we believe will
contribute to the protection of civilians in situations of
armed conflict as well. Those include the whole
question of security-sector reform and the promotion of
a human security approach that also seeks to enhance
efforts aimed at addressing the root causes of conflict.

We are pleased with the emphasis that has been
placed on the protection of women and children in the
debate today, because that is also one area where the
African Union has placed special emphasis, as
demonstrated by the adoption of three major policy
instruments since 2002. They include the Protocol to
the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights on
the Rights of Women in Africa, the African Union
Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa and
the gender policy of the African Union, which was
recently adopted. Special emphasis has also been
placed on the protection of youth, who are often
vulnerable to non-State actors who perpetrate serious
attacks against civilians in situations of armed conflict.

Other components of the African Union are also
focusing on helping to understand attacks against
civilians in situations of armed conflict. In that regard,
the Pan-African Parliament and the Economic and
Social Council of the African Union are also working
with non-State actors to conduct fact-finding missions,
lend their support for an increased voice for women in
peace talks and provide technical support to various
peace-support initiatives of the African Union.

However, as has been mentioned by many
previous speakers in today's debate, despite the
progress achieved in establishing necessary
instruments - those I just described as well as those
that have been adopted by the Security Council -
there have certainly been serious gaps in
implementation in the field. Just to take one example,
for the past 10 years, during which the Security
Council has debated the protection of civilians in
situations of armed conflict, extensive violence and
death have been visited upon innocent civilians in
Somalia. We would therefore like to take this
opportunity to once again thank the Council and the
international community for the efforts deployed so far,
as well as to restate the appeal of the Transitional
Federal Government of Somalia, the African Union and
other international partners for the Security Council to
take necessary measures concerning the situation in
Somalia in particular. We also call on the Council to
lend its support to the efforts of the African Union as it
continues to try to prevent the escalation of the
situation in Somalia. We are grateful for the progress
that has been made in connection with the support
package approved by the Council for the African Union
Mission in Somalia.

The international community must also not lose
sight of the up to 20 million internally displaced people
in Africa, most of whom have been in that situation for
several years, or even decades in some situations. In
that connection, the African Union is also continuing to
do its part and is in the process of establishing a new
instrument devoted to addressing the question of
internally displaced persons in order to strengthen

applicable norms of international humanitarian law,
which have been the only recourse for internally
displaced persons around the continent.

The importance of prevention and early conflict-
resolution has also been emphasized and widely
supported in the debate today. We believe they form
the best strategy to avert the tragedies faced by
civilians in situations of armed conflict. The African
Union, working closely with the United Nations and
the international community, continues to initiate and
participate in diplomatic initiatives to avert the
outbreak of conflict.

The protection of civilians in situations of armed
conflict is clearly a complex process. That underscores
the need to forge partnerships involving all relevant
actors, including Governments, humanitarian
organizations, civil society, the military in certain
situations, the private sector, the donor community and
affected populations themselves. We believe that, for
this to be effective, this partnership should be designed
to support and complement national efforts and
initiatives, which are responsive and adapted to the
realities on the ground. Each actor should be engaged
based on what it can do best and focusing on its
comparative advantages in relation to the others.

We feel fortunate that this debate is taking place
at a time when the Security Council is discussing the
question of the mobilization of resources and the
support of peace support operations by regional
organizations such as the African Union. It is indeed
our sincere hope that this debate will strengthen the
resolve of the Security Council to enhance the
mandates and capabilities of peacekeeping operations,
in particular those that are related to the protection of
civilians, and to enhance support for the peace efforts
of regional organizations such as the African Union.

Finally, we also wish to reiterate the importance
of addressing the crucial question of the illegal
circulation of small arms and lights weapons, which
often fall into the hands of non-State actors, who use
them to perpetrate attacks against civilians in situations
of armed conflict.

With these few remarks, Sir, we thank you so
much for giving us the opportunity to participate in this
meeting, and we certainly look forward to working on
the implementation of the recommendations outlined in
the report of the Secretary-General.
