Mrs. Alhright (United States of America): Let me
begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and by
saying that we look forward to working with you
productively and closely.

I should also like to thank Ambassador Merimee of
France for the outstanding leadership he provided to us last
month.

The United States strongly supports Rwanda's efforts
to become a peaceful, just and open society. Rwanda's
tragic history cannot be undone, so our goal today is to
open a new chapter for this troubled land - a chapter in
which the Rwandan Government and the international
community work together to reconcile former combatants,
promote justice for the victims of genocide and set the
Rwandan people on a path to a better future.

Our joint effort to achieve these goals remains a work
in progress, one that can be accomplished only through
unique cooperation between the international community
and the Government of Rwanda. The United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) continues to
have a critical role to play in this effort. One of its main
functions will be to assist the Rwandan Government in its
daunting tasks of readying the country for the voluntary and
safe repatriation of refugees. The tens of thousands of
refugees and displaced persons represent not only a human
tragedy for those in the camps, but also contribute to the
tensions in the region.

We are all aware of reports that bases and camps
separate from those under the supervision of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, are
being used for military training, recruitment and incursions
into Rwanda. This is a danger that we must address. That
is why the resolution also asks the Secretary-General to
work with the Government of Rwanda and other
Governments in the region to investigate and curb the flow
of arms to those who seek to destabilize Rwanda.

My Government is particularly pleased that, under this
mandate, UNAMIR will contribute to the security of the
personnel of the International Tribunal. The Tribunal's
success is crucial for the future of Rwanda. Those who
planned and led the genocide in 1994 must be brought to
justice. Justice is an essential element of reconciliation; we
are all in full agreement with the Rwandan Government in
this regard. To carry out their duties, the investigators,
prosecutors and judges of the International Tribunal require
impartial international military protection. We express our
gratitude to the Special Representative, Ambassador
Khan, for his effective work and to the personnel of
UNAMIR for their tireless efforts.

My Government also believes that UNAMIR can
address only part of the challenge that faces Rwanda. We
are acutely aware that development assistance is required
to achieve stability. As the Ambassador of Rwanda has
stated, doctors, agronomists and development experts
must work alongside the peace-keepers to achieve our
shared goals for Rwanda.

Finally, as a member of the Security Council,
Rwanda has an important responsibility to promote the
inviolability of international law around the world. We
welcome the Government of Rwanda's cooperation and
expect it to meet its obligations under this mandate as we
work together towards building peace and stability for all
the people of the region.

