Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Russia is deeply concerned over the scope and
serious consequences of the continuing humanitarian crisis
in Iraq. From the Secretary-General's report submitted to
the Security Council, we see clearly that during the
course of the implementation of the three stages of
humanitarian resolution 986 (1995) we were not able to
achieve a breakthrough in the situation and fundamentally
improve the impoverished situation of the Iraqi
population.

Therefore, the Secretary-General quite rightly
proposes a comprehensive approach to the resolution of
the problem of food supplies and health care, providing
for parallel measures in the areas of energy supply, water
supply and agriculture, without which the real value of
humanitarian supplies would be significantly diminished
and in some cases would be reduced to nothing.

Today we will be adopting a draft resolution to
increase revenues in order to satisfy Iraq's priority
humanitarian requirements through an increase in the
level of oil exports for this purpose to $5.256 billion. But
there is much more to this task. The United Nations
Secretariat must in the shortest possible time-frame work
out with the Iraqi side a distribution plan for optimum use
of the additional funds.

The Iraqi oil infrastructure, in its current state, is
hardly able to extract oil for export at the required levels
for humanitarian purposes. Repairs are needed for worn-
out equipment, which can be accomplished through
supplying the relevant spare parts and materials. Needless
to say, the financing of such a project requires additional
quotas for oil exports, which must be agreed upon by the
Secretariat and the Iraqi side. We expect the urgent
preparation of additional recommendations by the
Secretary-General on the restoration of the oil
infrastructure, as provided for in the draft resolution.

On the whole, the draft resolution meets the aim of
relieving the suffering of the Iraqi population, and we
support the consensus that has come about in the Council.
During the course of the work on the draft resolution, the
sponsors took into account many of the concerns of a
number of delegations, including our own. However,
some of the provisions could have been further improved.
So, in our view, there is no need to emphasize the priority
nature of various sectors; the optimum interrelationships
of various categories of humanitarian products should be
defined in the course of agreeing upon and approving the
distribution plan submitted by Iraq.

 

We also proceed from the understanding that the
establishment of a distribution plan in the draft resolution
does not mean that that plan cannot be changed. At each
new stage this plan must be fully thrashed out with Iraq
and submitted to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations for approval, as is emphasized in the preamble of
the resolution. There are other aspects, which evidently will
have to be ironed out in the process of the implementation
of the resolution within the framework of the Sanctions
Committee. All members of that Committee must recognize
their responsibility for achieving radical changes in the
humanitarian situation in Iraq.

In conclusion we would like to pay due tribute to the
United Nations humanitarian programme staff in Iraq, who,
under challenging circumstances, are performing an
important and noble task. We noted with satisfaction the
clarification provided by the Secretariat that all the
necessary staff will remain in Iraq and continue to carry out
the humanitarian programmes.

