Mr. Barkin (United States of America): While
the Sudan and South Sudan have important political
transitions of their own to navigate, the situation in
Abyei and along the border between the two countries
must not be forgotten. With that in mind, the United
States thanks Council members for their efforts to
ensure that the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA) can provide security in the Abyei
Area and support the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism.

A special word of thanks is due to Ethiopia for its
troop contributions to UNISFA. Without Ethiopia's
efforts in Abyei, it would not be possible to maintain a
stable security situation.

Creating temporary security and administrative
arrangements for Abyei, resolving its final status and
reaching agreements on border disputes is critical to
supporting long-term peace efforts in both South Sudan
and the Sudan. But more than that, the people of Abyei
deserve to live in peace, without fear of attacks like the
one that killed nine civilians in early November. The
United States condemns this unacceptable violence.
It is a sobering reminder of UNISFA's critical role in
protecting civilians and stabilizing the Area.

With this renewed mandate, the Security Council
reiterates its position that UNISFA is best equipped to
ensure security for Abyei through the deployment of
police forces, a strengthened civilian component and
the easing of logistical constraints on the mission by
both South Sudan and the Sudan. We also encourage
the African Union to revive its mediation efforts,
which will help accelerate the resolution of outstanding
political issues. We commit to working closely with
the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to
implement the renewed mandate, and we call for their
cooperation as we support their negotiations on issues
related to Abyei and the border.

Finally, we call on Security Council members to
increase bilateral efforts encouraging South Sudan, the
Sudan and the African Union to maintain momentum on
Abyei as well as to revolve outstanding border issues. In
doing so, the Council can demonstrate its commitment
to the region and, most important, to the people living
in and migrating through Abyei in the hope that they
may find peace, security and dignity.

