Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to express our
gratitude to you, Madam President, for being here
today to preside personally over this important debate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing, as well as to commend Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
and the Executive Director of UNICEF for their efforts
to protect children, both in situations of armed conflict
and elsewhere.

The report (S/2009/158) of the Secretary-General
before us focuses on the progress made in the
implementation of resolution 1612 (2005) and its
monitoring and reporting mechanism, as well as on the
recruitment and use of children by parties to conflict in
a number of countries. However, there is still much
that the international community must do to implement
that resolution.

We would like to emphasize that the recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict are still taking
place. Children are forced to participate in combat and
the killing of people. They are often more subjected to
abduction and sexual violence.

Libya expresses its concern and condemnation of
the crimes committed against children involved in
armed conflict. In that regard, we support the appeal of
the Secretary-General to Member States to take
stringent measures, within the framework of their
national legislation and in accordance with
international humanitarian law, to hold the perpetrators
of those crimes accountable and to impose the harshest
penalties in order to eliminate impunity. By the same
token, Libya shares the view that the protection of
children in armed conflict should be considered an
important facet of the strategy to prevent and resolve
armed conflict.

Children continue to be the main victims of grave
violations of human rights in conflicts throughout the
world. The report of the Secretary-General bears sad
testimony to that fact. My delegation shares the View
of the Secretary-General that the detention of children
in various conflict areas, based on their alleged
association with armed groups, constitutes an express
violation of human rights standards.

In particular, my delegation wishes to focus on
the abuse, torture and coercive interrogation of
Palestinian children in Israeli prisons. Here, we would
like to strongly condemn the Israeli military operations
that have recently led to the killing and displacement
of thousands of Palestinian children, caused by the
demolition of their homes and the killing of their
families. In addition, thousands of children suffer daily
while going to school because of the racist separation
wall erected on Palestinian land and the hundreds of
checkpoints that separate Palestinian villages. The
unique nature, duration and extent of their suffering, as
well as its continuation, constitute an established
policy pursued by the occupier, and affect tens of
thousands of children. These practices and policies
should be prosecuted.

The actions undertaken by the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict in
attempting to protect children and remove them from
hotbeds of tension and conflict deserve our
appreciation. However, my delegation appeals to the
Working Group to avoid selectivity and double
standards in the course of formulating its
recommendations and its actions as those should not be
politicized.

Given the regional dimension of some conflicts,
my country appreciates the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that United Nations country teams,
political missions and peacekeeping missions allocate
necessary resources to mechanisms for information
exchange and cooperation on cross-border child
protection concerns such as recruitment, release and
reintegration of children.

The state of abject poverty and degradation of an
area, the widening of an area of conflict, the absence of
development, the inability to obtain basic services and
lack of social and economic opportunity are all factors
that increase the risk of child recruitment and underline
the necessity of far-reaching development and recovery
programmes aligned with disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration guidelines and programmes. Such
programmes must be based on the needs of local civil
society with a view to achieving the successful and
sustainable reintegration of former child soldiers into
society.

Libya calls on international institutions and
donors to help implement those programmes and hopes
that the appeal launched by the Secretary-General will
receive a positive response from the international
community, including the World Bank and other
influential actors. They must set aside long-term
resources for use by United Nations agencies,
non-governmental organizations, national
organizations and civil society to promote child
protection activities.

It must not be forgotten that the best way to
protect children in armed conflict is to prevent the
outbreak of such conflicts by addressing the
motivations and root causes of conflicts.

