Mr. Pleuger (Germany): My delegation would
like to welcome your presence in the Chair,
Mr. President. We pledge to you our full support during
the month of December. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Danforth for the able manner in which
conducted the business of the Council last month.

The resolution we have just adopted does not
only extend the mandate of the United Nations
Operation in Burundi (ONUB) for another six months;
it also contains important messages to the Burundian
parties, most prominently to Mr. Agathon Rwasa's
Forces de liberation (Palipehutu-FNL). The resolution
is the first reaction of the Council to the joint report by
ONUB, the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) regarding the Gatumba massacre
of 13 August 2004. Unfortunately, the Gatumba
massacre is not the only case of atrocities committed
during the more-than-a-decade-long conflict in
Burundi. Burundi's recent history is also a history of
widespread human rights violations, as well as one of
impunity. To achieve peace, that cycle has to be
broken.

The fight against impunity for grave Violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law is a
matter of the utmost concern, and it needs to be
addressed as a matter of priority by Burundi and other
States in the Great Lakes region. The Burundian justice
system therefore desperately needs our political and
material support. The fight against impunity in Burundi
and in other States with scarce capacity in the
administration of justice can be won only with
international support. We welcome the intention of the
Government of Burundi, expressed in its statement
dated 29 October 2004 (S/2004/867), to refer the
matter of the Gatumba massacre to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) following its own internal
investigations. One of the recommendations of the
United Nations report on Gatumba, to which I have
referred, is indeed to encourage the Government of
Burundi to invoke the Court's jurisdiction.

We particularly welcome the support of the
Security Council, as expressed in the resolution, for the
efforts being made by States to end impunity. In
addition to national efforts, that includes the efforts
being made by States in cooperation with international
institutions and tribunals, notably the International
Criminal Court. We know that there are different Views
within the Council with regard to the ICC. We do not
seek to impose our Views on others. But the
Government of Burundi is making a significant effort
to investigate the massacre in the Gatumba refugee
camp, including through its decision to refer the case to
the ICC. It is right that the Council should encourage
all regional Governments and parties concerned to
actively cooperate with those efforts.

