Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Wejoin others in welcoming
Her Excellency Ms. Federica Mogherini for today's
annual briefing on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the European Union
(EU). We thank the High Representative for her remarks
on the EU's foreign policy priorities and its perspectives
on some of the most pressing issues of peace and
security to both the United Nations and the European
Union. It is indeed symbolic that we are discussing
the United Nations-EU partnership on Europe Day,
and I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate our
European friends on the sixtieth anniversary of the EU.

We are also holding this meeting at a time when the
world is facing unprecedented challenges and threats
to peace, security and prosperity. Europe is certainly
not immune to those challenges. It is in fact going
through difficult times, as the EU Global Strategy for
Foreign and Security Policy has acknowledged. We
understand that there are no easy solutions to some of
those challenges and, in a much more interconnected
and interdependent world, Europe cannot find solutions
to these difficult and complex challenges alone. That is
why reaffirming the multilateral approach, investing in
a stronger United Nations and enhancing cooperation
and partnership with other regional organizations is a
sensible and logical thing to do, as outlined in the EU
Global Strategy.

It is indeed music to our ears to hear the High
Representative stress that the EU vision is the United
Nations vision. This is a time when that kind of
commitment can serve as an example to all. A peaceful
and harmonious Europe would be an important pillar
for global peace at a time when there is more confusion
than clarity at the global level. The European Union
remains one of the most indispensable multilateral
organizations, with a crucial role to play at a time of
great uncertainty and a great deficit in trust, including
in institutions that have endured for a long time.
The United Nations-EU partnership is one of the
most important global regional partnerships for the
promotion and maintenance of international peace and
security, which we need to foster now with even more
and deeper commitment.

The significance of this partnership has indeed
been reinforced in the light of the new challenges that
we referred to earlier. In that regard, we appreciate the
growing cooperation between the United Nations and
the European Union, which encompasses a wide range
of issues across the peace, security and development
agendas. That includes, inter alia, preventive diplomacy
and mediation, peacekeeping, the fight against

terrorism and violent extremism, combating human
trafficking and other transnational organized crimes,
the global response to humanitarian crises, tackling
the issue of large movements of refugees and migrants,
addressing the impact of climate change and promoting
sustainable development.

For us in Africa, Europe is not only a neighbouring
continent but also an important partner - a vital
partner - for addressing the many peace, security
and development challenges we face. We in the Horn
of Africa are extremely mindful of this fact. We are
particularly grateful for what the EU has done in
Somalia for so long, but quietly and with great effect.
We therefore hope that Europe will continue to remain
true to the spirit of the strategic partnership that has
been forged with Africa in tackling issues of mutual
concern as well as in ensuring collective peace, security
and prosperity.
That is why we welcome the EU's renewed
commitment to investing in African peace and
development as an investment in its own security and
prosperity. Indeed, EU support for the promotion and
maintenance of peace and security on our continent,
inter alia, through its African Peace Facility, which is
providing substantial amounts of funding to African
Union-led peace support operations, has been quite
significant. Its intention to make an initial contribution
to the African Union Peace Fund once its governance
structures are put in place, with a view to encouraging
international support for the African Union's requests
for assistance for its peace support operations from
United Nations assessed contributions, is also very
much welcomed.

Finally, in the light of the upcoming EU-Africa
Summit, due to be held in Cote d'Ivoire later this year,
we hope the strategic partnership between Africa and
Europe will be further strengthened. We take note
of the EU's revitalized framework for joint action in
that regard.

In conclusion, we cannot overemphasize the
significance of forging even stronger multilateral
cooperation in partnership between the African
Union, the United Nations, the European Union and
other relevant regional and international partners for
sustainable peace, security and development in Africa.

