Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of the Minister of Justice of Serbia, Ms. Nela
Kuburovie, and share the serious concerns she has
expressed with regard to the state of affairs in Kosovo.
We are also grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir Tanin, and his
team for their work, and we thank Mr. Tanin for his
objective briefing on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). It shows
that there ongoing serious, profound problems in the
province that require immediate solution, as well as
outside monitoring.

Indeed, the scope of ongoing challenges in the
province is not decreasing but assuming new forms. As
a result, the goal of creating a multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo is further away than ever. The problem lies in
the obvious lack of desire on the part of the Kosovo
authorities to fulfil the obligations undertaken within
the framework of the dialogue with Belgrade. This
is taking place against the background of the blatant
condoning of the situation by outside actors.

The Brussels mediation process is biased in allowing
the Kosovo-Albanians to behave in such a manner. As
a result, the relationship between Belgrade and Pristina
is deteriorating and trust is losing ground. The dialogue
has faced an impasse for many months. There has
been no major breakthrough on the main track of the
negotiations - the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities - despite
the fact that an agreement was drafted more than four
years ago.

We consider it unacceptable and destructive to
attempt to impose a self-governing system on the Serbs
that would reduce their own powers to an absolute
minimum. It is obvious that the genuine goal of such
dead-end initiatives is to blame the Serbs for the
dialogue's impasse, whereas in fact the situation is
exactly the reverse. The lack of pressure from Brussels
means that Kosovo's political leaders feel that they
can do anything. They no longer refrain from using
the language of open provocation. Very recently,
Mr. Thaci threatened to resign from the post of the
so-called President if his initiative to transform the
Kosovo Security Force into a fully-fledged army is
not implemented. At the same time, we are convinced
that the implementation of his proposal would have
been a very serious violation of international law,
particularly resolution 1244 (1999) and inevitably led
to further destabilization in the region and even greater
conflict potential.

Of course exerting relevant pressure on Pristina
must continue. At the same time, the Kosovo Assembly
has adopted a resolution to suspend the dialogue until
such a time when France releases someone who is
suspected of very serious crimes, namely, the Kosovo
Liberation Army fighter Ramush Haradinaj. Moreover,
his brother, who is a representative in the Assembly,
has threatened ethnic cleansing and issued ultimatums.
On 27 April, a French court made an illegitimate and
politicized decision to release Mr. Haradinaj, who was
apprehended in January by INTERPOL at the request
of Serbia. That demonstrates the double standards used
in the case of the parties to the Yugoslavian conflict.
Once again, we underscore that those who are guilty
of carrying out war crimes, regardless of their actual
status or position, must be punished.

We are also not surprised by the fact that the
investigation of the crimes committed by the Kosovo
Liberation Army has been postponed. Allow me
to recall that Mr. Marty briefed the Council of
Europe Parliamentary Assembly on the crimes he
had investigated, including the trafficking of human
organs, more than six years ago. We hope in the very
near future to see the initial results of the Specialist
Chambers in The Hague and that that body will lack
the flaws of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). It is important to ensure that such
actions be as transparent as possible.
The European Union, through the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), which plays
a key role in organizing the workings of the Specialist
Chambers, must ensure an unbiased and professional
approach, which the ICTY was lacking at the time.
Mr. Haradinaj was acquitted twice. Moreover, dozens
of witnesses in his case were threatened and attacked.
This problem becomes all the more evident against
the background of the ongoing deterioration we have
observed in the region due to provocations made in
the name of greater Albania, which is a threat to the
security and territorial integrity ofa number of States.

Let us try to understand the regional scope of this

issue. In Kosovo, Mr. Thaci stated in an ultimatum
that all Albanians will live in the same State unless the
European Union fulfils his expectations for integration.
A similar sentiment has being expressed by the Prime
Minister of Albania, Mr. Rama. In Macedonia,
Albanians are gathering around the infamous Tirana
platform, and similar signals are being conveyed by
Albanian leaders living in the south of Serbia.

Against this background, let me be candid.
We are aware that the former head of the Kosovo
Verification Mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, Mr. Walker, distinguished
himselfby speaking in favour of the project ofbringing
together the Albanians in Albania, Kosovo and the
diaspora and calling upon Albanians to take the final
step towards this goal. We call on the European Union
and Western capitals to undertake measures as soon as
possible to stop these provocative statements, which
must be replaced by expressions of a desire to live as
good neighbours with mutual respect.

Another example of the weakness of the provincial
governmental institutions include the political crisis
in Kosovo, whose outcome we can easily predict.
Moreover, the freedom of movement agreed by Belgrade
and Pristina was undermined by the actions of Kosovo
law-enforcement bodies in preventing supporters of
Mr. Vucie's Serbian Progressive Party from attending
an electoral rally in the municipality of Leposavie,
thereby violating principles that seemed inviolable in
Europe, such as the freedom of speech, movement,
peaceful assembly and participation in elections.
Similarly, there was an incident on 9 May when the
head of the Serbian Government Office for Kosovo and
Metohija, Mr. Djurie, was barred without explanation
from going to a Victory Day meeting in Gracanica.

Pristina's acts aimed at appropriating Serbian
State property are unacceptable. Equally unacceptable
is the Kosovo Government's decision to transfer all
community-owned enterprises to State ownership.

We continue to witness ongoing physical attacks
on Serbs. We see their property burned down. We
see refugees and internally displaced people thwarted
in their attempts to return home, not to mention the
desecration of property belonging to the Serbian
Orthodox Church, in particular the land of the Visoki
Decani Orthodox Monastery, despite the fact that its
rights had been upheld by the Constitutional Court in
Kosovo. The cathedral church of Christ the Saviour in
Pristina is in a deplorable state. The Serbian Orthodox
Church has been unable to gain access to its religious
objects there, which is necessary for their restoration
after attacks by vandals.

The need to combat the spread of radicalism and
terrorism in Kosovo is increasingly pressing. We are
concerned by the fact that the province is being used
to recruit foreign terrorist fighters who fight alongside
extremists in the Middle East and to prepare terrorist
acts elsewhere in the world. Under these circumstances,
we think it untimely and counterproductive to plan to
reduce the UNMIK staff and the budget parameters.
The situation in the province means that decisions such
as these are inappropriate, especially in the absence of
real dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. Therefore,
we need to set aside any request to downsize the Mission
or even to close it all together.

Instead, we need to undertake constructive work
and interaction with that important United Nations
operation. I would like to remind the Council that
UNMIK is working despite having minimal resources
at its disposal. Even so, it is playing a key role in Kosovo
affairs and remains an irreplaceable international
monitoring tool designed to help normalize the situation
in Kosovo, pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999), which
remains fully valid.

In the light of the foregoing, we see no reason to
review the practice of having quarterly Security Council
briefings on the situation in Kosovo, which, as we have
seen during the discussions today, continues to require
very close international attention and monitoring.

