Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): Mr. President, I wish to begin by thanking you
for having convened this open debate on the situation
in Afghanistan, in which not only the Afghan people
and the countries neighbouring Afghanistan, but also
the whole international community, have an enormous
stake. I wish also to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive and valuable report on recent
developments in Afghanistan.

My Government, which has great interest in the
timely and full implementation of the Bonn Agreement,
followed closely the successful convening of the
Emergency Loya Jirga in Kabul from 11 to 19 June
2002. Despite the enormity of the task, we are pleased
that the Afghan people - ably led by the Afghan
Interim Administration and benefiting from assistance
provided by Afghanistan's neighbours and the
international community - were able to bring the
process to a successful conclusion.

We believe that the transfer of power from the
Interim Administration to the Islamic Transitional
Authority constitutes an important step in
implementing the Bonn Agreement, and we hope that
the other steps ahead will be taken without difficulty.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
skilfully led by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, played an
important role in terms of making the necessary
preparations and a crucial role in ensuring coordination
at the local and international levels. I would like to
thank him and his colleagues for the steadfast and
relentless efforts they have made thus far and
congratulate them on the success thus far achieved.

However, we believe that there is no room for
complacency. The Afghan people and their
Government are still facing a host of problems that, if
unchecked, could disrupt the steadfast and smooth
return of the country to peace and stability.
Security remains a cause for concern. There are
reports indicating that elements of Al Qaeda and the
Taliban are regrouping and presenting growing threats
to security in southern and eastern Afghanistan.
Terrorist acts such as the one that, regrettably, resulted
in the murder of Vice-President Haji Abdul Qadir may
further erode the nascent security in the country. In the
meantime, I would like to caution, as we did in the last
debate in the Council, that careless military operations
in which Afghan innocent people are killed could add
to the sense of instability and bring about unwanted
results.

Moreover, we are concerned over insecurity in
northern Afghanistan, which results mainly from
rivalry among local commanders, as well as over
reports pointing to attacks on minorities and aid
workers in the north. In this respect, we are using our
good offices to work with the parties in the region to
help resolve the problems.

While we agree that appropriate international
security assistance on the ground helps maintain peace
in Afghanistan, we believe that the creation of an
indigenous Afghan security sector should be expedited
by the Afghans and the international community. The
Iranian Government has joined in the process and has
undertaken, among other things, to train and equip 400
Afghan police officers.

We have thus far fully cooperated with the United
Nations in Afghanistan with a view to promoting peace
and security in that country, and we reiterate our
readiness earnestly to continue our cooperation in this
crucial field.

Drug trafficking in Afghanistan is also a security-
related issue. It runs counter to the restoration of
stability in that country and threatens neighbouring
countries. We commend the determination to eliminate
poppy crops shown by the Afghan Interim
Administration and by those foreign countries that are
assisting it in this respect. We encourage the
Transitional Authority and the international community
to plan ahead for crop substitution projects for the
upcoming cultivating season.

The early commencement of Afghanistan's
reconstruction and its steady progress could have an
important impact on the security situation in various
parts of the country. We believe that the successful
transfer of power to the Afghan Transitional Authority
should further enable members of the international
community to expedite the fulfilment of pledges they
have undertaken.
My Government, determined to participate in the
reconstruction drive, has already started a number of
projects, including the construction of a road from the
Iranian border to Herat, which is important given the
land-locked status of Afghanistan. Legislative and
administrative work is also under way to fund a
number of other reconstruction projects in Afghanistan,
in keeping with the pledge my country made at the
Tokyo Conference. We hope that the cultural, historical
and linguistic affinities between Iran and Afghanistan
will enable us effectively to contribute to the
reconstruction of Afghanistan. We hope that the
successful rebuilding of that country will reinforce
peace and help alleviate the refugee crisis and drug
trafficking in the region.

The dramatic slowdown in resource flows for
humanitarian and recovery activities, which the
Secretary-General refers to in his latest report, is a
serious cause for concern. The failure of the
international community to address the most urgent
needs of Afghanistan could adversely affect the
security situation. There is no doubt, either, that the
lack of funding available to the Government impairs its
ability to extend its presence beyond Kabul. As I said
earlier, the whole international community has an
important stake in the restoration of peace and security
in Afghanistan, and if it fails to shoulder its
responsibility, the hard-won achievements of the past
eight months could be endangered.

