Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like to
congratulate you, Madam President, on your accession
to the presidency of the Council, and I wish you and
your entire team every success in your endeavours. I
would also like to pay tribute to Mrs. Joy ngu and her
team for Nigeria's excellent stewardship of the Council
last month. I would also like to thank Mr. Feltman for
his briefing.

Despite repeated calls for restraint and for calm,
Chad notes with great concern that the situation in
eastern Ukraine continues to deteriorate politically and
in terms of security and runs the risk of degenerating
into a war with incalculable consequences. A number
of missions, attempts at arbitration, mediation and
other efforts have been undertaken to contribute to
de-escalating the situation and to opening the way to
dialogue. The results, however, have fallen far short of
expectations.

Chad condemns the most recent acts of violence in
eastern Ukraine, which have led to a number of deaths
and significant material damage. Given the grave
situation, Chad reiterates its call for an immediate halt
to the fighting and for adherence to non-violence, both
by Government forces and the separatists. We also
launch an appeal for the release of the seven observers
from the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe still being held in detention. We remain
convinced that a solution to the Ukrainian problem is
necessarily a political. It must be sought in full respect
for the territorial integrity, sovereignty and unity of
Ukraine and in keeping with the Charter of the United
Nations.

Chad also reiterates its call for calm, restraint and a
de-escalation of the situation. We call on the countries
with influence on the parties to use all means possible to
establish direct dialogue between the parties. With that
in mind, we encourage the international community,
especially the Secretary-General, to redouble efforts
to bring about a rapprochement between the parties in
order to find a peaceful solution to the Ukrainian crisis.

