Mr. Oshima: A number of practical questions
have been raised. First, I welcome the interest shown
by many members of the Council in the possibility of
our providing an interim report before the submission
of the final report, which is expected in November next
year. We would of course be prepared to submit at an
appropriate time an interim report which would
summerize all the progress that has been made so that
the members of the Council could consider it and make
any suggestions to the Secretariat that they might wish
to make so that we could perhaps have a better, more
complete and more satisfactory report in November
next year. That is something that we would be prepared
to consider favourably, and we of course also look to
the President of the Council for guidance in this regard.

On the question of whether we would want to
involve the Department of Political Affairs, together
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, of
course we would be prepared to do so; nothing really
prohibits us from doing that. The Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has no
reservations whatsoever about engaging other
departments of the Secretariat.

I mentioned the interface between OCHA and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations because there
was a specific reference to it in the letter from the
President of the Council to the Secretary-General. That
is the only reason we made specific reference to the
interface between OCHA and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. As a matter of fact, as the
members of the Council are aware, with regard to
Afghanistan we have established within the Secretariat
an Integrated Mission Task Force to address all issues
that are of policy importance within that newly
established framework so as to ensure a coherent
response to the problems in Afghanistan. I do not see
why a similar wide-ranging exercise should not be
undertaken with respect to the issue under
consideration.

Regarding the involvement of other parties, we
would, of course, be open to - indeed, we would
welcome - the participation of as many interested
parties as possible, including members of the Council,
and possibly some regional organizations, in
workshops and other similar exercises. We would
welcome that very much. As I said, we would like to
make sure that invitations are extended to all parties in
our future plans in this regard. As to whether a written
report is available concerning the discussions which
took place in the workshops that have so far been held,
I would like to make sure that such a report is made
available to all those who might be interested in it.
Concerning the possibility of benchmarking to
indicate progress made with respect to some of the
recommendations, I think there is a possibility of
including some form of benchmarking, either in the
aide memoire, in the process or elsewhere. Of course, it
all depends on the issues. Some issues lend themselves
easily to some form of benchmarking; others do not.
But we take note of this very interesting suggestion,
and we will see what can be done with respect to this
particular concern.

A specific issue was raised concerning the United
Nations High-Readiness Brigade. That is a specific
mechanism that was put in place in response to the
Secretary-General's call for a rapid deployment force,
as mentioned by the Ambassador of Mauritius.
Currently, it comprises units from several countries -
units trained to the standards for deployment in
operations under Chapter VI of the Charter. Whether or
not this so-called High-Readiness Brigade has, in fact,
been deployed, I myself am not certain at this stage.
But to my knowledge - I may be incorrect about
this - the brigade as such has not been deployed with
respect to any specific situations.

