Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: I am honoured to brief the
Security Council on the activities of the International
Criminal Court following the adoption of resolution
1593 (2005).

As the Council will recall, in our first case, we
investigated attacks by the forces of the Government of
the Sudan against the civilian population during the
period from 2003 to 2005. The evidence showed that
the Sudanese Armed Forces would bomb villages in
Darfur and surround them, and then ground troops
would move in to kill, rape and pillage civilians in
their homes. Those attacks forced the displacement of
4 million civilians to a hostile environment. The
evidence showed the role of the then Minister of State
for the Interior, Ahmad Harun, as the coordinator of the
Government of the Sudan forces and of
militia/Janjaweed leader Ali Kushayb as the ground
commander of some of the attacks.

On 27 April 2007, Pre-Trial Chamber I issued
arrest warrants against both individuals for war crimes
and crimes against humanity. The Chamber found that
the crimes were the consequence of a coordinated
effort supervised by a clear chain of command. The
Pre-Trial Chamber ruled that local security committees
had coordinated those attacks. They were supervised
2
by State security committees, which reported to
Mr. Harun, acting at the Darfur security desk.

A few days ago, the Office requested an
additional warrant of arrest for then Minister of the
Interior Abdelrahim Mohamed Hussein, who is
currently Minister of Defence. We are charging him
with the same crimes charged in the case Prosecutor
vs. Harun and Knshayb, thus expanding the number of
suspects in the first case.

The evidence shows that Mr. Hussein was also
involved in the crimes committed by his subordinate
Harun. Between 2003 and 2005, Mr. Hussein was the
Minister of the Interior and Special Representative of
the President in Darfur, with all of the powers and
responsibilities of the President. Mr. Hussein delegated
some of his responsibilities to his deputy, Mr. Harun,
but the evidence shows that, directly and through
Mr. Harun, Mr. Hussein played a central role in
coordinating the crimes, including in recruiting,
mobilizing, funding, arming, training and deploying
the militia/Janjaweed as part of the Government of the
Sudan forces, with the knowledge that these forces
would commit crimes.

In the second case, the Office identified the
responsibility of the President of the Sudan,
Mr. Al-Bashir. He launched attacks against villages and
publicly instructed his forces to take no prisoners or
wounded, but to leave behind only scorched Earth.
President Al-Bashir's genocidal intentions were clear
when he denied any assistance to entire groups forced
out of their homes to inhospitable areas. They were
condemned to die in the desert.

The United Nations and other humanitarian
agencies saved lives by setting up the largest
humanitarian operation in the world. President
Al-Bashir confirmed his genocidal intentions by
ordering a different type of attack against those in the
camps through rape and hunger. President Al-Bashir
appointed Ahmed Harun Minister of State for
Humanitarian Affairs to be in charge of the victims he
had displaced. As of September 2005, Harun obstructed
humanitarian efforts each step of the way. The crimes
of extermination and genocide under article 6(c) do not
require killing by bullets. They consist of intentionally
inflicting conditions of life - such as the deprivation
of access to food and medicine * calculated to bring
about the destruction of part of a population or a group.
11-63973
That was the conclusion reached by the Pre-Trial
Chamber on 4 March 2009, when it issued an arrest
warrant against President Al-Bashir for war crimes and
crimes against humanity, including the crimes of
extermination and rape. More than one year later, on
12 July 2010, Pre-Trial Chamber I issued a second
arrest warrant for President Al-Bashir for three counts
of genocide, including rape as a form of genocide and
genocide by deliberately inflicting conditions of life
calculated to bring about physical destruction.

In our third case, we are prosecuting two
commanders of the rebel groups that attacked African
Union peacekeepers in their base at Haskanita in
September 2007. They killed 12 African Union
peacekeepers, looted the entire base, and left thousands
of people displaced in the area without protection. The
two commanders charged, Abdallah Banda Abakaer
Nourain and Saleh Mohammed Jerbo Jamus, are
members of the Zaghawa, one of the ethnic groups
targeted by President Al-Bashir. On 17 June 2010, they
appeared voluntarily before the Court and both have
committed to surrender to the Court for trial. The trial
should start in 2012.

Interestingly, the rebel commanders accepted
their actual participation in the attack and are
contesting only three specific issues at trial: Whether
the attack was unlawful; whether they knew it to be so;
and, most importantly, whether the African Union
Mission in the Sudan was a peacekeeping mission in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. If
such issues are settled in favour of the Prosecution, the
accused persons will plead guilty to the charges against
them.

These are the cases. We are still evaluating the
responsibility of Mr. Abu Garda, the leader of the rebel
attack, against whom charges were not confirmed.
These are the persons identified as most responsible for
the most serious crimes committed in Darfur over the
past six years. In order to facilitate any decision of the
Council, I want to state that there is no sealed arrest
warrant requested or pending. There is no other case at
this stage.

My duty as Prosecutor is to galvanize efforts to
implement the arrest warrants issued by the Court. In
accordance with resolution 1593 (2005), the
Government of the Sudan has the legal obligation to
cooperate with the International Criminal Court.
However, in 2007, after the issuance of the arrest
warrant against Harun and Kushayb, President
Al-Bashir publicly refused to implement them,
challenged the Security Council's authority and stated
that Harun had done what he had been ordered to do.

In 2009, after the Court issued an arrest warrant
against him, President Al-Bashir expelled humanitarian
organizations that provided more than half of the total
amount of aid delivered. He confirmed his criminal
plans to exterminate those ethnic groups displaced. In
addition, President Al-Bashir blackmailed the
international community by threatening to commit the
same crimes in the south of the country, threatening the
North-South peace process. President Al-Bashir was
trying to avoid isolation and campaigned at the African
Union and elsewhere for political support.

Muammar Al-Qadhafi supported this campaign
and, as the Chairman of the African Union, at the last
minute of the African Union Summit in Sirte, on 3 July
2009, he promoted the adoption of the following
clause:

"In view of the fact that the request by the
African Union for an article 16 deferral had never
been acted upon, the African Union Member
States shall not cooperate pursuant to the
provisions of article 98 of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court relating to
immunities, for the arrest and surrender of
President Omar Al-Bashir of the Sudan".

On 26 May 2010, Pre-Trial Chamber I decided that the
Government of the Sudan was not cooperating with the
Court, in violation of resolution 1593 (2005) and
communicated this decision to the Security Council.

Cooperation is being extended by other countries.
On 28 November, the High Court of Kenya
implemented an arrest warrant against President
Al-Bashir following the decision of the International
Criminal Court. President Al-Bashir retaliated
diplomatically against the Kenyan decision and
threatened economic and trade sanctions.

Most importantly, Malawi - pursuant to the
argument laid out in the African Union resolution that I
cited earlier fl recently refused to arrest President
Al-Bashir. However, on 12 December, Pre-Trial
Chamber I issued a decision pursuant to article 87(7) of
the Rome Statute on the failure by the Republic of
Malawi to comply with the cooperation requests issued
by the court with respect to the arrest and surrender of
Omar Hassan Ahmad Al-Bashir. The Chamber found
that

"customary international law creates an exception
to Head of State immunity when international
courts seek a Head of State's arrest for the
commission of international crimes. There is no
conflict between Malawi's obligations towards
the Court and its obligations under customary
international law".

Therefore, the Chamber concluded, article 98(1) of the
Statute does not apply.

Furthermore, the Chamber decided that Malawi
had failed to comply with its obligations to consult
with the Chamber and failed to cooperate with the
Court by failing to arrest and surrender President
Al-Bashir. A similar decision was taken a day later by
Pre-Trial Chamber I in relation to Chad. The Security
Council and the Assembly of States parties were
informed of both decisions.

In conclusion, the arrest warrants issued by the
International Criminal Court shall be implemented. The
Security Council resolutions shall be respected.
Millions of civilians in Darfur shall be protected. The
individuals sought by the Court are still allegedly
committing genocide and crimes against humanity in
Darfur.

It is the case that the world knows where the
fugitives from the Court are, for they are in official
positions, controlling the Government of the Sudan and
commanding military operations in different parts of
the Sudan. Harun is the Governor of Southern
Kordofan state, presenting himself as the man to solve
problems. The attempts to appease them and reward
them with money and recognition are not working.

Civilians in Darfur continue to be subject to
indiscriminate aerial bombardment, despite numerous
injunctions by the Council that such bombardments
cease. Likewise, the numerous injunctions by the
Council that the militia/Janjaweed be disarmed have
not resulted in their disarmament. It is very easy to
produce a long list of false promises and refusals to
abide by previous commitments.

The execution of the arrest warrants will end the
crimes in Darfur. In the coming months, the Court will
decide on the arrest warrant requested against Minister
of Defence Hussein. Such a decision will provide a
new opportunity to the Council to develop a strategy to
implement resolution 1593 (2005) and presidential
statement S/PRST/2008/2 1.

My next report, in June 2012, could offer an
opportunity to establish consensus on the way forward.
The African Union and the League of Arab States
should play a central role to achieve a solution that
respects the Security Council's authority and the
Judges' decisions. The Government of the Sudan has to
review its policy and receive a clear message and
adjust to the world. People in Darfur need the Security
Council's leadership.

