Mr. Berml'idez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, allow me to thank the
Indonesian presidency for organizing this debate.
Your presence, Madam President, is a testament to the
importance that your country attaches to the topic of
peacekeeping operations.

Similarly, I express our gratitude for the
participation of, and the briefings given by, the
Secretary-General, Mr. Antenio Guterres, by the
Force Commander of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Lieutenant General Elias Rodrigues Martins
Filho, and by the Director of the Challenges Forum
International Secretariat, Mr. Bjorn Holmberg.

I wish today to reaffirm Uruguay's commitment
to the United Nations peacekeeping system and to
peacekeeping operations. Our country has already
deployed more than 45,000 troops in its long history as a
troop and police contributor in more than 20 operations
throughout the world. As of today, the contribution of
Uruguayan troops positions my country as the largest
contributor in the Americas, and very close to the top
20 contributors in the world. That effort, sustained over
decades, has given our country a very rich experience
in the field.

My intervention will focus on three points. The first
is the importance of training and capacity development.
The second is the normative framework and the various
United Nations documents and other initiatives in which
Member States participate. The third point covers the
concrete actions carried out by Uruguay in accordance
with the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.

First of all, Uruguay understands that the training
and capacity-building of troops are critical factors
for the effectiveness and efficiency of peacekeeping
operations. We are at a time when peacekeeping
operations must increasingly face highly challenging
operational environments, in which complex and
deteriorating political and security environments
can be observed and in which complex asymmetrical
threats are at play.

At the same time, peacekeeping operations are
being asked to do more and to do it better. Currently,
many of the missions have the characteristic of being
multidimensional, which means that they must carry
out a variety of tasks and responsibilities, such as
facilitating political processes, protecting civilians
and humanitarian partners, contributing to institution
building and promoting human rights. In that complex
operational context, we have observed how any
kind of deficiency in the areas of training, such as
predeployment training, the selection of troops from
contributing countries, the deployment of troops with
declared - or even worse, undeclared - caveats, or
equipment deficiencies, cannot only affect negatively
the execution of the mandates and the performance of
the missions, but can also increase the security risks for
the peacekeeping personnel deployed.

We believe, therefore, that effectively trained
troops with sufficient capacity would be better
equipped to fully implement the various aspects of a
mandate, which would result in better performance and
minimized security risks to deployed personnel. As a
long-standing troop-contributing country, Uruguay
attaches particular importance to the responsibilities
of troop- and police-contributing countries, given that
they are the ones acting on the ground and that they
must implement a given mandate.

We must also acknowledge that the effective
implementation of peacekeeping mandates is also the
responsibility of other actors concerned, including the
Security Council and financial contributors, and that
it depends on a number of key factors, in particular
clearly defined and realistic mandates, political will,
leadership, performance and accountability all levels
and sufficient resources, inter alia.

The key importance of training and capacity-
building to improving peacekeeping operations is
reflected, and here I turn to my second point, in the
efforts that various United Nations bodies have made
in this respect, be it in the form of resolutions, policies
or other initiatives.

Just as a brief overview, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2436 (2018) last September, in
which it reaffirmed its support for the development
of a comprehensive, integrated performance policy
framework to evaluate all United Nations uniformed
personnel who provide support to peacekeeping
operations and work therein. By the same token,
through the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, the main peacekeeping
actors reaffirmed their collective commitment to
peacekeeping operations and undertook to take action
on various issues, including the training and capacity-
building of peacekeeping personnel.

For its part, the Special Committee for Peacekeeping
Operations is continuing to consider these issues and
to provide political guidelines in this area as well as
specific recommendations to the Secretariat. The Fifth
Committee, which has just begun its consideration of
the peacekeeping operations budget, is responsible for
providing to peacekeeping operations the resources
necessary to fulfil their tasks. In this respect, we would
express our concern at the trend of budget reductions
that has been seen in recent years and at the possible
negative impacts that this could have in the fulfilment of
missions' mandates, which could lead to shortcomings
in their critical tasks, such as the protection of civilians.

On my third and last point, I would like to highlight
some specific actions that Uruguay has carried out in the
field of training and capacity-building. Last December,
my country, together with the United Kingdom,
organized a preparatory meeting on training and
capacity-building in Montevideo. Forty-two Member
States participated in the meeting, which served as
preparation for the United Nations Peacekeeping
Ministerial held on 25 March. At that conference, of
which we had the honour of being co-host, my country
offered training and capacity-building programmes in
the area of the protection of civilians. Furthermore, in
keeping with our efforts to increase the participation
of female peacekeepers, Uruguay offered to contribute
to the establishment of female task forces such as the
one we will soon deploy as part of our contingent in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).

In support ofthe efforts ofthe Department of Peace
Operations in the area of training, Uruguay, with the
backing of the United States, translated into Spanish
a number of United Nations educational materials
for the predeployment training of troops, which are
now available to all Member States. Furthermore,
Uruguay's national school of peacekeeping continues
to offer training courses on various topics. Yesterday
in Montevideo, a training-of-trainers course on
the protection of civilians began, supported by the
Department of Peace Operations. The course will be
held over several days and includes the participation of
a large number of Member States, including the main
troop-contributing countries.

To conclude, and taking advantage of the presence
of the MONUSCO Force Commander, I wish to
emphasize the high operational level of the Uruguayan
peacekeeping personnel deployed in the Mission. It
includes rapid response; no caveats; loyalty to the Force
Commander; and an unwavering commitment to the
protection of civilians. It is with this mindset and great
enthusiasm that we train our personnel prior to their
deployment in peacekeeping operations.

