Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We would like at the
outset to express our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for having convened this meeting. We wish also
to express our sincere appreciation to Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, for her comprehensive briefing
on the situation in Mali. It was enlightening and also
highlighted the significant progress made and the
amount of work that still needs to be embarked upon.

We also welcome the presence here with us of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali, Ms. Kamissa
Camara, and look forward to her briefing.

I would like to focus my intervention on the four
key pillars that underpin the peace process in Mali:
the political process, the security situation, regional
cooperation and economic development.

First, on the political process, we are encouraged
by the positive developments that have been undertaken
in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, as registered in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/1174) and described
in the briefing we heard today from Ms. Keita. We
would also like to commend President Ibrahim Keita
for his leadership and Prime Minister Maiga for his
mobilization in support of the implementation of the
agreement. These are positive indicators of a direction
towards peace.

The Council should make a positive appraisal of
these encouraging developments in Mali and accompany
the country in keeping a very tight time frame towards
normalization and elections later this year.

In this regard, South Africa calls on all parties to
make every effort to fully implement the 2015 Mali
peace agreement and the recently signed Pact for Peace,
which provides an opportunity to reinvigorate the peace
process in the country. As we know, this is not the first
peace process in Mali, and we as the international
community should provide the necessary support by
creating an enabling environment to sustain peace.

We wish to recall that at its thirty-first Summit
in Nouakchott, in July 2018, the African Union
(AU) Assembly welcomed "the gains made in the
implementation of the 2015 Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation" and urged "speedy progress as the only
way to durable peace and security in the country".
The Assembly also welcomed the progress made by
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S) Joint Force and
reiterated the AU commitment to assist in the regionally
coordinated response within the framework of the
Nouakchott process and other regional frameworks.

Secondly, on the security pillar, we are encouraged
by the progress made in the launch of the acceleration
of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process as well as security-sector reform. Furthermore,
we commend the measures taken by the Malian
Government in improving the working conditions of the
security services. My delegation is of the view that it is
vital that Mali's security forces be given the necessary
capacity, equipped and strengthened in order to address
the challenges faced by the country. We believe that
this will bring sustainable peace and stability to the
country. Furthermore, the Force should garner the trust
of the Malian people as a whole.

South Africa also recognizes the important work
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and
the troop-contributing countries in supporting the
implementation of the peace agreement as well as
providing capacity-building to ensure the gradual
restoration of State authority and services throughout
Mali, including in the centre of the country.

Moreover, my delegation fully supports the unique
partnership between MINUSMA and the G-5 Joint
Force in the process of restoring peace and stability in
Mali and the wider Sahel region. As has been recognized
by the Council, that partnership represents positive
cooperation between a United Nations peacekeeping
operation and a regional peace operation in Africa.

Thirdly, regional cooperation is a critical element
in the case of Mali given the challenges it faces in terms
of transnational crime and terrorist threats, which
further highlights the fact that this is not only a Malian
crisis. Threats to the broader region are imminent if
the current challenges in Mali are not addressed and
curtailed urgently. Consequently, the solidarity of the
region is a critical ingredient in the creation of lasting
peace throughout the Sahel.

The G-5 represents a concrete example of
neighbouring countries contributing to the peace and
stability of their own region. Therefore, every effort
should be made by the United Nations, including the
Council, and its Member States to ensure that the G-5
Joint Force is fully capacitated so that it can effectively
implement its mandate. In addition, we take note of and
support the Secretary-General's recommendation that
the Council establish a United Nations support office
for the G-5 Joint Force.

The situation in Mali illustrates the severe
asymmetrical threat faced by United Nations
peacekeepers. In the context of these threats, such as
terrorist attacks against United Nations personnel, the
Security Council must ensure that these operations
are, first, fully resourced; secondly, entrusted with the
appropriate mandate to respond to the context-specific
environments in which they are deployed; and, thirdly,
adequately equipped to protect themselves and defend
their mandate.

Fourthly, and lastly, I would like to underscore the
need for economic development so as to sustain the
peace we are trying to bring about in Mali. The people
need to benefit from the peace dividends that result
from the agreement. Ordinary people need to feel the
change and be able to earn their livelihood.

It is key, therefore, that the international
community support the people of Mali through
economic and infrastructure investment that would
help them to overcome the challenges currently facing
them. This will contribute not only to a stable Mali and
a stable region, but also to a peaceful and prosperous
African continent.

We thank France for the press statement and
reiterate that, as always, it has our support.

