Mr. Dauth (Australia): A year after the adoption
of resolution 1373 (2001), the international community,
the Security Council and, of course, in particular the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) under
Ambassador Greenstock's energetic chairmanship, can
take justified pride in what has been accomplished,
particularly in putting in place the legislative
framework to fight terrorism and suppress its
financing. Sir Jeremy Greenstock and his colleagues, I
think, are particularly to be congratulated on really
quite outstanding work. And as Sir Jeremy will know
well, it is unusual for an Australian to heap such praise
on an Englishman.

But our work is beginning, rather than ending.
Terrorism remains a significant and evolving threat to
international peace and security. Our defence against
terrorism is only as strong as its weakest link. Much
remains to be done by States individually, by regional
groups and multilaterally. Universal fulfilment of
obligations under resolution 1373 (2001) must remain
our key priority. National legislation needs to be strong
and comprehensive. Adherence to all 12 anti-terrorism
conventions needs to be global. And we need to ensure
active implementation of legislation, assisted where
necessary by strengthening the institutional capacities
of those States where these are lacking.

Australia is strongly committed to playing an
energetic and creative role in the fight against
terrorism. We take our obligations under resolution
1373 (2001) with the utmost seriousness. Australia is
now a party to 11 of the 12 anti-terrorism conventions.
We acceded to the Convention on the Suppression of
Terrorist Bombings this August, and ratified the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism last month. We are actively
considering our position with regard to the Convention
on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for the Purpose of
Detection.

Within our own region, Australia continues to
encourage greater cooperation to combat terrorism. As
set out in detail in the Pacific Islands Forum statement,
delivered by my colleague, the distinguished
Ambassador of Fiji, the Nasonini Declaration on
Regional Security was adopted by the Pacific Islands
Forum on 17 August 2002, affirming the need for
immediate and sustained regional action in response to
terrorist threats. Australia also sponsored with the
United States, New Zealand and the Forum Secretariat
a counter-terrorism workshop for Pacific Island
countries in March.

Australia and Indonesia announced in September
that they will co-host a regional conference on
combating money-laundering and terrorist financing in
December this year. The conference will augment and
contribute to existing initiatives being undertaken by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and other
organizations. Australia and Indonesia believe that the
meeting will enable countries in our region to
strengthen further their individual efforts to prevent
and counter money-laundering and the financing of
terrorism, particularly by identifying capacity-building
needs to meet existing and new obligations.

Australia has also been active in the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum
context. Together with Thailand we chaired an ASEAN
Regional Forum (ARF) workshop on terrorism
prevention in Bangkok in April 2002. We were pleased
to be part of the ASEAN Regional Forum's Declaration
on Terrorist Financing at its Ministerial Meeting on 31
July 2002, as well as in the creation of an intersessional
mechanism on terrorism.

In addition to these regional initiatives, we
consider that bilateral cooperation between
Governments is also critical in combating terrorism,
especially in the exchange of information and
intelligence to identify terrorist threats at the earliest
possible stage. Australia is seeking closer law
enforcement cooperation with partners in our region
and has negotiated Memorandums of Understanding
(MOUs) on counter-terrorism cooperation with
Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand.

Australia remains a very strong supporter of the
CTC. We have provided an expert to the Committee
and have nominated three additional experts to be
called upon by the Committee as required.

As the CTC embarks on its second year, it can be
assured of Australia's ongoing support. We will also
continue to work vigorously within the United Nations
and elsewhere to defeat international terrorism, and we
encourage other States to do likewise.

