Mr. Petric (Slovenia): Let me first express my
sincere appreciation to you, Madam President, for
convening this open debate on a subject which is
especially dear to us, since Slovenia, as a non-
permanent member of the Security Council at the time,
had the privilege of contributing to the drafting, and of
participating in the adoption, of the important
resolution 1261 (1999), which recognized the
protection and well-being of war-affected children as
an important peace and security item.

We are pleased to see the significant progress that
has been achieved in the past two years. The Security
Council has played an active role in the protection of
children in armed conflict and has paid special
attention to children in its decision-making with regard
to peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-building
operations. The Council also continued to play a
crucial role in calling on parties to implement existing
rules of international law that protect children in armed
conflict. We are pleased that the new draft resolution,
to be adopted today, takes into account action points
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General to
further improve the well-being of children affected by
armed conflict.

Slovenia associates itself with the statement
delivered by Belgium on behalf of the European Union,
and we fully endorse it. I would therefore like to
briefly highlight one particular point only.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict has stressed
one particular point on many occasions. He did so most
recently when referring to the situation in Afghanistan,
stating:

"No peace is likely to be sustainable unless
children and youth are provided with
rehabilitation and hope, so that they become a
constructive force in rebuilding their country.
Only by doing what is right for children today
can we build a solid foundation for peace and
security tomorrow."

Following this idea, the Government of Slovenia,
together with a non-governmental organization,
Slovene Philanthropy, decided to launch an initiative
called "Together: the Regional Centre for the
Psychological Well-being of Children". Thus we have
gone from worthy statements to real deeds.

By establishing and activating this centre,
Slovenia, a small United Nations Member with limited
resources, hopes to contribute to the well-being and
improve the mental health of war-affected children,
particularly in South-Eastern Europe. We believe that
long-term social conciliation in the region will depend
in particular on the psychological state of younger
generations. We wish to share our expertise in the area
of the mental health of children, as well as our
profound understanding of the situation in the region
and of the culture and traditions there. We would like
to make available our knowledge and resources for the
benefit of the children of the region. By establishing
the centre, Slovenia, in cooperation with other
interested countries and international and local
partners, hopes to create an efficient framework to
provide a comprehensive, continuous and organized
approach to providing protection and assistance to
traumatized children in South-Eastern Europe and,
possibly, elsewhere.

Let me also reiterate Slovenia's recognition of
and strong support for the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu. I also wish to
express our recognition and strong support to the
United Nations Children's Fund and to Ms. Bellamy
personally, and to other United Nations agencies and
organizations and non-governmental organizations
which contribute expertise, resources and operational
capacities for the well-being of children. Their
activities and cooperation are crucial for truly
ameliorating the plight of children. We also encourage
continuous and meaningful dialogue between the
Security Council, the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.

Last but not least, we hope that the General
Assembly's special session on children, which had to
be postponed owing to the tragic events of 11
September, will resume in 2002 and will result in a
new and ambitious agenda for our children.

