President Tadie: I thank you, Madam, for calling
this emergency meeting of the Security Council.

Four days ago on Friday morning, close to 3,000
Kosovo Serbs assembled to protest the latest egregious
violation of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999)
by the ethnic Albanian secessionists based in
Pristina- the forcible attempt by these authorities to
establish a so-called Kosovo Government Office in the
Serbian town of North Mitrovica. The Serbs came in
10-43669
peace, yet they were met with unprovoked violence.
Two high-intensity bombs were thrown into the crowd.
They came from within courtyards of homes owned by
ethnic Albanian supporters of the 17 February 2008
unilateral declaration of independence (UDI).

The facts that led to this flagrant act of terror -
in which a dozen Serbs were seriously injured and one
local Bosniak Muslim, a paediatrician, was killed -
are clear and indisputable. They are the direct result of
the conscious choice made by provocateurs to expand
the scope of the post-UDI, Pristina-based parallel
institutions to North Kosovo. I repeat - this was done
deliberately in order to increase inter-ethnic tensions
and sabotage the quest for comprehensive peace. It was
yet another destructive consequence of a sinister plan -
sponsored in part by the so-called International
Civilian Office headed by Pieter Feith - to
unilaterally impose an illegal and unwanted regime in
that part of our province. This was done not only
against the will of the Kosovo Serbs, but despite the
opposition of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the
European Union (EU) Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and other responsible stakeholders, including
the Security Council, which never approved the
blueprint of UDI - the so-called Ahtisaari proposal. It
means that the secessionists continue to blatantly
disregard international law, rejecting the universal
principles of the United Nations Charter. This is
absolutely unacceptable.

We urge the international community to ensure
that nothing like what happened on Friday is ever
repeated, and to make sure that the illegal office in
North Mitrovica remains closed. We call on UNMIK to
make use of its reserved powers under resolution 1244
(1999) and to restore the province's legitimate legal
framework discarded by the secessionists. We call on
the EU to compel EULEX to exercise its executive
authority and swiftly bring to justice the perpetrators of
all crimes against Kosovo Serbs, the most vulnerable
local community in Europe today. And we call on
NATO to maintain its present troop levels and
exclusive static presence at all Serbian holy sites it
currently protects.

Finally, we call on all responsible stakeholders to
avoid ever again putting themselves in a position of
supporting any additional destabilizing acts by Pristina.
The ethnic Albanian authorities have to be told what
the consequences will be should they try unilateralism
10-43669
again. Otherwise, Serbia will have no choice but to
reassess its relations with the international presence in
the province.

Attempts by Pristina to unilaterally impose any
post-UDI institution on the local Serbian community,
absent the consent of all stakeholders, will not be
tolerated by Serbia - no office, no courthouse, no
telecommunications infrastructure, and no other act of
aggression that is in violation of resolution 1244
(1999).

On 22 January, when I last addressed this Council
(see S/PV.6264), I harshly condemned the illegitimate
strategy that has led us back to the Security Council
today, underlining that it could only be forced upon the
Serbian community in North Kosovo by a draconian,
undemocratic set of measures. Those who announced
and actively supported it - they and they alone -
would have to bear the sole responsibility for the
destabilizing atmosphere such conflict-inciting designs
would obviously produce.

This is exactly what was attempted on Friday. I
derive no satisfaction from this fact. It is incredibly
disappointing that some in Pristina still believe in
unilateralism and that they believe it can ever provide
an answer to any of the open issues we have an
obligation to resolve peacefully. The bottom line is that
the Security Council must not tolerate unilateralism.
Opposing one-sidedness is its fundamental mission. So
let me make myself clearly understood. Differences on
UDI notwithstanding, whoever does not condemn
unilateralism of any sort in Kosovo, as Serbia has, will
be responsible for any future violence, deaths, and acts
of terror that may take place in the province.

We must never forget that the circumstances that
have led us to this point are rooted in the March 2004
pogrom planned and orchestrated by the authorities in
Pristina. In less than 72 hours, 35 Serbian holy sites,
many of them hundreds of years old, were set ablaze
by tens of thousands of ethnic Albanian militants
throughout Kosovo. Nineteen people were killed, 500
were injured, and more than 5,000 Kosovo Serbs were
ethnically cleansed from their homes.

A profoundly terrible consequence arising from
these atrocities committed against Kosovo Serbs was
that they triggered the abandonment of the
international community's standards-before-status
approach. Pristina's violent behaviour was rewarded by
some, and UDI was the result.
3

What about today? Will Violence be rewarded
again? Will those who show a willingness to commit it
gain further advantage? Is leverage in any discussion to
come proportional to a readiness to engage in it? These
are profound questions that we will have to urgently
address, for how they are answered will contribute to
determining whether the emerging norms of global
governance will favour Violence. This is not just about
Kosovo; it is a litmus test about how problems in the
world will be tackled in the decades to come.

"Only on a scrutiny of truth can a future of peace
be built" (A/PV883, para. 7), Secretary-General Dag
Hammarskjold said in 1960. The undeniable truth in
this case is that the architects of the flagrant act of
terror in North Mitrovica deserve the denunciation of
this Council and the States Members of the United
Nations, for what happened on Friday illustrates the
ongoing, inherently dangerous consequences of UDI.

The truth about UDI, however uncomfortable it
may be for some to hear, is that it cannot lead to peace
and stability, for peace is the product of agreement, just
as stability is the result of consensus. UDI rejected
them both at the moment of its stillbirth. It has clearly
divided the world and brought into question the
fundamental tenets of the contemporary international
system. That is why, in reality, the stubborn
continuation of attempts to implement UDI can only
produce what everyone responsible must seek to avoid,
namely, a long-term freeze in Kosovo's limbo.

It is our shared responsibility to find a way to
overcome the present impasse. I want to be very clear
on that. Unilateralism has got us nowhere. It is time to
chart a course towards a secure future for all the
residents of our southern province, for all the citizens
of our country and for all the nations of our region. The
only way to establish stability in Kosovo is to
implement in full the Secretary-General's six-point
plan - which, let me remind everyone, was welcomed
by the entire Council in November 2008 -
irrespective of Member States' differing positions on
Pristina's UDI.

The Secretary-General's six-point plan therefore
contains the only legitimate framework for working out
a number of delicate practical issues, from the rule of
law to guaranteeing lasting international protection for
Serbian holy sites. It also comprises, among others,
topics such as health care, education,
telecommunications, electricity, the privatization of
socially owned enterprises, property restitution and the
return of more than 200,000 Kosovo Serb and Roma
internally displaced persons.

No sensible impediment stands in the way of
anyone's sincerely engaging right away, through the
six-point plan, to find pragmatic arrangements that
would benefit all the residents of the territory. Rapid
breakthroughs in the areas covered by the six-point
plan would help to build much-needed confidence
between the parties. Our number one priority should be
to set the stage for the peace process between Serbs
and Albanians to begin in earnest, and for it to result in
an agreement that everyone can endorse.

The significance of the landmark Kosovo case
before the International Court of Justice must be
restated in this Chamber. It is, after all, the first time
that the Court has been asked to consider the legality of
a unilateral attempt to partition a United Nations
Member State in peacetime, in defiance of its
Constitution and against the will of the Security
Council. It is also the first time all five permanent
members of the Council have participated in a
proceeding before the Court. A record number of
countries have presented their views, making it the
largest case in history.

Accordingly, the Court's conclusions will have
extensive consequences for the entire United Nations
system. We have strong expectations that the Court will
not legitimize Pristina's UDI. Any other outcome
would mean that no border anywhere in the world
would remain safe from separatist ambitions. That
would inevitably produce instability in all corners of
the world as the number of ethnic conflicts multiplies.

A substantial majority of Member States and of
countries seated in the Security Council have continued
to abide by their binding obligations under our 1945
Charter and resolution 1244 (1999) to respect Serbia's
sovereignty and territorial integrity. On behalf of my
nation, I would like to reiterate our deep gratitude for
their support. We know that maintaining that position
is not easy for everyone, owing to the pressures that
unfortunately continue to be exerted by those with the
capacity to do so credibly.

But we also know that, tomorrow, some other
country might find itself in a similar situation, and that
the world would then rapidly discover that the rushing
river let loose by Kosovo's UDI had become an
uncontrolled cascade of secession across the world.
l0-43669
That is why we strongly urge all non-recognizing
Member States to stay the course.

The International Court of Justice will be
reporting back to the General Assembly in the near
future. Serbia will surely join the great many interested
countries in the ensuing debate. One can reasonably
predict that fundamental concerns about preserving
basic international norms will compel the majority to
encourage the parties to arrive at consensual solutions
on all outstanding issues peacefully and through
dialogue. But let us be frank with each another - there
is no open question in Kosovo that is not related to
status, either directly or indirectly. It is impossible to
think that negotiations on anything can take place
outside that context. We must not ignore this obvious
reality and waste an unprecedented chance to find a
mutually acceptable comprehensive settlement between
Serbs and Albanians.

I am aware of the fact that some powerful voices
are against a consensual solution, but I remain
profoundly puzzled as to why they would reject it out
of hand. There is nothing to be lost by working
together to reach a truly sustainable outcome.
Moreover, it is absolutely clear that no democratic
leadership in Serbia will ever under any circumstances,
implicitly or explicitly, recognize UDI. We have not
consented to it and we never will. That principled
position is set in stone and will not change, come what
may. There are those who expect us to yield eventually.
That will not happen. We will continue to use all the
diplomatic resources at the disposal of a sovereign
State to oppose the unilateral attempt to partition our
country. No peaceful, democratic and proud nation
whose territorial integrity is under threat would act
differently.

I want to be very clear. We will pursue a
compromise with Pristina constructively and in good
faith, as if it had never attempted UDI. But make no
mistake; my country is equally prepared to resist UDI
incessantly for as long as no compromise appears on
the horizon.

This past Friday's tragedy reminds us of the fear
and violence that are at the heart of unilateralism. But
it can also teach us that the failure of one thing -
UDI- can be repaired by the success of another,
namely, the establishment of harmonious peace
between two vibrant and proud nations, Serbs and
Albanians.
10-43669

I would like to conclude by saying that the time
for anyone to try half-measures devoid of real
imagination or foresight has come to an end. We have
entered a period of consequence and momentous
choices where only results matter. We are determined
to reach a sustainable agreement on the final status of
Kosovo. We have no right to fail in this task. We have
no intention of humiliating anyone. What we seek is a
just status that all parties can embrace. That is the only
way to secure original gains, reinforce shared priorities
and complete the democratic transformation of the
Balkans.

What everyone needs to do is to reject the
extremist voices that find comfort in the old ways and
that believe that it is impossible for Serbs and
Albanians to normalize their relations by reaching a
historic compromise. That has been our vision all
along, because we believe that comprehensive peace is
essential for securing a shared prosperous future in the
European Union.

