Mr. Yacouba (spoke in French): I thank the
representatives for their questions. The first question
related to capacity-building of the Malian security
forces. In my statement I said that we have multifaceted
support. That is because there are huge needs. The
training that we provide therefore depends on the needs
and the kind of activities that the police, gendarmerie
and national guard tasked with civilian protection have
to carry out. We have undertaken a level of training but
also construction projects to enable their deployment
of equipment in the north and the centre. The training
is now also very focused towards countering organized
crime. We currently have specialized teams on the
ground. There are three such teams at the moment.
There is a specialized German team, a specialized
French and German team and a third team that carries
out all the technical and forensic training. Those are the
areas in which we work.

We also provide support in terms of advice. In many
areas we work in partnership with EUCAP Sahel Mali
because we have the same clients. At that level, there
is support in the form of advice as well as operational
support on the ground, such as, for example, when there
were the massacres in Koulougon Peul, Ogossagou and
Sobane Da and even an attack on the military camp.
The only existing capacity, as was rightly said, in
the technical and forensic areas is that of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), where we have helped
to have a presence on the ground and to collect data and
analyse that information. The analysis that we carry out
is at two levels: first, for prosecution needs through our
units that support countering cross-border organized
crime but also for prevention needs. In that regard,
the Ministry of Internal Security and Civil Protection
established a centre to analyse and collect intelligence,
whose staff we trained. We are also working with
EUCAP Sahel and the French security adviser to help
us to better respond in such situations because often we
hear reports but we do not know what has not worked.
People say that they have reported an incident but the
forces arrive only the next day. That is why we also
provide such support to our Malian partners.

We were also asked about the contribution made
by the formed police units. In that regard, I would
like to take the example of the Mopti region, where,
while awaiting the arrival of a second formed police
unit, we cover all areas except, of course, those that are
flooded. We have patrols there jointly with the Malian
forces, particularly the gendarmerie. In that context, I
would point out that an operation was undertaken in
partnership with the Malian security force but there is
also a region where MINUSMA operates. I think that
we can say that there has been less crime in the areas
held by MINUSMA.

In review of what we have done, I would say that in
terms of training and support to the Malian authorities,
during the recent elections, which saw the fewest
incidents and went smoothly, thanks to the work we did
with EUCAP Sahel Mali to train security units, there
was a security presence. That is the added value that
we can bring.

Another aspect that was raised was the interaction
with armed groups. There are two levels to that
question. First, there are armed groups that signed the
agreement and there are organizations through which
we work. For example, with regard to territorial policy,
we had to explain to them what it is and its potential in
the context of security sector reform. In sum, those are
the concerns that we shared in that regard.

There was a question regarding the non-involvement
of police in the area of human rights and policing. It
should be acknowledged that the police also have quite
a key role there. Resolution 2382 (2019) recognizes
that security sector reform is highly political. So police
officers must be able to support elections because what
they are supporting can have a political impact if there
are incidents.

Human rights are at the heart of policing and the
protection of people. We must promote respect for
human rights in all our activities, including addressing
violence against women and minors. We must also
adhere to the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy in
the work that we do.

Those are the issues where representatives requested
some clarifications. Regarding the difficulties, I think
that Mr. Lacroix has already provided appropriate
responses. In terms of our needs, we need the necessary
expertise. Given the central role of the police and
its cross-cutting nature, the needs are tremendous.
We have seen that we need to change the military
approach. We have seen its limits everywhere, but the
security approach also needs to change by encouraging
community-based policing. That is to say, we cannot act
from a distance. We need to address security at a local
level. That means we must deploy within communities
for the best possible outcomes. That also involves
issues of inclusiveness to ensure that all sectors of
society are represented. It is not a matter of having
forces alongside the population but the quality of the
deployment depends on people's perception to ensure
better cooperation and intelligence.

