Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
May I begin by congratulating France on assuming
once again the presidency of the Security Council and
wishing you and the new members of the Security
Council every success in carrying out the tasks
awaiting you.
Switzerland welcomes this annual Security
Council debate on children and armed conflict, as it
represents one of my country's priorities in matters of
human security. Switzerland takes note with
satisfaction of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2002/1299) and considers it to be a valuable
reference document on action undertaken in the United
Nations over the last year to respond to challenges with
regard to the rights of the child in armed conflicts. I
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund for their respective presentations.

Switzerland expresses with conviction its
solidarity with the recommendations formulated by
Austria on behalf of the Human Security Network and
is convinced of the Security Council's essential role in
their implementation.

Switzerland reiterates its support for the
international community's numerous current efforts to
reinforce the protection of the civilian population in
times of armed conflict. Children are particularly
vulnerable, and the impact of conflict on their rights
and well-being can be felt at many levels and in
various ways: attacks on their rights to survival and
development, attacks on their physical integrity, attacks
on their rights to education and health, and the
destruction of their family structures and of their social
and community ties. Far too many of them also find
themselves refugees or internally displaced, orphaned
or unaccompanied. In the face of such situations,
Switzerland particularly recalls the importance of
respecting the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their two
Additional Protocols of 1977, in which specific
provisions for the protection of and assistance to
children are incorporated.

As underlined in the Secretary-General's report,
2002 saw the entry into force of two major
international instruments: the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflicts, and the
Statute of the International Criminal Court.

Switzerland, which ratified the Optional Protocol
last June, is committed to pursuing its efforts with a
view to ensuring its universal ratification as soon as
possible. It hopes that all States that have not yet done
this will follow its example by depositing a declaration,
as stipulated in paragraph 2 of article 3, indicating 18
years as the age limit for voluntary recruitment.
The entry into force of the Rome Statute
represents a major step towards an end to impunity.
Switzerland welcomes the steps taken by the Secretary-
General's Special Representative to ensure that the
International Criminal Court, as well as the Special
Tribunal for Sierra Leone, include particular
considerations regarding juvenile law into their
regulations and procedure.

Switzerland shares the Secretary-General's
opinion that the current major challenge resides in the
implementation of these international instruments,
which, by the standards they set, propose new
prospects for action. In this respect, it would have been
desirable for the report to formulate suggestions for
concrete actions to be taken by the Security Council
itself as well as by the United Nations system as a
whole, and by each of its Member States individually.

Switzerland emphasizes the innovative and
welcome contribution that resolution 1379 (2001)
represents, particularly the establishment of a list of
parties to armed conflicts that recruit or use children in
violation of the international provisions meant to
protect them. The political importance of this list is
undeniable, and it should certainly be maintained.
However, its true value will become apparent only
when the Security Council has defined the actions it
plans to undertake in this respect.

In this regard, Switzerland invites the Security
Council to consider the following recommendations.
We suggest that this list be updated on a regular basis.
Include in the list all countries and situations of armed
conflict which involve the problem of recruitment and
use of child soldiers and which appear on the Security
Council's agenda. Include on the list all other countries
and conflict situations which the Council may deem
necessary. Establish an ongoing dialogue with those
Governments named in the list and promote the
relevant instruments among the armed non-State actors.
Identify other criteria, in addition to the recruitment
and use of children, for developing the list, keeping in
mind the magnitude of the impact of armed conflicts on
children. At the conceptual level, the work
accomplished by non-governmental organizations on
this matter could constitute a particularly valuable
contribution.

To conclude, I wish to recall the commitments
made by the international community in the document
"A world fit for children", adopted at the General
Assembly's special session on children (resolution S-27/2). In this regard, Switzerland supports the
activities to create awareness and to integrate
children's rights in United Nations activities as a whole
and encourages the Organization to pursue and
intensify them at all levels. My country welcomes the
implementation of guiding principles for conduct for
all United Nations staff, which are essential to ensuring
that the behaviour of humanitarian personnel vis-a-vis
its beneficiaries is beyond reproach, and to prevent
abuse. We further invite the Security Council to
continue including child protection advisers in its
peacekeeping operations. They play a key role in
ensuring that the rights and specific needs of girls and
boys be taken into account and respected.

