The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Algeria, Argentina,
Australia, Bahrain, Belarus, Brazil, Canada, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Fiji, the Gambia,
Georgia, Greece, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Japan, Jordan,
Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Malaysia, the Marshall Islands,
Morocco, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Peru, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Saint Lucia, Saudi
Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Sudan,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam and Yemen,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Aldouri
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Nesho
(Albania), Mr. Baali (Algeria), Mr. Listre
(Argentina), Mr. Dauth (Australia),
Mr. Almansoor (Bahrain), Mr. Ivanov (Belarus),
Mr. De Moura (Brazil), Mr. Heinbecker
(Canada), Mr. Stagno (Costa Rica),
Mr. Rodriguez Parilla (Cuba), Mr. Ye'pez Lasso
(Ecuador), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Yauvoli
(Fiji), Mr. Grey-Johnson (Gambia), Mr. Adamia
(Georgia), Mr. Vassilakis (Greece), Mr. Acosta
Bonilla (Honduras), Mr. Kristjansson (Iceland),
Mr. Nambiar (India), Mr. Djumala (Indonesia),
Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran),
Mr. Haraguchi (Japan), Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan),
Mr. Al-Otaibi (Kuwait), Mr. Jegermanis (Latvia),
Mr. Diab (Lebanon), Mr. Own (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein),
Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia), Mr. Capelle (Marshall Islands), Mr. Loulichki (Morocco), Mr. Mackay
(New Zealand), Mr. Sevilla Somoza (Nicaragua),
Mrs. Yahaya (Nigeria), Mr. Al-Hinai (Oman),
Mr. De Rivero (Peru), Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar),
Mr. Sun (Republic of Korea), Mr. Huntley (Saint Lucia), Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Tan
(Singapore), Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr.
Mahendran (Sri Lanka), Mr. Erwa (Sudan), Mr.
Staehelin (Switzerland), Mr. Kasemsarn
(Thailand), Mr. Kerim (the former Yugoslav Republic ofMacedonia), Mr. Pamir (Turkey), Mr.
Kuchinsky (Ukraine), Mr. Al-Shamsi (United Arab Emirates), Mr. Paolillo (Uruguay), Mr.
Vohidov (Uzbekistan), Mr. Ngo Duc Thang (Viet Nam) and Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, which reads as follows:

"In accordance with article 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council, I have the honour to request the
participation of His Excellency Mr. Yahya
Mahmassani, Permanent Observer of the League
of Arab States to the United Nations, in the
discussion of the agenda item under consideration
by the Council on Iraq, which will start on 18
February 2003."

That letter will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol 8/2003/ 184.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr.
Yahya Mahmassani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Permanent Observer of the League of
Arab States to the United Nations, Mr. Yahya
Mahmassani, to take the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the request
contained in the letter dated 6 February 2003 from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa addressed to

the President of the Security Council, which was issued
as document S/2003/153.

I should also like to draw the attention of
members to document S/2003/183, containing the text
of a letter dated 14 February 2003 from the Permanent
Representative of South Africa to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

I wish to recall that at our meeting last Friday, 14
February, ministers were given seven minutes for their
statements. In view of the long list of speakers before
us, I would appeal to all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five to seven minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing, and
to deliver the condensed versions in this room. There
are 61 speakers on my list. If they speak for seven
minutes each, that means seven hours of debate, not
including all the procedural time we need.

As another measure to optimize the use of our
time in order to allow as many delegations as possible
to take the floor, I will not individually invite speakers
to take seats at the Council table. When a speaker is
taking the floor, the Conference Officer will seat the
next speaker on the list at the table.

I propose that we suspend our meeting tonight at
6.30 pm. and resume tomorrow morning at 10 a.m.
sharp, because otherwise we will not be able to finish
our discussion. I would be very grateful if all members
of the Council and those speaking in the Council
Chamber would cooperate in this for the sake of
expediency in the organization of our meeting.

I would like to welcome the presence of the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Louise Frechette, at
this meeting.

The first speaker on my list is the representative
of South Africa, to whom I give the floor.


