Mr. Vieira de Mello (spoke in French): I would
like to express my gratitude for your support, Mr.
President, and for the support expressed by all speakers
for the efforts we are making in Timor. This is a great
source of encouragement to us all.

First of all, allow me to express my satisfaction
and that of my associates at the unanimous
endorsement of the initiatives we have undertaken in
recent weeks to expand and deepen the participation of
Timorese leaders in the Transitional Administration in
East Timor until the time of independence.

As the President has suggested, I will now
confine my remarks to answering the questions put to
me. I have taken very careful notes of all the
comments, suggestions, recommendations and advice
that has been offered to us in the course of this debate.
I can assure the Council that we will take them fully
into account.

Let me begin with the question concerning
reducing the size of the military force of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET). I am thinking in particular of the
statements made by the representatives of the United
States, the Netherlands and Canada, as well as that
made by the President.

The representative of the United States asked me
whether we had a plan, and when the reduction would
begin. Yes, we do have a plan, which we presented to
the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations and which we will of course submit to the
Secretary-General. Although I would like to emphasize
that it has not yet been endorsed, that plan provides for
a reduction of 487 troops between now and October,
1,050 between now and February, and 1,405 between
now and April. This includes both men and women. It
is only a provisional plan. As I said in my presentation,
we shall be reviewing the situation at regular intervals.
We are aware of what the Security Council resolution
asks us to do, namely, to bring the security situation
under control so as to permit a reduction of United
Nations military forces in East Timor.

Apart from questions of security in the field, we
also need to be sure of the capacity of our civilian
police to take over the functions of maintaining public
order that are now provided in East Timor by military
personnel.

I would also point out that we have identified
some additional needs, particularly in the areas of
engineering capacity for road repairs - as I mentioned
in my presentation- and patrolling Timorese
territorial waters. This is a need that concerns me
greatly, and it is possible that the figures I have just
given the Council are not definitive.

I have taken note of the statements made by the
Permanent Representatives of the Netherlands and
Canada. I shall convey to the Secretary-General their
requests that the Council be given a detailed briefing
by our military colleagues before any final decision is
taken on the reduction of the military force.

I turn now to other issues in the political domain.
The Ambassador of the Netherlands asked me if
independence will immediately follow the elections. I
can only speculate now, but as we see things - and
when I say "we", I mean the Timorese leaders, we in
UNTAET and I think my colleagues here in New York
also - the elections that will take place next year will
be elections for a constituent assembly. That assembly,
once elected, will be able to consider the text of a draft
Constitution, to debate it and to adopt it. So that makes
me think that independence would not immediately
follow the elections.

Another question, which I believe was put to me
by the Ambassador of the Netherlands, concerns the
measures taken or to be taken in order to improve the
security situation in the refugee camps and along the
border. In my presentation, I said that our cooperation
with the Indonesian armed forces has been improving,
notwithstanding recent incidents. We were informed by
General Kiki Syahrakri, who commands the military
district that covers the western portion of the island,
that a large number of weapons were confiscated in the
refugee camps. We were given the figure of 600
weapons, and were informed that the pro-integrationist
militias could no longer be trained at these camps. Of
course, we welcome these measures, and they have
been confirmed through other sources. Regarding the
additional measures that could be taken, I will repeat
what some representatives have stated here, which has
also been noted on other occasions - that the
Timorese elements in the Indonesian armed forces and
in the Indonesian police need to be transferred. I know
that this process has begun. They need to transferred
from the refugee camps and even from the western
portion of the island to other Indonesian islands.
It also seems very important to identify, which
should not be very difficult, and transfer from the
camps the extremist elements that regularly carry out
acts of violence and intimidation directed at the
refugees or at the personnel of humanitarian agencies.
Finally, it is clear that the acceleration of
repatriation- or of reintegration for those refugees
wishing to remain in Indonesia- would greatly
facilitate things. When I gave my statement, I stated
that we intend to take a number of measures with
Xanana Gusmao and with Indonesian authorities to
overcome obstacles in the current situation.

(spoke in English)

Regarding a number of questions that were put to
me by Ambassador Greenstock and by Ambassador van
Walsum, which are related to security, yes, we have
been attempting to pay attention to the humanitarian
needs of the Falantil, especially of those who are
cantoned in Aileu, despite the problems that
humanitarian agencies have, as is known, in assisting
uniformed and armed personnel. We are trying to find
an imaginative solution, and we have noted the interest
of some Governments, in particular of Portugal, of
providing direct bilateral assistance to them.

As far as the new security force is concerned, as I
indicated, we are awaiting the outcome of the Kings
College study that will make recommendations and, I
hope, will propose different options regarding the
configuration, the size and the doctrine of a possible
future East Timorese defence force. I have taken note
of what Ambassador van Walsum said about the role of
Falintil in the creation of this new security force, a role
that we recognize. What we need to do after decisions
have been made on this future security force is to
determine which of the Falintil members can be or
should be retrained to form part of that force and which
should be demobilized and retrained to occupy their
place in East Timor civil society. The plan exists, but,
as members may be aware, the Falintil commanders do
not wish to treat this problem piecemeal and are
therefore awaiting a decision on the future security
force before they agree to the retirement or
demobilization of some of the Falintil subgroups.

Finally, Ambassador van Walsum asked me if we
had the results of the investigation into the latest
grenade attack against the Australian contingent of the
peacekeeping force. No, the answer is that I do not
have it yet. I know that those who were arrested were
being interrogated, and this information could be made
available to the Council as soon as it is made available
tO me.

Moving now to other questions put to me by
Ambassador Greenstock, the question of the slow rate
of disbursement is one that has preoccupied us, as I
said in my presentation. I indicated in Lisbon last week
that we had two main reasons for this pattern of slow
disbursement in the first semester of the year 2000.

First of all, we did not have a government
procurement capacity in Dili. This is one of the lessons
we can learn from UNTAET, and I believe also from
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, namely, that when governance-building and
nation-building, efforts are deployed by the Security
Council, a capacity in different areas for which we do
not necessarily have resources in the United Nations
system, and in particular procurement for the
Government as distinct from the peacekeeping mission
as such, should be deployed in the very early stages of
the operation. We now have such a capacity with the
help of the United Nations Office for Project Services.

The second reason was that we did not, until three
weeks ago, have a consolidated budget for East Timor.
So it was extremely difficult for us to decide on
priorities. We were bombarded, as can be imagined,
with requests from different central and district
transitional administration services, all of them
justified. But it was impossible to prioritize in the
absence of a consolidated budget, which we now have
and which, as members know, was approved last week
in Lisbon. We can now, therefore, begin implementing
the budget for East Timor for the fiscal year 2000-
2001, and I can assure members that the rate of
disbursements will increase rapidly.

I have also taken note of Ambassador
Greenstock's comments, which I will share with my
colleagues here in the Secretariat, regarding
measurable achievements, as well as a greater level of
autonomy for UNTAET in the performance of its
governance functions.

I move now to the question of refugees. The
representative of Namibia asked me if we had estimates
of how many out of the roughly 120,000 would be
prepared to go back and how many would prefer to
remain in Indonesia. The long-awaited census of the
refugee population in West Timor has not been
completed yet. It has been suspended, in fact, as a
result of the incidents in the camps around Kupang.
Therefore, the total figure of 120,000 is only an
estimate. Our sense is that at least half, if not two
thirds, of the refugee population in West Timor would
be prepared to return if given the possibility of
choosing freely and if a number of conditions were
met, some of which I outlined and others of which
were alluded to by the representative of Indonesia in
his presentation. I will not list those, but this is our
rough estimate.

The representative of Malaysia asked me whether
there had been progress on the proposed relocation of
integrationists and their families away from the border.
The answer is no; we have not yet had confirmation
that this is happening. Incidentally, 20 kilometres away
from the border may be an insufficient distance. As I
said, we would prefer that the most extreme elements
among the pro-integration forces - particularly those
who were previously members of the militia- be
relocated at a safe distance from our border, and
preferably away from West Timor, or the province of
Nusa Tenggara Timur as it is known in Bahasa
Indonesia.
Moving now to the last few questions, the
representative of Jamaica, supported by Brazil, asked
me what measures were being taken to tackle my
"nightmare", which is unemployment in East Timor. In
addition to, obviously, recruitment of East Timorese by
international organizations, be they intergovernmental
or non-governmental, recruitment into the new civil
service of East Timor - that is, approximately 10,000
new civil servants in the coming fiscal year- should
provide employment. But obviously, we should not
look to the public sector to solve the problems of
unemployment. Bilateral programmes funded by
countries represented in this Chamber, for which I am
most thankful, have helped us bridge the gap between
the Tokyo conference, the appraisal of reconstruction
programmes, and the impending implementation of
large-scale reconstruction programmes. But it is these
reconstruction programmes in the fields of health,
education, infrastructure and agriculture that will
provide employment opportunities in sufficient
numbers in the months to come.

The private sector, though, in the longer term-
and you alluded to this, Mr. President- will be the
employment-generation sector. Therefore, the
promotion of investment in East Timor, from both
foreign and smaller local sources, is essential. And in
order for that to happen, we also need to resolve the
question of land and property, which is another of our
many nightmares, given the fact that there are no
records left in East Timor: East Timor has no memory;
there are no archives; there is nothing left. And as can
be imagined, we receive many competing claims
regarding property. Unless these can be resolved,
probably by an independent tribunal, in the near future,
very few investors will be prepared to come and risk
their money in East Timor. We are very conscious of
that.

(spoke in French)

The President asked where we stood with regard
to loans to small and medium-sized enterprises and
whether we had sufficient funds. No, they are not
sufficient. We have some $4 million from a small-scale
World Bank project; yet requests received as of just
before I left amounted to more than $30 million. This
is very encouraging; it means that there is a great deal
of initiative and much interest on the part of Timorese
enterprises in setting themselves up. But clearly, the $4
million at hand is not enough. Our plan is to encourage
local enterprises that will be working with us to
implement major reconstruction plans financed by the
World Bank and the Asian Development Bank, and to
set up joint ventures involving Timorese in order to
create Timorese capacity in the private sector.

(spoke in English)

I shall conclude by addressing two further
questions. The first is from Ambassador Satoh of
Japan, on mass information. He is absolutely right: that
is one of our greatest weaknesses, which explains some
of the frustration expressed by the Timorese
population. The problem is that we have no television;
the coverage of our own UNTAET radio is very
limited. It will take time to repair repeaters, antennas
and the generators for those antennas. It will take time
to procure radio sets and distribute them to the
Timorese population. We are very conscious of this,
and we are enthusiastically proceeding with the
reconstruction of the telecommunications infrastructure
in East Timor, not least for that reason.

We also have a fortnightly magazine, which is
broadly distributed but which is grossly insufficient as
well. We are trying to use other means, such as video,
town hall meetings - I myself participate in those-
and I have recently written to the two bishops of East
Timor requesting the help of the Church infrastructure
in disseminating information on our activities.

(spoke in French)

Finally, Mr. President, let me reply to your
question about progress with respect to the exploitation
of natural resources, especially oil and natural gas.
Timorese leaders told us a few months ago that they
would like the terms of the agreement on the
exploitation of these resources in the deep waters
between Timor and Australia, in the cooperation zone
defined by the pre-existing treaty between Indonesia
and Australia, to be renegotiated by UNTAET - with
Timorese participation to be sure- during the
transitional phase. Talks have taken place in Adelaide,
Canberra, Dili and, just last weekend, Darwin. The
Australian Government has evinced understanding.
They are open-minded and flexible, for which I am
grateful to them. I am therefore optimistic about the
conclusion of these negotiations before independence
day.

I thank you, Sir, and all the other members of the
Council for this opportunity to address the Council and
for your support.

