Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands):
I would like to start by thanking the Permanent
Representatives of Kuwait, Peru and the United
Kingdom for their briefings on our joint Security
Council visit to Bangladesh and Myanmar, and to join
others in thanking them for organizing and co-leading
the visit. We were also glad to do our part during the
March presidency of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to
facilitate discussions to make the visit to both countries
possible. It provided an opportunity to assess the
progress made in implementing the Council's November
presidential statement (S/PRST/20l7/22) and to inform
the Council's further engagement. We are grateful to
the Governments of Bangladesh and Myanmar for their
hospitality and willingness to engage with the Council.
I would also like to warmly thank all the United Nations
staff who were involved in organizing the visit and
producing the briefings. I would like to address three
aspects of the issue, starting with the impressions we
had from the visit; secondly, the immediate steps to be
taken; and thirdly, the urgent need for accountability
for crimes against the Rohingya.

The visit left a deep impression on us all. We were
particularly shocked by the scale of the crisis, the
number of refugees and the extent of the destruction
of their villages. In Cox's Bazar we heard horrifying
accounts from survivors of the violence. We met a
woman holding a 16-day-old baby who looked as if she
did not know what to do with it. She had been raped the
night that her husband was killed and did not know who
the baby's father was. We met an elderly woman who
saw members of her family being raped and was then
raped herself. We met a girl aged seven or eight with
deep scars on her skull inflicted by knives and cuts.
Imagine doing that to a child. We met a girl about 12
years old whose upper thigh had been ripped open by
a bullet and who was now paralysed and unable to go
to school. We met children who had no dreams for the
future, just the past to deal with. Several of them had
lost their parents and had to cope with that alone.

We also witnessed the hospitality of the people
and the Government of Bangladesh in hosting almost
1 million Rohingya refugees. Their generosity deserves
our deep appreciation and support. At the same
time, with the monsoon season almost upon us, the
challenges in the camps should not be underestimated
by any of us. Swift action is required to prepare the
camps for the imminent possibility of floods and
landslides. The United Nations joint response plan is
seriously underfunded. It is therefore essential that the
international community step up its aid.

The second aspect is the immediate steps to be
taken. Coming back from the visit, we cannot conclude
other than that the outlook for a swift solution to the
crisis remains bleak. Much needs to be done before
the Rohingya can return safely and in a voluntary and
dignified manner. The Council's presidential statement
of November, which was reaffirmed in a press
statement (SC/13331) following the visit, is far from
being implemented.

Quick steps can be taken to show that Myanmar is
truly committed. We call on the Myanmar authorities to
allow full access to the United Nations and humanitarian
organizations. The swift conclusion of talks on a
memorandum of understanding with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the United Nations Development Programme would
be an encouraging first step. Furthermore, initial
efforts to implement the recommendations of the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State - the Annan
Commission - need to be followed up with meaningful
and concrete steps - steps towards recognition,
protection and citizenship for the Rohingya.

The third aspect is the need for accountability. For
every member of the Rohingya community with whom
I spoke, justice featured high on their list of needs for
them to feel safe enough to return. Without addressing
the crimes committed against the Rohinyga, the
decades-old cycle of violence and discrimination cannot
be broken. We welcome the expressed commitment of
the Myanmar authorities to facilitate independent and
credible investigations.

As a first step, we call on Myanmar to allow access
to the fact-finding nission, as well as to the Special
Rapporteur. Furthermore, we call on Myanmar to

become a party to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court or to accept the jurisdiction of the
Court in accordance with paragraph 3, article 12, of the
Rome Statute. We hope for swift and decisive action in
that regard. Otherwise, it will be up to the international
community to shoulder its responsibility and to consider
further steps to bring about accountability, including
referral to the International Criminal Court.

The visit has made it clear to all of us that the
continued engagement and support of the international
community is needed, including through the newly
appointed Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands stands ready to play its part
and to support the decisive engagement of the Council
through a draft resolution that reflects the large scale
of the crisis.

