Mr. McNee: I welcome this opportunity to
participate in today's meeting in my capacity as Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission's country-specific
configuration on Sierra Leone. I think that regular
exchanges of views between the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission foster greater synergies in
the work of both bodies.

At the outset, I would like to congratulate the
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General on
his insightful briefing today and his very effective
leadership of the United Nations peacebuilding
mission.

I would like to focus on several key
developments in Sierra Leone and, in particular,
highlight the findings of my recent visit to the country
and the preparations for the Peacebuilding
Commission's high-level special session on Sierra
Leone. The engagement of the Peacebuilding
Commission with Sierra Leone has centred on three
primary objectives: first, focusing attention on the
political and security developments in the country;
secondly, broadening the donor base and enhancing the
coherence of international support to Sierra Leone; and
thirdly, supporting new or improving existing activities
in peacebuilding priority areas. The Peacebuilding
Commission has received strong support for these
5
efforts from the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) under
the leadership of the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General.

The Commission's advocacy and resource
mobilization efforts will culminate in a high-level
special session to take place in New York on 10 June.
That event will also mark a new phase in the
engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission with
Sierra Leone and will align its work with the
peacebuilding elements of the Government's Agenda
for Change.

In preparation for the special session, and in
order to assess at first hand Sierra Leone's
peacebuilding challenges, I undertook a visit to the
country on 20 to 24 April. During that visit, I held
meetings with Sierra Leone's leadership, including the
President, the Foreign Minister and other ministers,
members of the opposition parties, the diplomatic
community, civil society and the United Nations
family. In addition to extensive meetings in Freetown,
the mission also visited Makeni in the North and, with
the Foreign Minister, inaugurated a border post
between Sierra Leone and Liberia. The visits outside
the capital provided a useful opportunity to highlight
the importance of subregional cooperation and to
explore the challenges facing rural Sierra Leone.

The visit confirmed that the Government of
Sierra Leone, with the support of the United Nations
and other partners, has made commendable progress
towards consolidating peace and democratic
governance. However, as demonstrated by events in
March, Sierra Leone's impressive democratic gains
remain fragile and could still be easily reversed. High
levels of youth unemployment, widespread corruption
and the growing threat of illicit drug trafficking all
raise the risk of relapse into conflict. More work is
needed to consolidate reforms in the justice and
security sectors, especially with respect to
strengthening the capacity and the performance of the
Sierra Leone police. Continued international support
for building the capacity of State institutions will also
be critical if Sierra Leone is to meet these challenges
and chart a path towards peace and economic
prosperity.

The Government of Sierra Leone is well aware of
these challenges and its own primary responsibility for
addressing them. The events of March, which represent
the worst cases of politically motivated violence since
the end of the civil war, were followed, as Mr. Von der
Schulenburg has just explained, by commendable and
timely action on the part of the President of Sierra
Leone and senior leaders of both main political parties.
International partners, and in particular UNIPSIL, also
played a key role by supporting the Government's
efforts to restore law and order and facilitating a
successful outcome to the bi-party dialogue.

The joint communique signed by the two leading
political parties on 2 April provides a comprehensive
basis for improving inter-party dialogue, strengthening
democratic governance and reforming key national
institutions. Not only is the joint communique a
significant achievement for Sierra Leone, but it could
also serve as a helpful blueprint for countries in similar
circumstances. The joint communique unequivocally
demonstrates that political differences within
democratic systems can and should be resolved
peacefully.

Adherence to the agreements in the communique
will require not only the political will of both parties,
but also sustained support from the international
community. In a statement welcoming the joint
communique on 6 April, the Peacebuilding
Commission encouraged both political parties to
maintain the spirit of reconciliation that prevailed
during the bi-party dialogue and called on all
stakeholders to ensure timely and effective follow-up
to the joint communique.

It is also critical that the United Nations and other
actors continue to provide resources for the
implementation of the joint communique. In this
context, I would like to highlight the catalytic role
played by the Peacebuilding Fund, which has provided
timely financial support for the follow-up to the March
events.

In addition to maintaining momentum and
political support for the joint communique, the
Peacebuilding Commission's special session will
garner support for the Government's Agenda for
Change, which was launched by President Koroma in
May. The Agenda for Change is a robust national
framework for growth, economic development and the
consolidation of peace. It outlines a clear strategy for
national action and international support. As such, the
Peacebuilding Commission's future engagement with
Sierra Leone will be aligned with the peacebuilding
elements of the Agenda for Change. The Commission
will also continue to advocate for greater subregional
cooperation, including the strengthening of subregional
institutions and the promotion of gender equality and
human rights. At the special session this week, the
Commission will call on all Member States and
international partners to recognize the Agenda for
Change as Sierra Leone's core national strategy and to
align their support accordingly.

The special session will also provide an
opportunity to highlight the work of the United Nations
family in Sierra Leone and to mobilize support for the
United Nations Joint Vision. In our View, the Joint
Vision represents an important innovation in the United
Nations approach to peacebuilding and provides a solid
basis for the Organization to achieve its integrated
peacebuilding mandate in the country. The
Peacebuilding Commission will also support resource
mobilization for the Joint Vision by launching a multi-
donor trust fund at the special session this week. I am
confident that the effective implementation of the
United Nations Joint Vision, under the leadership of
the Executive Representative of the Secretary-General,
will make a real difference in the lives of Sierra
Leoneans and in consolidating the country's hard-won
peace.

Peace consolidation in Sierra Leone continues to
require collective and timely action. Both the high-
level special session of the Commission on 10 June and
the Consultative Group meeting to be held in
November offer important opportunities for
international partners to redouble their commitment to
Sierra Leone. I am confident, given the leadership of
the Government and the sustained support of the
international community - including that of the
Security Council - that it will be possible to address
the remaining challenges to peace.

