Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): This is a timely meeting, as it has given us and a
number of other countries an opportunity to inform the
Security Council about the attacks that armed terrorist
groups from Idlib are carrying out on neighbouring
cities and towns in the suburbs of Aleppo, northern
Hama and northern Latakia. The most recent was two
days ago in the village of Al-Wadihi in the southern
suburbs of Aleppo, where those groups committed
a massacre in which 12 civilians died and more than
16 others were injured as they were celebrating a
wedding in the village. Those villagers are now living
in an indescribable state of terror after leading a safe
and normal life. Terrorists from the Al-Nusra Front,
supported by Erdogan's Turkish regime, fired rockets,
leaving the bodies of the martyrs and the wounded,
mostly women and children, scattered across the
village, and also significantly damaging houses and
other private and public property, including a health
centre and the village mosque.

That barbaric crime was part of a series committed
by terrorist groups led by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which
is the Al-Nusra Front of Al-Qaida in Syria, a terrorist
group on the Security Council's list of terrorist groups
and entities, and the Security Council should condemn
those crimes unequivocally.

I would like to provide the Council with a few
examples of the crimes that have resulted in the death of
dozens of martyrs and injuries to hundreds of innocent
civilians, including many women and children - and I
am citing only civilian victims, not military casualties.
On 25 May, the city of Al-Suqaylabiyah and the town
of Ein Al-Krum and village of Bilhsein were targeted
with dozens of missiles. On 26 May, the cities of Silhib
and Al-Suqaylabiyah were targeted with more than
30 rockets. On 29 and 31 May the town of Qamhani
was targeted with a number of rockets, and scores of
missiles and rockets were aimed at the towns of Qalaat
Al-Madiq, Karakat and Shat-ha in the northern and
north-western suburbs of Hama, along with many areas
in Aleppo and its suburbs, while the city of Jablah was
targeted with several rockets. The city of Mhardeh has
also been repeatedly targeted by scores of rockets, most
recently earlier today. The positions of the Syrian Arab
Army and the locations of allied Russian forces, in
particular Hmeimim airport, are continuously targeted
with rockets and explosive drones.

As some Council members would like to ask
questions, I wish to ask a good one: Who provides those
terrorists with all their weapons? Where do they get
their weapons? By parachute? From another planet? Or
from Council members and other Member States? Who
provides those terrorists with rockets, tanks, missiles
and mines? Where do the terrorists and their arsenals
come from? Some 100,000 foreign terrorists have
entered Syria through our borders with Turkey. We
have repeated that fact inside and outside the Council,
and a Security Council sub-committee has confirmed
that 101 Member States have exported foreign terrorist
fighters to Syria.

The statements that we have heard in this Chamber
today indicate that there is a shared understanding of
the fact that we must address the problem in Idlib. That
is what we have understood from the statements of
Council members. I refer to the city of Idlib in Syria
and not an Idlib in Florida, Britain or Germany. I am
talking about the Syrian city of Idlib. On 17 May (see S/PV.8527), I explained to the Council in detail that this
problem stems from the Turkish regime and its allies,
which continue to provide various forms of support to
terrorist groups.

The Turkish regime has disregarded its

commitments under the de-escalation agreement and

the Astana and Sochi agreements. That has allowed the

Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorist group, which includes

tens of thousands of foreign terrorists, including 15,000

Europeans, to take almost complete control of the city

of Idlib and some of the adjacent areas in north-western

Syria and to create a terrorist outpost for blackmailing

the Syrian State. It has allowed them to use hundreds of
thousands of civilians as human shields and commit the

most heinous crimes against them, spread terror, death

and destruction and destroy civilian infrastructure,

including hospitals and schools, turning them into
military barracks, detention and torture centres while
killing anyone who dares to reject their takfiri and
pre-Islamic ideologies.
Some members, as well as regrettably Mr. Lowcock
and Ms. DiCarlo, have stated that 27 hospitals have
been targeted in Idlib. I am unsure of the sources on
which they relied for that information. I wish to inform
the Council that Damascus, home to 8 million people,
has only eight public hospitals, with a further nine in its
suburbs, amount to 17 in total. I repeat that Damascus,
our capital and home to 8 million people, has only 17
public hospitals, with a further 10 private hospitals. The
total number of hospitals is therefore less than 30. That
is in Damascus, Syria's capital. Aleppo has 11 public
hospitals and 10 private hospitals, which is 21 hospitals
in total. Aleppo, the second largest city in Syria, is
home to 5 million people. As for Idlib, there are only
four public hospitals and four private hospitals, which
are eight in total. How can members in this Chamber
therefore state that 27 hospitals have been targeted in
Idlib? I would like to know their sources. I wish to state
on the record that the misleading information that has
been provided is based on lies. Those sources are lying.
There are not 27 hospitals in Idlib.

With regard to what was said by our colleague the
British representative, if the White Helmets are using
some sort of basement from which to launch attacks,
then that cannot be called a hospital; rather, it is
a makeshift medical facility. That is a mere lie; it is
simply a basement that is used to launch attacks on and
shell civilians and the Syrian Arab Army.

I also wish to refer to another scandal. We have had
sanctions, or so-called non-Council unilateral coercive
measures, imposed on us for eight years. To this day,
the United States and the European Union still prohibit
the exportation of medical devices, such as MRI and
CT scanning equipment, to Syria, as well as medical
threads used in surgical procedures in the country. I do
not understand how Council members can talk of the
humanitarian situation in Syria and express concern,
while banning the export of medical equipment to the
country. Shame on them. I would go so far as to say
that that constitutes a crime, to which the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. DiCarlo and
the humanitarian penholders are seemingly blind. The
Syrian Government and its allies do not target hospitals
or schools, as those are our hospitals and schools.

The implementation of the principles of
international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the Council's resolutions on counter-terrorism also
require support for the efforts of the Syrian Government
and its allies in combating terrorism. Partnerships must
be built with the Syrian Government, as it is the only
party concerned about ending the presence of terrorists
in Syria and improving the humanitarian situation in
general. That should be done instead of convening
meetings to show off, spread misleading information
and falsely accuse my country and its allies in order
to support terrorist groups while blocking all legal
measures taken by the Syrian Government to protect its
citizens and liberate them from the terrorist groups that
use them as human shields.

There must be no further attempts to undermine
the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic or to exploit the crisis to serve
the destructive agendas of certain countries and their
agents. We must put an end to selective policies and
systematic biased approaches. That is unequivocally
reflected in the fact that certain members overlook the
crimes committed by terrorist groups and the role of
certain Governments that are widely known to support
terrorism, as well as the war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed by the international coalition in
Raqqa, Deir ez-Zor, Hajin and Baghouz - thankfully
referred to by my Russian colleague - also overlook
the detention of tens of thousands of Syrian civilians
by American troops in Rukban camp. I would highlight
the fact that Rukban camp is on Syrian territory and is
occupied by United States troops, which are sponsoring
a terrorist group in the area known as Maghawir
Al-Thawra. That terrorist group demands 100,000
Syrian pounds for every Syrian civilian who wants to
leave the camp, with the knowledge of the Americans,
which means that a family of seven must pay 700,000
Syrian pounds in order to merely leave the camp.

Ending the suffering of Syrians in Idlib and other
parts of Syria will require the following actions.

First, the root causes of the suffering of Syrians
must be addressed, including the policies of terrorist-
sponsoring Governments, the practices of their armed
terrorist groups and the continued crimes committed
by the so-called international coalition and its militias,
including the deliberate burning of crops, such as wheat
and barley.

With regard to the burning of agricultural crops, two
or three days ago an announcement was made in Turkey
in Arabic, addressing Syrian farmers. According to the
announcement, the Turkish Government is willing to
buy their crops with Turkish pounds. The crops that
are not burned will therefore be sold to Turkey for a
quarter of their price. Certain countries accuse us of
making false allegations about the Turkish regime.
The Turkish regime has absolutely no regard for good-
neighbourliness. If it did, it would think about the
future in the context of international law and good-
neighbourliness agreements between Syria and Turkey.

The Turkish Government must look to the future.
We and Turkey are in a region bound by geography
and history. The Erdogan regime should not open its
borders with Syria to hundreds of thousands of foreign
terrorists and the smuggling into Syria of all kinds of
weapons, including chemical weapons that are brought
from Benghazi through Istanbul, then to Aleppo and
eventually to Khan Al-Assal with the help of a Syrian
terrorist by the name of Haitham Kassar, who worked
for Turkish intelligence. I have sent the Council 800
official letters detailing that information, but some do
not wish to read them.

Secondly, the illegal presence of United States and
Turkish forces on Syrian territories and the suffering of
millions of civilians in the areas controlled at the hands
of those forces must end.

Thirdly, the illegal unilateral coercive measures
imposed on the Syrian people, which constitute
economic terrorism and a collective punishment
of the Syrian people, must be immediately and
unconditionally lifted.

F ourthly, the deliberate and systematic politicization
of the humanitarian issue and attempts by some States
to exploit it in a manner that is completely inconsistent
with the principles of humanitarian law must come to
an end.

Fifthly, the reconstruction efforts of the Syrian
State in areas destroyed by terrorism must be
supported. The United States, Britain, France and other
countries oppose the reconstruction of areas destroyed
by terrorism in Syria. It is up to Council members to
interpret the meaning of that. The Syrian State must
be supported in its efforts to facilitate the safe and
dignified return of Syrian refugees, and donor pledges
should be directed to that end.

In conclusion, the Council has adopted more than
46 resolutions on counter-terrorism, and nine years
have passed since the beginning of the terrorist war
waged against my country, Syria. The dimensions of
that war and the role played by certain Governments
in fuelling and prolonging it have now become clear.
However, some Council members and other Member
States continue to invest in terrorism as a way to target
the Syrian State, instead of building a partnership with
it against terrorism. Council members may draw their
own conclusion from that.

I again reiterate that the Syrian Government will
not succumb to the terrorist war imposed on it and will
not allow its citizens to be endangered. The Syrian
Government will continue to exercise its sovereign and
constitutional rights and implement the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
international law to defend its land and citizens, combat
terrorism and end the illegitimate foreign presence on
all territories of the Syrian Arab Republic. My country's
Government is also committed to a political solution
that will allow Syrians to determine their own future
and choices through a Syrian-Syrian dialogue led by
Syria, without foreign interference and in a manner that
will guarantee the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Syria.

