Mr. Ybafiez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour to participate in this high-level open debate.
This is my first statement to the Security Council since
Spain joined the Council as a non-permanent member
on 1 January. I am doubly pleased that it coincides with
the presidency of our Chilean friends and that President
Bachelet is here among us today. I recall that hers was
the first Visit by a Head of State to Spain during the
reign of Philip VI, which shows the very close ties that
bind our two nations.

I would also like to thank you, Madam President,
for convening an open debate on a topic of ongoing
timeliness. I also welcome the Secretary-General's
presence and thank him, the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Nobel Peace Prize recipient Gbowee
for their informative briefings.

The three pillars on which the United Nations is
based are not independent of each other. On the contrary,
if one fails, it threatens the entire structure designed by
the Charter of the United Nations. As rightly pointed
out by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, there is no
peace without development and there is no lasting
peace or sustainable development without respect for
human rights and the rule of law. We could also add that
there is no peace or sustainable development without
inclusion in all its dimensions. That must be the main
conclusion of this debate. The concept note prepared
by the President (S/2015/6, annex) is very useful in that
respect.

No one disputes that the Security Council has as its
primary responsibility the maintenance of international
peace and security. However, the idea of peace and
security has changed since the time when the Charter
was adopted. Peace is not the mere absence of war, just
as security is not limited to reducing threats. Both are
much more complex.

In today's world, peace and security are an
ensemble of a number of factors that range from
citizens' personal security to overcoming deep social
fractures, from the proper functioning of impartial
institutions to the absence of widespread corruption,
from eradicating gender-based Violence in all social
strata to educational reforms aimed at combating hate
speech, from clean and fair election campaigns to
respect for the territorial integrity of States. They all
form a protective framework that is closely linked to
the prosperity of nations and respect for human rights.

In other words, the notion of peace and
security is inclusive, so that inclusion in all its
dimensions - whether territorial, national, ethnic,
social, economic, cultural or gender-related - is key to
the inner stability of a country, to international peace
and, no less important, to preventing future conflicts.

Spain understands this idea very well, as it is a
pluralist nation that loves diversity. We are a nation
with different cultures and sensitivities, established on
historical alluvial deposits built up as a result of being
located at the crossroads between Europe, Africa and
the Americas, the meeting place of East and West, the
gateway to the Mediterranean and the bridge between
the new and the old continents. All that has resulted
in the mixture of ethnicities, cultures, identities and
varied expressions of humanity that we have been
incorporating for centuries. Unity in diversity is one of
our outstanding features.

More recently, the arrival of a large number of
immigrants has been a new and enriching contribution,
although not one without challenges. The principle of
inclusiveness has been one that has guided our actions,
both in the cooperation with the immigrants' countries
of origin and with regard to social policies towards
immigrants.

As regards our international cooperation, three
of the five guidelines contained in the fourth Master
Plan of Spanish Cooperation, which is valid until the
end of 2016, are inspired by the idea that inclusive
development is essential for maintaining peace and
security. I refer to the consolidation of democratic
processes and the rule oflaw, reducing vulnerability to
extreme poverty and to crisis, and promoting the rights
of women and gender equality. That means that Spain
gives priority to cooperation projects inspired by those
inclusive guidelines.

At the domestic level, the social, economic and
gender inclusion of immigrants is a priority. That
has been achieved through social policies that have
involved support for immigrants" integration into our
society, and awareness-raising and preparing Spanish
society to adequately receive them. The ultimate goal
of those policies is to prevent the creation of pockets of
exclusion, as that could easily lead to marginalization,
and to prevent xenophobia.

This philosophy of inclusion is at the root of the
preventive diplomacy that the Charter lays out in its
Chapter VI and that has certainly been revived in recent
years. It is a concept coined many years ago by Dag
Hammarskjold, which reaches its full expression in
international situations such as the one we are currently
experiencing.

Spain has clearly opted for preventive diplomacy
as an instrument of international relations, especially
at the multilateral level. My country is a founding and
active member of the Group of Friends of Mediation,
created at the request of Finland and Turkey, and has
launched, together with Morocco, the Mediation in the
Mediterranean initiative, which aims to build a culture
of prevention on both sides of a geographical area
marked by tensions and conflicts ofvarious kinds. Also
in the region, we have launched, along with Algeria, a
Water Strategy for the Western Mediterranean, which
aims to defuse potential conflicts in the region related
to that vital resource.

Also, as founders, along with Turkey, of the
Alliance of Civilizations, we believe that dialogue
among different cultures and religions is a crucial basis
for efforts to defuse existing tensions, prevent latent
tensions from worsening and debunk myths about the
Vision of "the other" in national, ethnic or ideological
narratives of various societies. That task is important
and urgent. To accomplish it, we need powerful tools
that bring together different sensitivities with one
purpose: to avoid conflicts and to work for peace.

The King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz International
Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural Dialogue is
another forum called upon to play a role in promoting
harmony, tolerance and interfaith dialogue. Spain will
do all it can to ensure that this centre can use its great
potential for this purpose.

Lastly, the maintenance of international peace and
security requires inclusive instruments to help prevent
the outbreak of conflict; this is clear in the context of
the responsibility that every Government has to protect
its citizens. Such protection in the face of potential
mass crimes means that we must take early actions, and
inclusive development is not the least of these.

Spain believes that the maintenance of international
peace and security is not a question ofa purely military
or police-related nature. If we have learned anything in
the almost 70 years of existence of this Organization,
it is that it there is no point in achieving a ceasefire or
freezing a conflict if we do not address its root causes.
This requires developing preventive policies in all
areas; inclusive development forms an essential part of
such policies.

In the final analysis, we must create inclusive
development strategies in order to strengthen the role of
the United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. In order to be effective, such
strategies must be comprehensive and cover all
aspects of inclusiveness - territorial, national, ethnic,
social, gender, economic and cultural - and they
require participation by and coordination among all
of the principal organs of the United Nations system,
including the Council.

I should like to conclude, therefore, by
congratulating the Chilean presidency for having
taken the lead in introducing inclusive development
as a topic of discussion in the Council. I congratulate
you, Madam President, and welcome the presidential
statement adopted today (S/PRST/2015/3), to which we
contributed on the basis of our national experience. It is
now up to us all to follow up on this initiative.

