I thank the Special Coordinator for his briefing. I welcome Minister Al-Malki, as well as the Russian and Vietnamese Deputy Ministers and the Tunisian Secretary of State. We recall every month that the parameters for the settlement of the Israeli- Palestinian conflict are well-known: two States, living in peace and security, within secure and recognized borders on the basis of the 1967 lines, both with Jerusalem as their capital. This is not an ideological position disconnected from reality and belonging to a bygone past. On the contrary, it is the only realistic solution to ensure the stability of the region and, in particular, the security of Israel, on which France will never compromise, and the Palestinians' inalienable right to self-determination. What is at stake is the credibility of the Security Council, which has endorsed those parameters and is the guarantor of international law. Along with its European partners, France has welcomed the normalization agreements between Israel, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain, and welcomes the announcement of an agreement with the Sudan. France hopes that they can contribute to the stability of the region. The decision taken in that regard by the Israeli authorities to suspend their annexation plans is a positive step. France calls on Israel to make it a definitive measure. France is concerned about the current dynamics of de facto annexation of the occupied territories. In that regard, we condemn the decision of the Israeli authorities to launch plans for the construction of more than 4,900 housing units in the West Bank settlements. The expansion of the settlements is a flagrant violation of international law and constitutes an obstacle to a just, comprehensive and lasting peace, as set out in resolution 2334 (2016). That decision is compounded by the launch of the bidding process for the construction of new units in Givat Hamatos, scheduled for 2 November. The record rates of demolition of Palestinian structures, including in East Jerusalem, are also worrisome. These demolitions must stop. That is what we reaffirmed with Germany, Spain, Italy and the United Kingdom on 16 October. We must work to recreate a positive dynamic to enable the parties to resume dialogue. In conjunction with its European and Arab partners, France is ready to support a gradual resumption of talks based on concrete and realistic commitments on both sides. France continues to coordinate closely with Germany, Egypt and Jordan on this issue, in line with the Amman meeting of 24 September. France will also support any initiative that is in line with the agreed parameters and international law. In that regard, we welcome Minister Al-Malki's detailed proposal to organize an international conference and invite him to do so with the help of all stakeholders. We wish to take advantage of the presence of Mr. Al-Malki today to encourage him to continue the initial efforts in the area of inter-Palestinian reconciliation. We welcome the commitment of President Abbas to hold general elections in the Palestinian territories. We call on the Palestinian Authority to hold these elections without further delay in order to meet democratic demands and promote peace. France and the European Union are ready to support him in that endeavour. Finally, we reiterate our appeal to all Member States, especially our partners in the Gulf, to finance the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which is all the more essential in times of the coronavirus disease pandemic. France has doubled its contribution to the Agency since 2017 and will continue to support it in these difficult times. It will also continue to support civil society organizations and to call for respect for international humanitarian law and human rights. France calls on the Council to join efforts to relaunch a political process that has been at a standstill since 2014. That is our responsibility as guarantors of international peace and security.
