At the outset, I would like to express Costa Rica's appreciation for the convening of this high-level open debate to consider the interlinkages between peace operations and human rights. Costa Rica also welcomes the presence of the Minister of Defence of Germany, Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Michelle Bachelet, and we thank them for their remarks. Over the past seven decades, United Nations peacekeeping has evolved into a complex global undertaking. Peacekeeping operations are not an end in themselves, but a tool for protecting civilians and enabling political negotiations in conflict- affected States, which can lead to viable and sustainable peace processes. In this regard, please allow me highlight two aspects that are of relevance to my delegation. First, we need to improve our monitoring mechanisms for violations of international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law through sharing of information, good practices and, most important, capacity-building and training for peacekeepers. Peacekeeper training, in particular regarding human rights and protection issues, is a strategic investment that enables United Nations military, police and civilian staff to effectively implement their increasingly multifaceted mandates. Without such training, there is a risk that some military personnel could see all human rights issues as the responsibility of human rights sections alone, diminishing their own contributions to monitoring and addressing grave violations. There should be no disconnect between the normative framework on which peacekeeping is based and human rights-related mandated tasks carried out by a mission. Protecting civilians must include upholding their rights. Secondly, sexual violence remains a pervasive tactic of modern war, one recognized as a war crime that is preventable and punishable. Costa Rica would like to raise its concerns over sexual and gender-based violence in areas of operations, cases of sexual exploitation and previous abuses committed by United Nations personnel, despite the existence of conduct and discipline systems and a zero-tolerance policy. It is crucial that the United Nations, the media and civil society groups continue to exert pressure on countries that contribute peacekeepers to respond to abuse allegations more seriously and more transparently. Otherwise, prosecutions of crimes will remain the exception. The global response to such crimes must ensure the punishment of the perpetrators and comprehensive support to survivors. The impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has been multidimensional and the challenges that peacekeepers face in fulfilling their mandates - especially related to the protection of civilians - are greater than ever. Peacekeepers are not only having to cope with the pandemic but must also support and protect people amid rising infection risks. In this regard, we would like to recognize the work carried out by the Department of Peace Operations, the Department of Operational Support and, most important, by the peacekeepers themselves, who continue to protect the vulnerable while adapting to new circumstances affecting their own protection. Costa Rica also welcomes the implementation of a system- wide COVID-19 medical evacuation treatment framework for United Nations patients. Costa Rica is honoured to serve as a regional medical evacuation hub in the western hemisphere.
