Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Republic of Senegal
for convening this important meeting. I would
also like to thank all of today's briefers for their
valuable presentations.
Water scarcity is a threat to human life and health.
It is also a factor that threatens and undermines
economic and social development, and a potential
source of political instability and conflict - unless
we are collectively able to deal with the emerging
challenges posed by the crises of the lack of potable
water and unequal access to water. We all share the
human responsibility to make water a tool for regional
and international cooperation and a factor of economic
and social well-being in the effective implementation
of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

The scarcity of water resources in Jordan affects our
security and sovereignty, not only because it stands in
the way of achieving the SDGs, particularly Goal 6, but
also because Jordan suffers from serious water scarcity
and a lower per capita share vis-a-vis international
standards. Jordan is the third-poorest country in water
resources, and the per-inhabitant share of renewable
water resources is lower than that in the international
Water Poverty Index.

The protracted refugee situation adds pressure
to the infrastructure in host countries. The common
factors of that pressure are water, energy and the
human environment. The humanitarian crises,
particularly the Syrian refugee crisis, has depleted our
fresh-water aquifer, which should have been protected
and preserved for future generations. Those are not
the only challenges. Others include the possibility
of groundwater contamination, not to mention the
possibility that that water too might be depleted due to
the increase in population.

The demands on fresh-water sources in Jordan
since the crisis in Syria began have increased by more
than 25 per cent. Jordan hosts the largest number of
refugees in the world in overall numbers. Hence, we
have shouldered the responsibility on behalf of the
international community, and that has created new and
more complex realities that have greatly challenged the
ability ofJordan to achieve the SDGs. In that connection,
I wish to thank the International Committee of the Red
Cross for its help in meeting those challenges through
its joint cooperation with Jordan in the rehabilitation of
my country's water networks in order to provide services
to over 150,000 inhabitants in the host communities of

Syrian refugees.

The dangers of water scarcity and the challenges
of climate change, pollution, population growth and
the movements of internally displaced persons and
refugees require an approach based on international
governance that would make these issues priorities
of the international community. They are central to
Jordan's interests, both at the political and technical
levels. Therefore, we have contributed to, and actively
participated in, all international forums that support
international cooperation frameworks to solve our water
problems, including the Secretary-General's Advisory
Board on Water and Sanitation and the High-Level
Panel on Water that was set up by the United Nations
and the World Bank to devise effective measures to
expedite the implementation of SDG 6, on the provision
of clean water and sanitation.

We would like to reaffirm that it is ethically and
legally unacceptable to use water as a tool of war and
conflict, as that affects the water rights of civilians
in their lands, which leads to the deterioration of
humanitarian conditions and more refugees and
internally displaced persons.

The threat pertaining to water is not just a matter
of scarcity or unequal access. It also includes the threat
of the expansion of the activities of terrorist groups
that spread the message of fear through killing and
violence, as well as the possibility of contaminating
water resources. Through their malicious acts, those
gangs have made it clear that they adhere to no ethical
boundaries, as they are desperate to use water resources
as tools of threats, intimidation and terrorism.

In conclusion, we call upon the international
community to work seriously to encourage international
and regional cooperation with regard to water resources.
That would protect the human environment and ensure
water security so as to spread peace among countries in
conflict and provide a social and economic environment
that benefits all people.

