Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish at the outset to congratulate you warmly,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. We have full
confidence in you, Sir, and in your friendly country,
Singapore. Allow me also to express our deep
appreciation to Ambassador Sergey Lavrov, Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, for his great
skills and personal contributions to the Council's
achieving important successes under his leadership.

Fourteen days ago the Security Council adopted
resolution 1405 (2002), which welcomed the initiative
of the Secretary-General to develop accurate
information on recent events in the Jenin refugee camp
through a fact-finding team. That resolution also
requested the Secretary-General to keep the Security
Council seized of the matter. It came as a natural and
responsible response to increasing reports about the
humanitarian catastrophe caused by the Israeli
occupation forces, particularly in the Jenin refugee
camp. Resolution 1405 (2002) addressed the horrific
humanitarian situation of the civilian Palestinian
population in a general way and established the
framework for addressing the events in Jenin. It is
impossible to fully understand what occurred there
without putting it in the context of the activities of the
Israeli occupation forces in all the re-occupied
Palestinian cities and towns.

Following the adoption of resolution 1405 (2002),
the Secretary-General formed the team, which was
made up of three widely respected personalities. It also
included two high-level senior advisers. Two others
were subsequently added, as were several experts in
various areas. The Palestinian side and the entire world
welcomed the composition of this team as a serious
step toward finding out exactly what happened in the
Jenin refugee camp.

Subsequently, we all have seen how the Israelis
completely reneged on accepting the fact-finding team.
We have also seen a series of Israeli positions aimed at
undermining the team and jeopardizing any results that
it might reach, as well as attempts to blackmail the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Secretariat.
Despite the Secretary-General's response to
accommodate the Israeli side's concern regarding
clarifications - on which we had reservations - the
Israeli positions deteriorated and basically represented
rejection of the Secretary-General's initiative, his fact-
finding team and Security Council resolution 1405
(2002).

The Secretary-General sent letters to the
Permanent Observer of Palestine and the Permanent
Representative of Israel on 27 April 2002, in which he
outlined the parameters and modalities of the work of
the fact-finding team. We agreed generally with the
content of those letters, and we had intended to clarify
fully our position once we had received an indication
that the team was proceeding to the region. I wish to
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his efforts and his insistence on maintaining his basic
position and for preserving the integrity of the team's
mandate.

The day before yesterday, the Secretary-General
sent a letter to the Security Council on this matter,
which contained a description of Israeli positions and
of the Secretary-General's conclusions and announced
his intention to disband the team. The content of the
Secretary-General's letter itself constitutes full
condemnation of the position of Israel - the
occupying Power - regarding the team. We strongly
condemn the decision of Israel - the occupying
Power- to refuse compliance with resolution 1405
(2002) and to impede the work of the fact-finding
team.

We believe that the entire world should fully
condemn Israel's position. We also believe that the
Security Council should have supported the Secretary-
General's efforts a few days earlier. Indeed, we
proposed that to the Council, but, to our deep regret,
the Council did not respond accordingly.

Following the Secretary-General's decision, we
thought that the Council should take a drastic step to
stress the need to implement resolution 1405 (2002),
order Israel not to impede the team, request the
Secretary-General to dispatch the team immediately
and request both sides to cooperate with the team
without obstacles or conditions. The Arab Group had
indeed submitted a draft resolution along those lines.
Unfortunately, it did not receive adequate support
because of the objections of one of the permanent
members of the Security Council.

The Council's backtracking before the Israeli
rejection will constitute a real scandal for the Council.
It will constitute a breach of the provisions of the
Charter and abrogation on the part of the Council of its
responsibilities, and it will have serious political and
operational implications on the ground. We still hope
that the Council will be able today to adopt an
appropriate resolution even at a minimum level. Even
if the Council fails to do so, we will resort to a
resumption of the tenth emergency special session of
the General Assembly in order to address this situation,
if only partly.

The fact that we all should bear in mind - and
that must be the focus of any analysis of the
situation - is that Israel is the occupying Power and
that the Palestinian territories are occupied territories
to which the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949
applies, as has been set forth in 25 resolutions adopted
by the Security Council.

The position of Israel towards the fact-finding
team, among other things, proves beyond any doubt
that the Israeli occupation forces have indeed
committed unspeakable atrocities against our people,
especially in the Jenin refugee camp. Israel committed
war crimes and probably carried out a massacre of the
camp population. The atrocities committed by the
Israeli occupation forces are now established facts. The
firing of missiles from helicopter gunships at that very
tiny, densely populated area; the use of tanks and
armoured bulldozers to demolish houses, in some cases
while civilians were still inside them; the obstruction
of the delivery of food and medicine; the denial of
access of humanitarian agencies to the camp for 11
days; and, last but not least, the use of human beings as
shields are all established facts. These acts constitute
war crimes. What remains now is to establish the scope
of those crimes and whether they indeed constituted a
massacre and crimes against humanity.

The world must investigate these crimes and get
to the bottom of the facts in full. It must adopt the
measures necessary to prosecute the war criminals and
the commanders and members of military units who
deliberately killed civilians and wreaked unwarranted,
wide-scale destruction, especially, as we indicated
earlier, General Shaul Mofaz, chief of staff of the
Israeli occupation army.

Resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) have
not yet been fully implemented. It has now been more
than a month since their adoption and the resolutions
have yet to be implemented in full. After several weeks
of sweeping Israeli military assault, the Israeli
occupation forces have left some towns, but they have
tightened their siege against all of them and the
occupation forces remain inside some cities. The
compound of Chairman Yasser Arafat in Ramallah was,
until the day before yesterday, under military siege.
The end of that siege, despite the fact that it was a
positive step, is not a source of satisfaction to us. The
situation arising from the Israeli military assault is
illegal and represents a gross breach of the Security
Council resolutions I have just mentioned. The Church
of the Nativity is still under military siege and
yesterday was a target of another military assault that
set a Franciscan convent and a Greek Orthodox church
on fire, which constitutes another Israeli crime. Israel,
the occupying Power, continues to tighten its siege of
all Palestinian towns and is reoccupying some parts of
those towns, as has happened recently in Hebron,
Qalqilya and other Palestinian towns and villages and,
today, in Nablus.

The purpose of the Israeli military campaign
remains the same: to cause devastating harm to our
population and to the Palestinian Authority and to
prevent the situation from returning to where it was
before the campaign, let alone before September 2000.
It is not, of course, to put an end to the Israeli
occupation of all Palestinian territories occupied since
1967, including Jerusalem. The essence of the position
of Mr. Sharon and his Government has not changed,
notwithstanding the resolutions of the Security Council
and the position of the international community in this
regard and the efforts of some parties, which we fully
appreciate. Still, those efforts have not yet led to the
full implementation of resolutions 1402 (2002) and
1403 (2002).

The entire issue requires the Security Council to
take a more serious position on the basis of the Charter.
That is precisely what we now look forward to.

