Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Like others, I
would like to thank Mr. Rashid Khalikov for updating
us on the humanitarian situation in the Sudan.

The continued delivery of humanitarian
assistance in the Sudan is vital to the survival of a
significant part of the population of Darfur. Austria is
therefore deeply concerned by the decision of the
Government of the Sudan to expel 13 international
humanitarian non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
and to revoke the licenses of three Sudanese NGOS.
We are also gravely concerned by recent reports that
the Sudanese Government has called for all
international aid groups to leave the Sudan within one
year. We have already heard - and the point has
already been made - that the aid organizations
affected by these decisions are responsible for some
40 to 50 per cent of the aid provided to Darfur. These
organizations therefore provide an indispensable
lifeline to many Sudanese civilians.

The point has already been made that over
1 million civilians are immediately affected by the
decision to expel these NGOs. The United Nations
depends on the NGOs as its partners. The expulsions
leave behind life-threatening gaps in assistance for the
population in Darfur, particularly at a time when there
have been outbreaks of meningitis in Southern Darfur,
including in Kalma camp. Over time, the impact of the
expulsion of NGOs will be dramatic in such fields as
water and sanitation, health care and food distribution.
The loss of these vital aid services could lead to a
serious deterioration of the humanitarian situation and
to greater population movements throughout Darfur
and across the border to Chad.

In accordance with the call made by the European
Union just a few days ago, we therefore appeal to the
Government of the Sudan to urgently reconsider its
decision and to ensure that humanitarian assistance to
all people in need in the Sudan be guaranteed. We are
also sure that the United Nations will do everything in
its power to fill some of the gaps left behind by the
expelled NGOs, but we know that it is not possible at
this point for the Organization, as the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has made clear,
to fill all these gaps. In this situation, we believe that it
is essential to recall that it is the Government of the
Sudan that has the primary responsibility to ensure the
provision of basic services, in particular food, shelter
and health care, for its civilian population.

Other speakers have already referred to the
number of attacks on peacekeeping personnel and
humanitarian workers and to incidents of banditry that
have greatly increased in recent times. All parties to
the conflict need to show restraint in the current
situation. All sides must abide by their obligation to
protect the civilian population under applicable rules of
human rights and international humanitarian law. As
far as the Government of the Sudan is concerned, we
expect it to ensure the safety and security of all United
Nations personnel and humanitarian workers and to
refrain from any form of intimidation towards the
human rights community in the Sudan.
