The President: Representing the Security Council, I
should like to express my sincere appreciation to the
Secretary-General for preparing this report on the situation
in Africa and for presenting it to us today.

I wish to recall that, on 25 September 1997, the
Security Council, at its 38l9th meeting, which was held at
the ministerial level, requested the Secretary-General to
submit a report containing concrete recommendations
regarding the sources of conflict in Africa, on ways to
prevent and address these conflicts, and on how to lay the
foundation for durable peace and economic growth
following their resolution. This request was made in View
of the continuing grave concern of the Council over the
number and intensity of armed conflicts on the continent.
The Council expressed its view that such conflicts
threaten regional peace, cause massive human dislocation
and suffering, perpetuate instability and divert resources
from long-term development.

I am confident that I speak for all the members of
the Security Council when I say, Mr. Secretary-General,
that we in the Council are impressed by the commitment
and insight which you have brought to your task. We
especially appreciate your incisive observations and
carefully structured recommendations, and highly
commend your efforts in preparing this report. The
recommendations you made in the report are indeed
concrete and comprehensive, and provide us with ample
basis for our discussion as to how we can best contribute
to the peace, stability and prosperity of the African
continent.

It is my intention, as President of the Security
Council, to request that Council members study the report
carefully and thoroughly, and then to convene a formal
meeting of the Security Council on 24 April 1998 to
discuss the report. I would invite other Members and
observers of the United Nations wishing to do so also to
participate in that discussion.

On this occasion, I should like to state that the
Security Council reaffirms its intention to review
promptly the recommendations of the Secretary-General
with a view to taking steps consistent with its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations.

Once again, Mr. Secretary-General, thank you for
coming to this formal meeting of the Council and
presenting your report to its members, in the presence of
the general membership of the United Nations.

In accordance with the understanding reached in the
Council's prior consultations, the Security Council will
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda at a
meeting to be held at 10 a.m. on 24 April 1998, at which
there will be an open debate on the report of the
Secretary-General.

The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.
