Mr. Bonser (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Bolivia for convening this debate on the
grave threat posed to international peace and security
by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors.

Canada is pleased to align itself with the statement
of the Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004), and
would like to make the following additional three points.

First, Canada fully supports resolution 1540
(2004) and its successor resolutions as essential to the
international non-proliferation architecture. Indeed, we
all need to step-up our efforts to achieve its full and
universal implementation as quickly as possible.

(spoke in English)

As a co-sponsor of resolution 2325 (2016), Canada
particularly welcomed measures aimed at strengthening
assistance requests and mechanisms. To support those
measures, we are pleased to announce funding to the
Stimson Center to implement a 1540 assistance support
initiative. This initiative will create a new website
with a comprehensive list of assistance providers and
help to develop more detailed and strategic requests
for assistance. It aims to provide the Office for
Disarmament Affairs and committed States Members
of the United Nations with an action plan for more
effectively transmitting assistance requests through the
1540 Committee. We are also providing new funding
for several other projects related to resolution1540
(2004), including continued support for a Caribbean
Community regional 1540 coordinator, and further
assistance to partner countries in Latin America and
the Caribbean for legislative implementation.

Secondly, we recognize that fast-evolving
proliferation risks and advances in science, technology
and commerce demand dynamic and flexible responses.
Domestically, Canada is strengthening its counter-
proliferation capabilities by increasing funding and
amendinglegislationtobettercontrolbrokering activitie,
and weapon-of-mass destruction-related exports. We
continue to monitor advances in science and technology
and promote responsible innovation. Through targeted
outreach, we are educating stakeholders about the
proliferation risks associated with chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear sensitive technologies and
dual-use goods. Internationally, under Canada's
chairmanship, the Nuclear Security Contact Group
is working to identify and address new and emerging
challenges to nuclear security.

Thirdly, Canada is pleased to chair the high-
level fissile material cut-off treaty expert preparatory
group to prepare the way for negotiating a treaty to
end fissile material production for nuclear weapons.
A fissile material cut-off treaty would reduce the risk
of non-State actors acquiring these materials, thereby
enhancing global nuclear security and reducing the risk
of nuclear terrorism.

In conclusion, Canada stands ready to partner in
relevant and constructive ways with all interested
national and regional parties to address the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction.

