Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and
Assistant Secretary-General Gilmour for their briefings
on the latest developments in Darfur and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).

Since our last briefing in April (see S/PV.8513),
the United States has become increasingly concerned
that political uncertainty in Khartoum is adversely
impacting the situation in Darfur. Stability there is
intertwined with the rest of the country and the region,
as other speakers have noted. The gravity of several
recent incidents in Darfur is especially troubling.
These incidents call into question the commitment of
the Transitional Military Council to respecting the
rights of Darfuris and to acting in good faith to find
durable peace. In that regard, reports of an attack on
civilians in Deleij in Central Darfur on 9 June are
deeply disturbing. That attack resulted in a number of
casualties, and we call on UNAMID to investigate.

Beyond Darfur, the Sudan's security forces' reported
use of violence last week to break up a peaceful sit-in
is also alarming. The incident outside of the Sudanese
armed forces headquarters in Khartoum killed more
than 100 unarmed protesters and wounded hundreds
more. Reports that the forces of the Transitional
Military Council have directed such violence against
civilians, obstructed medical care, blocked access to
the internet and restricted media and civil society raise
serious questions about the its willingness to negotiate
a transition to a civilian-led Government.

The United States strongly condemns the killing,
beating and sexual assault of protesters and other
civilians. We call on the Transitional Military Council
to stop these attacks and create a more conducive
environment for renewed political negotiations with the
Declaration of Freedom and Change Forces coalition.
Continued international support for UNAMID must be
considered in the context of good faith efforts by the
Transitional Military Council to responsibly maintain
basic services for the people of the Sudan and its
progress in facilitating a sustainable political solution
for the country.

The Transitional Military Council can take steps
to show that it is ready to negotiate. Allowing for an
independent investigation of the events in Khartoum
and holding accountable those responsible for the
recent violence would be a welcomed first step. Beyond
this, allowing all political voices to freely express their
opinions and withdrawing the Rapid Support Forces
and other militia from Khartoum would demonstrate
further good will.

The United States supports the African Union (AU)
Peace and Security Council's 6 June communique, the
AU's decision to suspend the Sudan's membership and
its strong message on the need to transition quickly to
a civilian-led Government. We also welcome the recent
diplomatic initiative by the Ethiopian Prime Minister,
undertaken along with the AU and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, to engage the Transitional
Military Council and the opposition. Those efforts will
help encourage a peaceful resolution of the crisis.

We urge all parties to continue the process towards
a civilian transition in an atmosphere of calm, and we
are ready to work with our partners in the Council and
the region to support these efforts.

