Mr. Bale (Congo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Sir, I would like to congratulate you on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and to thank you for having organized this
debate on an issue so crucial and vital to Africa. I
extend my delegation's congratulations to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Japan,
who led the Council's work during the month of
February, and seize this opportunity to offer to him the
warmest appreciation of the Government of the Congo
for his country's commitment to peace in Africa.

Once again, Africa returns to the Security
Council's agenda, as if to remind us that the
establishment and maintenance of peace and security
remain a major challenge, even though appreciable
progress has been achieved as a result of actions taken
under the leadership of the African Union.

Here, it is worth recalling that peace and security
are preconditions for all sustainable economic
development. It is to that end that the African Union
and its regional and subregional integration
organizations are endeavouring to build a peace and
security architecture, including by putting in place
early warning systems and standby forces as
peacekeeping operations conclude.

This quest for peace and stability, including with
regard to conflict prevention, management and
resolution on the continent, is vibrantly reflected in the
actions carried out in Darfur, where the African Union
Mission in Sudan preceded the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, and in Somalia
with the African Union Mission in Somalia, which is
awaiting substantial support from and a handover to
the United Nations.

Similar efforts have been made at the subregional
level. The contribution of the forces of the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community,
expanded to the Economic Community of Central
African States, was most decisive in the gradual
restoration of stability in the Central African Republic
and facilitated the deployment of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad.
Various initiatives of African countries have made it
possible to give the populations of such countries as
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi
reasons to hope for lasting peace.

Africa's political commitment to investing in
peace and stabilization on the continent is thus a
reality. Regrettably, that commitment collides with a
dearth of resources and limited capacities. That is why
my delegation appeals once again to the international
community to continue to support and further commit
itself alongside the African Union and its subregional
organizations in their joint efforts to establish a peace
architecture and in the deployment of peacekeeping
operations and various peace processes under way on
the continent.

In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
multifaceted support provided by Africa's bilateral and
multilateral partners, which are assisting the African
Union in its various peace and security programmes,
and recognizes the growing involvement of the United
Nations. The Council's recent decisions concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, the
Central African Republic and Somalia reflect the
concerns of Africa and open up promising prospects for
peace and security in those countries - prospects that
are, however, waiting to be realized.

Here, my delegation highlights the relevance of
the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, which today serves as a springboard
for developing the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union, in particular between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council. The challenges that Africa is called
upon to meet in order to establish and ensure lasting
peace and security, particularly within the framework
of peacekeeping operations, should promote more
dynamic and better coordinated cooperation with the
entire United Nations system, since the causes of
conflicts and crises are as many as they are varied.
Thus, such cooperation, if it is to be fruitful, must
focus on strengthening the complementary efforts of
those two bodies, particularly in the areas of preventive
diplomacy and peacebuilding.

In that context, my delegation would like to
congratulate Mr. Romano Prodi and the African Union-
United Nations panel that he chaired on their report on
modalities for support to peacekeeping operations
under a United Nations mandate, contained in
document S/2008/813. The relevant recommendations
set out in the report, while not exhaustive, enlighten us
as to the path to be followed to make the difficult work
of establishing and building peace more effective. The
African Union has undertaken that task in its
supplementary role, which cannot replace the primary
role of the United Nations and its Security Council in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
However, this process is only in its infancy and should
be followed up with an in-depth analysis of those
recommendations in order to strengthen the human and
institutional capacities of the African Union in the area
of peacekeeping and to ensure that it has sufficient and
predictable resources.

Finally, by striving to meet the challenge of
achieving peace and security, African States and the
African Union, in a joint spirit of enthusiasm, wish to
play their rightful role in extricating the African
continent from its tragic fate of war, conflict and crisis,
which is hampering its march towards development. To
that end, they have quite rightly turned to the United
Nations, which is a centre for harmonizing the actions
of nations, to ensure that an Africa where peace and
security reign can fully participate in international
peace and security.

