Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today's
meeting. My gratitude also goes to the Executive
Directors of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate for their input.

As global concerns, both international terrorism
and transnational organized crimes require a global
response, and the United Nations has a decisive role to
play in both cases. While the Security Council should
continue its role in addressing international terrorism,
issues related to transnational organized crimes
must be dealt with only by the General Assembly.
Terrorist and criminal groups have different motives
and use different methods. However, the impacts of
their activities are very similar - both are extremely
disruptive and exceedingly destructive.

Iran is the victim of the activities of terrorist groups
and transnational criminals alike. At the same time, we
are at the forefront of combating both menaces. In the
past four decades, 17,161 Iranian citizens, including
almost 200 high-ranking political figures, among them
one President, one Prime Minister, one judiciary chief,
one deputy chief of the armed forces and 27 members of
Parliament, as well as four nuclear scientists, have been
martyred by foreign-backed terrorist groups.

The Mujahedeen-e Khalq (MKO), which is
responsible for the killing of at least 12,000 Iranian
civilians and many Iraqi citizens, as well as a number
of citizens of various nationalities, continues to receive
funds from certain countries in the region, while
enjoying the support of certain States, including in
Europe. Moreover, after being delisted as a terrorist
group by the United States, MKO is now active in this
country and its members are cooperating closely with
the United States intelligence community to develop
disruptive and destructive plots and plans against Iran.

Cognizant of the serious threat posed by terrorist
groups in our region, Iran has assisted Iraq and Syria,
upon their request, in combating the most dangerous
terrorist groups. In our neighbourhood, terrorist groups
and organized criminals are involved mostly in the
trafficking of drugs and, in certain cases, of arms and
cultural properties in order to finance their activities.
Therefore, in addition to combating terrorist groups,
we have also engaged seriously in countering organized
criminals, mainly those involved in drug trafficking. As
a result, in the past 40 years, 3,815 members of our law
enforcement forces have lost their lives and over 12,000
others have been wounded. In the past three decades,
Iran has seized approximately 11,000 tons of different
types of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.

In 2018 alone, our law enforcement forces carried
out 1,557 operations against drug traffickers, seizing
approximately 807 tons of different types of narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substances. Our outstanding
activities in combating drug traffickers have always
been acknowledged at the global level. For instance,
according to the World Drug Report 2019 of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in 2017, Iran seized
the largest quantity of opiates, accounting for 39 per
cent of the global total. Likewise, during the same
period, the largest quantities of opium, as well as the
second-largest quantities of morphine and heroin, were
also seized by Iran. We are determined to continue our
efforts in combating terrorists and drug traffickers.
However, to ensure the continuity and effectiveness of
our efforts, the international community must assist
Iran- of course, without preconditions, discrimination
or politicization.

I also refer to the detrimental effects of unilateral
sanctions in undermining our efforts to counter
terrorism and organized crime. Countries imposing
such unlawful sanctions have to be reminded that their
sanctions policies seriously weaken the effectiveness
of the counter-narcotic efforts of transit countries.
Ultimately, our success in countering those menaces
is dependent largely on our genuine political will,
comprehensive approach and non-discriminatory
cooperation and assistance.

