Mr. Motoc (Romania): First, we welcome you,
Sir, and congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. I also take this opportunity to commend the
performance of the German presidency during the
month of April.

I join other members of the Council in thanking
Assistant Secretary-General Danilo Tiirk, for his
briefing on the latest developments in the activities of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville
(UNOMB).

Romania is encouraged to note the steady
progress in the implementation of the peace process in
Bougainville, with the effective contribution of the
small, follow-on United Nations Mission. We welcome
in particular the advance towards the destruction of
contained weapons, and the good prospect that the
entire process will be completed soon.

Good news is also related to talks between the
national Government and Bougainville leaders on the
finalization of the third draft of the Bougainville
constitution. We encourage the parties to proceed in a
timely manner with the approval of the constitution,
which will mark an important step towards autonomy.
We are confident that the parties will soon take a
decision on the timing of elections for an autonomous
government, and will make the necessary preparations
in that regard, with the support of the United Nations
Mission.

We further hope that progress in the political
process will be followed by progress in the economic
field and improvement in the living standards of the
population. In our View, the transition towards an
autonomous Bougainville should be synonymous with
the transition towards a prosperous and stable
Bougainville.

Finally, I wish to express appreciation for all the
efforts undertaken by the Government of Papua New
Guinea and by the Bougainville parties in the peace
process. All the positive developments achieved so far
are evidence of the increased capacity of the people of
Papua New Guinea and Bougainville to assume full
ownership of the peace process and move forward
towards political normalization and economic
development.

Here, I would also like to commend the role
played by other countries in the region, as well as by
United Nations specialized agencies and international
donors in supporting the peace process and achieving
good progress in Bougainville.

