Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): I wish to thank you very
much, Mr. President, for convening today's meeting. I
would also like to express my appreciation to Mr. Hans
Blix and to Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei for their reports to
the Council this past Friday.

The issue of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction
represents a threat to international peace and security.
It is a matter of serious concern not only for certain
specific countries but also for the entire international
community. Underlying our concerns is the fact that in
the past, Iraq has actually used chemical weapons and
that, over the course of the past 12 years, it has
challenged the authority and credibility of the United
Nations by continuing to disregard its obligations
under numerous resolutions of the Security Council.

In order to resolve this issue peacefully, Japan has
been making its own diplomatic efforts, including by
urging Iraq proactively to dispel every suspicion, to
abide by all relevant Security Council resolutions and
to abandon its weapons of mass destruction.

While resolution 1441 (2002), which was adopted
unanimously by the Security Council, affirmed that
Iraq was in material breach of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 687 (1991),
through which Iraq committed to eliminate its weapons
of mass destruction, it also provided Iraq with a final
opportunity to comply with its obligations.

Japan hopes - as do all countries - that this
issue will be resolved peacefully, but it is important to
stress that that depends upon Iraq's attitude. Based on
the deliberations of the Security Council to date, as
well as on the intelligence briefing by United States
Secretary of State Powell, on 5 February and on the
reports by the weapons inspectors on 14 February, we
cannot help but conclude that the declaration submitted
by Iraq in response to resolution 1441 (2002) was
neither complete nor accurate and that Iraq is not fully
and proactively cooperating with the resumed
inspections. To the best of our knowledge, only Iraq -

no other Member State - has expressed the view in
the Council that it has been cooperating fully and
proactively.

We are aware that, in countries around the world,
there is strong opposition to war. We share the desire to
resolve this issue peacefully. It should be stressed,
however, that the root of the problem is whether Iraq
will radically change its attitude, cooperate
immediately, proactively and without conditions and
eliminate its weapons of mass destruction, in
accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. In his report to the Council on 14 February,
Mr. Blix reaffirmed that Iraq's response thus far has
been inadequate. Therefore, even if the inspections are
continued and strengthened, they will hardly lead to the
elimination of its weapons of mass destruction unless
Iraq fundamentally changes its attitude of cooperating
only passively. There is serious doubt as to the
effectiveness of continued inspections.

In our view, it is crucial now that the international
community remain united and that it continue to put
strong pressure on Iraq. If the Security Council fails to
act in unity, it will not only damage the credibility of
the United Nations but also send the wrong message to
Iraq. It would also lead to an ongoing threat,
throughout the world, of terror by weapons of mass
destruction.

The Government of Japan attaches great
importance to international cooperation. Based on the
fact that Iraq is not fully cooperating or fully
discharging its obligations, we consider it desirable
that the Security Council adopt a new resolution that
clearly demonstrates the determined attitude of the
international community. The Council should strive to
adopt such a resolution. Diplomatic efforts have been
made for 12 long years; Iraq now has very limited time.
Japan sincerely hopes that the Council will be united
and that it will take effective action to fulfil its
responsibilities for international peace and security.

