Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) ofresolution 1970 (2011) of26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established pursuant
to that resolution. The report covers the period from
17 September to 9 December, during which time the
members of the Committee met once, in informal
consultations.

In informal consultations on 6 November, the
Committee received an update from the Panel of
Experts on Libya on its work since the submission of
the Panel's interim report in July, and met the new
coordinator and arms expert of the Panel. The Panel
deplored the difficulties it had encountered in obtaining
responses from certain Member States to requests for
visits, despite assistance from the Committee, which
had dispatched follow-up letters to six Member States
in that regard. Regarding the Panel's travel activities,
the Panel reported on visits to five Member States,
including three trips to Libya, a visit to INTERPOL
headquarters and its attendance at a conference of the
Arab Forum on Asset Recovery.

With regard to the monitoring of the implementation
of sanctions measures, the Panel reported that it was
both monitoring and making enquiries concerning
individuals designated under the travel ban. Regarding
the arms embargo, the Panel remained concerned
over the continued reports of violations of the arms
embargo both from and to Libya. With regard to
notified transfers to Libya, the Panel said that it had
duly focused on Libya's efforts to create effective and
efficient procurement systems. With reference to the
assets freeze, the Panel highlighted its ongoing concern
and enquiries regarding the capability of a significant
number of Member States to implement and comply
with United Nations asset freeze measures.

Also during the informal consultations on
6 November, the Committee discussed pending matters,
the Libyan arms procurement process and an issue
concerning a storage facility in Sabha, Libya, where,
reportedly, a large number of man-portable air defence
systems and yellowcake were stored, among other
things, and on which informal consultations of the
Security Council had taken place on 4 November. The
Panel provided additional information on that issue,
highlighting the work of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya and the United Nations Mine Action
Service in securing stockpiles, and opining that the
yellowcake posed no significant security risk without
extensive processing, which required national facilities.
Finally, I updated the Committee on the status of the
INTERPOL-United Nations Security Council Special
Notice agreement, reporting that Notices had been
published for 17 individuals and the two entities on the
Committee's list, while three entries lacked the required
minimum identifiers for issuing Special Notices.

Lastly, I would like to provide some updated
statistics on the issues dealt with by the Committee since
the most periodic report to the Council (see S/PV.7031).
In relation to the arms embargo, the Committee received
two notifications on which no negative decision was
taken. The Committee also responded to two requests

for guidance from Member States and received one The President (spoke in French): Thcrc areno more
inspection report from a Member State pursuant to names inscribed on the list of speakers. 1 now invite
paragraph 13 ofresolution 1970 (2011) and paragraph 15 Council members to informal consultations to continue
of resolution 1973 (2011) relating to the arms embargo our discussion on the subject.

measures. .
The meenng rose (1110.30 am.
