Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I thank the High
Representative for his briefing today, which continues
to be a useful way for the Council to stay abreast of
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As noted by others, this year marks the twentieth
anniversary of the Dayton Peace Agreement. Today, it
is appropriate that we celebrate their success in keeping
the peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the past two
decades, while also acknowledging the unfinished
business that remains in their implementation.

Since the High Representative last briefed the
Council (see S/PV.7440), the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina have taken the important step of adopting
the Reform Agenda. That was a significant move
towards delivering on the commitment made by Bosnia's
leadership to carry out necessary reforms aimed at
supporting national institutions, strengthening the rule
of law and improving the socioeconomic conditions of
the entire population of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

With those goals in mind, efforts must now focus
on converting a shared aspiration into shared action.
The adoption of the Federation Labour Law is one
example of concrete progress that should be built upon.
We wish the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina well
in the undertaking and welcome the European Union
(EU) support to Bosnia and Herzegovina in moving the
Reform Agenda forward.

Reconciliation remains a work in progress. We note
with concern episodes of violence that have taken place
this year, including some with an ethnic dimension. We
welcome the steps taken by leaders both within Bosnia
and Herzegovina and in the region to address those
developments. We also support the presence of the EU-
led stabilization mission as a means of contributing to
a stable security environment, and are pleased that the
Council has acted today unanimously to reauthorize
that mission.

In addition to the presence of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force, the Office of the High
Representative retains responsibility for civilian aspects
of the Dayton Peace Accords. We encourage further
efforts to make progress on the five objectives and
two conditions set by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council, which remain prerequisites
for the Office closure.

As detailed by the High Representative, referenda
have been proposed that challenge the authority of
Federation Bosnia and Herzegovina judiciary and the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina itself. Such moves are provocative and
divisive. They undermine reconciliation efforts and
distract from advancing on the Reform Agenda. We
hope that such proposals can be left behind as Bosnia
and Herzegovina moves forward in a greater spirit of
unity and inclusiveness. We believe that this is the best
route to stability, peace and prosperity.
