Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
has for several months noted a trend that, unfortunately,
has been increasingly confirmed. The status quo does
not exist. It is but an illusion cloaking a daily backslide
that we cannot accept. Given the humanitarian
consequences of the situation on Palestinian and Israeli
civilians, we must recognize the harsh reality on the
ground that, if nothing is done, the fragile prospects
of the two-State solution will disappear and the risk of
widespread conflagration will grow.

The Quartet report presented to the French
presidency of the Security Council strengthened our
assessment of the situation, based on two elements. The
first is that the two-State solution is sorely threatened
with disappearance. We must have the courage to
say so. While there is enough blame for this to go
around, the Quartet report unequivocally confirms
that Israeli settlement is one of the main threats to the
very sustainability of a future Palestinian State. Acts
of violence, incitement to violence and terrorism also
undermine the prospect of two States - a State of Israel
and a Palestinian State - living side by side in peace
and security. Progress towards the inter-Palestinian
reconciliation is indispensable.

The second element - a mirror of the first 4 is
the need to take steps to preserve the feasibility of the
two-State solution through specific action. It would
seem indisputable that without the resolute action of the
parties and the international community, this solution
would give way to other scenarios that would in no way
guarantee a just and lasting settlement of the conflict
and would, on the contrary, threaten to precipitate
armed clashes.

Faced with this relentless conclusion, our message in
recent months has focused steadily on the needto recreate
a political horizon to save the two-State solution. That
is the only way to address the legitimate aspirations of
Palestinians and Israelis to independence and security.
The ministerial meeting held in Paris on 3 June marked
the first stage of an international mobilization to save
the two-State solution. That important meeting gave
rise to three complementary advances.

The first is political mobilization in favour of the
peace process. For the first time since the Annapolis
conference in 2007, an international meeting was held
on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. That first meeting
brought together 29 partners committed to peace. While
the peace process has been partially overshadowed by
the serious crises in the Middle East, our first goal
was to put the conflict at the heart of our collective
priorities. The Paris meeting contributed significantly
to that end.

The second advance was the collective reaffirmation
of support for the two-State solution. In a context in
which the situation continues to deteriorate, our wish
was to reiterate that this solution is the only possible
outcome to the conflict and to thereby re-establish
political prospects capable of halting and reversing
the downward spiral that we have seen on the ground.
The conclusions arising from the Paris meeting are
especially clear on that point.

The third advance obtained in Paris is the promotion
of an international commitment to the relaunch and
completion of dialogue between the parties. Everyone
knows that only the Israelis and Palestinians will be
able to make peace, but it is also necessary to recognize
that conditions are not ripe today for a resumption
of direct negotiations. Our initiative therefore seeks
to build a consensus and promote a convergence of
initiatives in order to recreate a climate conducive to
successful dialogue.

The activities of France and of the Quartet are
mutually complementary. Their common objective
is to seek the resumption of credible negotiations
conducive to reaching a final status solution. The
report of the Quartet is an important contribution to the
remobilization of the international community on behalf
of the peace process. Bearing in mind the eminent role
of the Quartet, France and all its partners will therefore
pursue its efforts in a flexible and inclusive way. The
Paris meeting is only the beginning of a process that
still requires a lot of collective efforts in three areas.

We are going to begin by working on the
preparation of a package of incentives that could be
proposed to the parties in the event of a peace accord,
during which time France will play a role of flexible
coordination. That work will permit, we hope, the
inclusion of several countries that were not present
at the Paris meeting. Naturally, all contributions of
goodwill will be welcome. Work in various directions
has been proposed, in particular economic incentives,
the strengthening of Palestinian institutions and links
between Israeli and Palestinian civil societies.

That will, in turn, build on other ongoing
efforts. In the first place, the implementation of the
recommendations ofthe Quartet report will be essential
in promoting rapid improvement on the ground.
Moreover, following up on certain considerations in the
Arab Peace Initiative, to which the 3 June communique
assigns a central role, need to be pursued.

Finally, we will continue our dialogue with the
parties to prepare the convening at the end of the year
of an international conference with the parties.

France is, of course, aware ofthe difficulties posed
by this conflict, one in which so many efforts and so
much goodwill have failed. We consider, however, that
it is our collective responsibility not to give up and
never to quit the fight. Our ambition is realistic. We are
not claiming to be the only ones able to succeed where
others have stumbled. We are urging something in the
nature of a coalition for of leveraging our experience
and our affiliations with the parties and the region to
bring into View a consensual method to construct a
substantive agreement for the purpose of progressing
in this way towards peace.

