Ms. March Smith (Norway): Maritime security
has received increased attention since pirates from
Somalia started threatening the lives and safety of
seafarers and undermining world trade in 2007 and
2008. The recent decrease in the number of hijackings
in the western Indian Ocean reflects the successful
international cooperation in addressing this problem.

An important factor in this success story is the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. I
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate India
on its current chairmanship of the Contact Group. The
simple and non-bureaucratic way of organizing work,
and the way countries with very different resources and
challenges have cooperated in the Contact Group, could
provide a model for tackling other security problems
in future. The way in which we have shared burdens in
our efforts to ensure that pirates are prosecuted is one
aspect of this successful cooperation. We would like to
commend the countries in the region that have stepped
up to do their share. They have been excellent partners.

Norway is co-financing the United Nations prison
project in Puntland. We look forward to seeing the
rapid completion of that project, which will mean that
Somalia's neighbours can transfer convicted pirates
for imprisonment there. Norway will also deploy a
frigate to the anti-pirate Operation Ocean Shield for six
months, from the end of May.

Another key to success has been cooperation with
the shipping industry and its implementation of best
management practices.

We must continue our joint efforts so that this
particular brand of crime can be brought to an end. Our
priority is to see that the rule of law is implemented
throughout Somalia. We are now seeing a new beginning
in the country, which we hope will be an important step
towards ensuring the rule of law.

Parallel to that, international efforts to arrest
and prosecute organizers of and investors in piracy
must continue. We must also prevent the laundering
of ransom money. Norway would like to take this
opportunity to underline that it is morally and legally
unacceptable to play with human lives in order to extort
ransom payments the way pirates in Somalia do.

Although we can be pleased with our progress in
combating piracy in the western Indian Ocean, we
are concerned about the increased number of armed
robberies and acts of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
Piracy also continues to be a problem in Southeast
Asia. The international cooperation in Southeast Asia
is functioning well, and Norway is engaged in that
work. The regional cooperation in Western Africa still
needs to mature. It is our hope that the countries in the
region will give the issue of armed robbery and piracy
the priority it deserves and that joint action will follow.
