Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Today, I have the honour to speak on behalf of
Liechtenstein and Switzerland.

Our two countries welcome the regular open
briefings by the Chairmen of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions
Committee and the 1540 Committee. We would also
like to convey our gratitude for the information that the
three Chairmen gave us this morning and for their
ongoing efforts. In this way, non-members of the
Security Council have the opportunity to express their
views and concerns. Today, I will focus on the 1267
Committee, as recent events call for us to pay it special
attention.

In resolution 1822 (2008), the Council introduced
important measures aimed at improving listing
procedures, such as publishing narrative summaries of
the reasons for listing on the Committee's website.
Those summaries must be as complete as possible. We
also welcome the periodic review of all names on the
consolidated list within the timelines clearly set out in
the resolution, as that will render the list more
effective.

Unfortunately, we must voice our disappointment
that no progress has been made on what we consider to
be a serious shortcoming of the current system, namely,
the lack of an independent review mechanism
concerning delisting decisions. In that context, I would
like to recall that Switzerland and Liechtenstein,
together with Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands and
Sweden, proposed the establishment of an expert group
appointed by the Security Council to assist the
sanctions committees in the consideration of delisting
requests. In our view, that would address concerns
regarding the right to an effective review mechanism.
Therefore, we regret that resolution 1822 (2008) did
not reflect any of the ideas put forward in that
discussion paper.

As is well known, the Court of Justice of the
European Communities rendered an important
judgment on that subject. The Court ruled that the
Community Act was unlawful and infringed the
fundamental rights of appellants under Community
law. It gave three months to remedy the infringements
found.

We greatly regret that dilemma confronting a
Member State that is obliged to both implement
Security Council sanctions and comply with a
conflicting court ruling. On several occasions we have
drawn the attention of Council members to that
possibility, which our proposal to create an advisory
group on delisting issues aimed precisely at avoiding.
With no change and with more cases pending, the very
legitimacy of United Nations sanctions could be put in
jeopardy.

Thus we urge the 1267 Committee and the
Security Council to take duly into account the
reasoning of the Court of Justice of the European
Communities and the concerns expressed by our

countries and several other States. Switzerland and
Liechtenstein are ready to contribute constructively to
the efforts of the Security Council and its Committees
to strengthen the effectiveness of United Nations
sanctions regimes by enhancing the transparency and
fairness of listing procedures, in order to do away with
concerns over the right to due process. The informal
report of the seminar on counter-terrorism targeted
sanctions and the rule of law, organized by
Liechtenstein and the American University on
15 September 2008 in Washington, also provides useful
conclusions on that issue.

In addition, I would like to mention some
concrete measures that Switzerland has supported to
strengthen the sanctions regime in the area of counter-
terrorism.

With regard to better implementing the asset-
freeze requirements, this year and last year Switzerland
has provided financial support and experts to several
activities of the Working Group on Tackling the
Financing of Terrorism. More recently, Switzerland,
like Liechtenstein, decided to give financial support to
a study on terrorist financing indicators in response to
a request by the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team. In order to further develop public-
private partnerships in the fight against terrorism,
Switzerland has also organized meetings with
representatives of the private sector, in particular the
banking sector, in order to enhance the prevention of
terrorist financing and the fine-tuning of targeted
sanctions.

With regard to the travel ban, Switzerland has
supported a pilot project of INTERPOL aimed at
detecting lost or stolen travel documents. We now
provide real-time access to INTERPOL's Stolen or Lost
Travel Document Database not only to its National
Central Bureau, but also to its 20,000 federal agents at
border crossing points, customs and immigration
offices, as well as embassies and consulates. In the first
six months, Swiss officers have conducted nearly 500
times more checks on the INTERPOL database than
before and detected almost double the number of false
documents than all the other 183 INTERPOL member
countries combined. That success has led more than 30
countries around the world to place their officers in the
field to carry out instant checks of travel documents on
the INTERPOL database.

The efforts of Switzerland and Liechtenstein are
motivated by their desire to strengthen the sanctions
regimes and to enhance the effectiveness and
legitimacy of the Security Council. We are convinced
that our firm commitment to see that all applicable
human rights standards are respected serves that end.
However, I would like to be very clear by way of
conclusion: if we do not see substantive changes with
regard to the right to due process, political support for
the activities I have mentioned will diminish and
cooperation in the future will be put at risk.

