Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the Assistant Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Ursula Mueller,
for their briefings. China supports the Special Envoy
in advancing the political process in Yemen and
appreciates the tireless efforts of the United Nations
and its relevant agencies in improving the humanitarian
situation in the country.

We are deeply concerned about the recent
large-scale bloody clashes in Aden, and we welcome
the current de-escalation. Following the clashes, the
entire international community expressed its concern
about the situation in Aden. The Ambassadors to
Yemen from China, Russia, the United States, the
United Kingdom and France immediately issued a joint
statement expressing concern and urging peace talks.
We hope that all the parties concerned will act in the
best interests of Yemen and its people, exercise reason
and restraint, resolve their differences through dialogue
and negotiations and restore stability and normal life in
Yemen as soon as possible.

A political solution is the only way out for Yemen.
All the parties in Yemen should resolve issues by
political means, based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative, its
Implementation Mechanism and the outcome document
of the National Dialogue Conference. As countries of
the region play an important role in the issue of Yemen,
they should strengthen dialogue and cooperation with
the United Nations to create the necessary conditions for
all parties in Yemen to ease tensions, enhance mutual
trust and dialogue and promote the political process.

The Security Council should remain united and
provide support to Yemen's political process. The
Stockholm Agreement is an important step towards a
political solution to the Yemeni issue. We hope that it
will be implemented in earnest. Under United Nations
mediation, all parties in Yemen should continue to hold
dialogue and consultations on outstanding issues, such
as local security forces, port revenues and so on. The
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
and the Redeployment Coordination Committee should
strengthen coordination to push for an early resolution
of relevant issues.
China supports maintaining Yemen's sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity. China
supports the role of the United Nations as the main
channel of mediation and will play an active and
constructive role in promoting the political settlement
process of the Yemeni issue.

It is the Yemeni people who suffer the most in the
country's war. The international community should step
up its humanitarian assistance to Yemen. China hopes
that donor countries will strengthen their coordination
with the United Nations to make good on their pledges.
The parties concerned should ensure that humanitarian
supplies can reach all people and areas in need of
assistance. China has provided Yemen with multiple
shipments of humanitarian aid, including food and
medicine, through bilateral and multilateral channels,
and is willing to continue to do so to the best its ability.
China expects the prompt restoration of peace and
stability and the realization of development in Yemen
to enable its people to have a normal life.

