The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Libyan Arab J amahiriya.

At the outset, I wish to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for
his briefing to the Council on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

This year, 2008, marks the sixtieth anniversary of
the Palestinian tragedy, and the beginning of this year
marked the passing of the fiftieth anniversary of
Israel's occupation of the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip. I wish to remind the Council of those two facts
because I believe that they are of great importance. Do
other members not see, as I do, that the Palestinians
have long endured tragedy and suffering, and that they
have every right to stop being patient?

I believe that the following explains many of the
actions taken against the Palestinian people. Since
1967, the Zionist occupation authorities have attempted
to create a new fait accompli by changing the legal
status of Jerusalem and by building settlements - all
of which are illegal - on the occupied Palestinian
territory. For years, those authorities have continued to
entrench that reality by building a racist wall that has
isolated large portions of the occupied Palestinian
territory, reducing its size to less than 12 per cent of
the historical Palestinian lands, or nearly 50 per cent of
the total area occupied in 1967. These actions have
been taken despite the 2004 advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, which stipulates that the
building of the separation wall is illegal and contrary to
international law and that the Israelis must dismantle it
and compensate the Palestinians who have been
harmed by the building of the wall. However, the
Israelis have, as usual, continued to flout international
legitimacy and legality.

Examples are found in the Zionist escalation of
terrorism carried out by the occupation authorities
against the Palestinian people, which is shown in the
ceaseless campaign of assassination against the
Palestinians, as well as in the killings - to which
Mr. Pascoe referred - in the past few days in the
occupied Gaza Strip. Unfortunately, the constant
closures and the siege, as members are aware, is just
one link in a long chain of actions, as is the detention
of more than 11,000 people, most of them in Israeli
prisons and detention centres, as Mr. Mansour pointed
out in his statement this morning. Among them are
hundreds of women and hundreds of children and over
900 Palestinian officials, including members of the
Palestinian Legislative Council.

There have also been numerous incursions into
Palestinian towns. Those incursions have terrified
civilians, whose property has been confiscated and
farmland bulldozed. They have also included the
setting up of blockades and hundreds of checkpoints in
a very small area of land, so as to hinder the mobility
of the Palestinian people and make their lives
unbearable.

As the Council is aware, and as members can
daily observe, the ongoing suffocating siege imposed
against the Gaza Strip has had a devastating impact on
all aspects of the lives of more than 1.5 million
Palestinians. We welcome the announced declaration of
intention - which has thus far produced nothing,
while all the suffering of the Palestinian people is
ignored, suffering which is in violation of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War. The Gaza Strip is still under
occupation. That constitutes collective punishment of
the Palestinian people, which is a crime under
international humanitarian law.

Paragraph 2 of the resolution adopted by the
Human Rights Council at its sixth special session on
23 January 2008, calls for

"urgent international action to put an immediate
end to the grave violations committed by the
occupying Power, Israel, in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including the series of
incessant and repeated Israeli military attacks and
incursions therein and the siege of the occupied
Gaza Strip". (A/HRC/S-6/L. I )

The entire world has once again witnessed - if
indeed it needed another example - the reality of
Israel's intentions with regard to peace. Following the
Annapolis Conference, as is their custom, the Israelis
continued to escalate their campaign of wide-scale
attacks, not just against Gaza but also against West
Bank towns. Mr. Pascoe referred to that and provided
us examples. Those attacks have resulted in many
victims, including older persons, women and children.

As the occupying Power itself has announced,
and as the Council is aware, it is also planning to
continue to build settlements. All of that was in the
wake of the Annapolis Conference, in contravention of
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
Quartet decisions and even Israel's own pledges at the
Conference.

I would like to warn the Council of the
consequences of those actions for peace. The fact that
the Israeli occupying authorities continue to flout
resolutions pertaining to the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
including those of UNESCO, is actually imperilling the
Mosque itself.

Israel's goal is well known, namely, to undermine
the very concept of peace. That is its usual behaviour.

Peace will come about only through full and
unconditional Israeli withdrawal from all Arab
territories occupied since 1967 - including East
Jerusalem, the occupied Syrian Golan and the Shaba'a
farmlands - in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and Security
Council and the Arab Peace Initiative, and through the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State on
all Palestinian territory occupied in 1967, with fixed
and recognized borders and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as
its capital. Peace must also include the return of
refugees to their homeland, from which they were
expelled in 1948 through a wide-scale ethnic cleansing
operation that many Israeli historians acknowledge.

In that regard, we would like to underscore the
right of the Palestinian people to resist occupation.
Describing their resistance as a form of terrorism is an
attempt to obliterate that right. That right must be
supported, not undermined.

I should like to remind the Council that the
Palestinians previously decided to halt the launching of
rockets. Those rockets have been referred to often in
the Council, although they have never actually killed or
injured anyone. Palestinians pledged to halt those
launchings many months ago. During that time, Israel
has continued with its usual behaviour: killings, extra-
judicial executions, incursions and so on.

The United Nations, through the Security
Council - the organ entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security - should shoulder its
responsibility vis-a-Vis bringing peace to Middle East
and find ways to implement Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002). The Council
cannot fulfil its role unless it respects its own
resolutions and works to implement them.

The situation in Lebanon continues to experience
the effects of Israel's aggression that began on 12 July
2006. The Council did not attempt to halt that
aggression at the appropriate time. That failure led to
the general destruction of Lebanon's infrastructure.
That has been underscored by numerous United
Nations reports, and there is no need for me to cite
document numbers. Lebanon continues to suffer from
that aggression, in particular as a result of mines
planted by the enemy and the cluster bombs it utilized.
In continuing to refuse to provide maps to the location
of those mines and cluster bombs, Israel is deliberately
exposing civilians to the ongoing possibility of being
killed by them and is paralyzing economic
development and humanitarian efforts in many parts of
Lebanon.

I should like to remind the Council of the daily
letters from the representative of Lebanon with regard
to Israel's ongoing violations of its terrestrial, maritime
and air space. Such violations explicitly contravene
resolution 1701 (2006), and I believe they are
contributing to what is taking place in Lebanon today.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.

