Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening the
open debate on the situation in the Middle East. I
would also like to thank Mr. Robert Serry for his
insightful briefing. It is timely, as the Security Council
has just adopted resolution 1850 (2008). We fully
associate ourselves with the resolution, as it contains
essential elements for realizing a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in the Middle East. We also
appreciate the efforts by the Quartet.

I would like to reiterate Japan's strong support for
and commitment to the Middle East peace process and
its support towards the realization of the two-State
solution. While difficult challenges for the Middle East
peace process remain, we believe that the
developments since the Annapolis conference are
noteworthy. There have been regular interactions at the
highest level between the parties, indicating the
seriousness of their commitment to the process.

We believe that a comprehensive agreement for
the two-State solution is essential for stability and
prosperity in the Middle East, and it must address all
the core issues such as permanent borders, Jerusalem,
security arrangements, refugees and water resources.

Peace in the Middle East can be achieved only
through negotiations between the Israelis and the
Palestinians, based on the principle of land for peace,
relevant United Nations resolutions and the agreements
reached by the parties.

We also support Palestinian unity under the
leadership of President Abbas through the national
dialogue, which Egypt has made great efforts to
promote.

It is equally important to create in the region an
environment conducive for the peace process to
continue without pause. We therefore recognize the
significance of the Arab Peace Initiative and the
constructive role of each State in the Middle East. We
5
also appreciate the efforts towards the indirect peace
talks between Israel and Syria under the auspices of
Turkey. We hope that the positive progress shown on
all of those fronts will soon culminate in a
comprehensive peace in the region.

There have been some improvements in the
security situation such areas as Jenin and Nablus. This
demonstrates the benefits of cooperation between
Israeli and Palestinian authorities and reinforces the
credibility of the Palestinian Authority under the
leadership of President Abbas.

We believe the achievements to date will serve as
a solid foundation for the peace process going into next
year. Japan stands ready to make every effort to
support the process.

Signs of progress notwithstanding, we are deeply
concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian
conditions on the ground, especially in the Gaza Strip.
The shortage of basic supplies and the restrictions on
movement are having an adverse impact on the
livelihood of ordinary people. Clearly, tangible
improvements in the daily lives of the Palestinian
people are essential in order to maintain the momentum
of the peace process. To that end, we urge the Israeli
authorities to lift the blockade and allow the movement
and access of the Palestinian people.

At the same time, we must address the issue of
rockets and mortars being fired against the Israeli
people from Gaza. We call upon Hamas and others to
stop any violence and respect the safety of the Israeli
people. Japan calls for extending the current ceasefire
with an immediate cessation of violence. Also, in order
to facilitate the peace process, freezing the settlement
activities by the Israelis must be enforced in
accordance with phase I of the Road Map. The recent
violent acts by the settlers in Hebron revealed a
considerable degree of vulnerability in the West Bank.

We believe that the rule of law must be respected,
and we commend the commitment by the Israeli and
Palestinian authorities to strengthen their cooperation
in that regard. It is of paramount importance to secure
a safe environment for both the Israeli and Palestinian
people in which they can live without fear or despair.

Japan is equally committed to support economic
development in the Middle East, which is essential to
enable the Palestinian people to build a viable and
sustainable economy. Japan has promoted the initiative
called "Corridor for Peace and Prosperity" in order to
build an agro-industrial park in the Jordan Valley and
to provide job opportunities and facilitate export to the
surrounding areas. The project relies on regional
cooperation among Israel, the Palestinian Authority,
Jordan and Japan.

Moreover, Japan hosted the Fourth Conference
for Confidence-Building between the Israelis and the
Palestinians in October. The two sides were headed,
respectively, by Mr. Meir Sheetrit, Minister of the
Interior of Israel, and Mr. Sa'eb Erekat, Head of the
Negotiations Affairs Department of the Palestine
Liberation Organization. The objective of the
Conference was to deepen understanding and build
mutual confidence between the two sides.

Japan has provided over $1 billion in aid to the
Palestinian people since the Oslo Accords and stands
ready to provide more assistance, in accordance with
its pledge of $150 million made at the Paris
Conference in 2007. We hope that our efforts will
contribute to bringing about the long-awaited peace in
the region.

Briefly, Japan welcomes the recent positive
developments in Lebanon and stresses the importance
of the continuous commitment to Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006) by both Israel and Lebanon. We
call upon the parties concerned to respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon, as
called for in resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).

In closing, I would like to emphasize that it is
ultimately the responsibility of the parties themselves
to achieve peace. The success of the negotiations
depends on their efforts. No one else can assume that
responsibility. At the same time, the international
community can help to ease the situation, allowing the
parties to concentrate on their efforts to achieve peace.

Japan expects the leaders in the region to
continue the negotiations with unfailing determination.
Japan, for its part, will continue to play the role of a
responsible and active partner to help realize peace in
the region. We look forward to participating in the
many efforts of the international community, including
the Moscow Conference next year.

