Mr. Kodama (Japan): Before delivering my
statement, I too want to join previous speakers by
extending Japan's deepest condolences and sympathies
to the victims of the outrageous bombing of the United
Nations building in the Nigerian capital and to their
bereaved families. Japan condemns in the strongest
terms such heinous acts, particularly directed against
those brave men and women.

At the outset, I would like to welcome your
initiative, Sir, to convene this open debate on the
critical issue of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Japan shares the views presented and
concerns raised in the concept paper prepared by the
Indian presidency (S/20ll/496, annex). Japan has
worked vigorously on many issues pertaining to United
Nations peacekeeping operations in its capacity as
Chair of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations for the terms 2005-2006 and 2009-2010. It
is our View that triangular cooperation among the
Council, the Secretariat, troop-contributing countries
(TCCs), police-contributing countries (PCCs) and other
stakeholders is the fundamental key to the success of
current peacekeeping operations, which have become
more complex and multidimensional in recent years.
11-48209

Throughout the course of its chairmanship of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, Japan
made efforts to establish a customary practice of the
Council to hold consultations with TCCs, PCCs and
other stakeholders at the time of the creation,
modification or extension of a peacekeeping mandate,
at least one week prior to the mandate's adoption. In
parallel with this, the Working Group devoted several
meetings to and had serious discussions on the issue of
capability gaps, including the critical shortage of
military utility helicopters in several peacekeeping
missions. I would like to make my statement based on
these experiences.

With regard to the capability gap, Japan concurs
with the View set out in the concept paper that this
issue is an inevitable difficulty arising when the
Security Council translates its will into deeds on the
ground. It goes without saying that we must try to
minimize the gap, but the challenge is always how to
do so.

While the international community cannot
abandon its responsibility to protect civilians in need,
no matter how difficult the task may be, the resources
needed to fulfil such mandates are not likely to become
immediately available. Japan highly appreciates, in this
regard, the continuing efforts of the Secretariat to
develop, disseminate and update the gap list, which
have greatly helped us to recognize and understand the
existence of gaps. With that as a foundation, it is now
high time for us all to take further steps to elaborate on
the causes of gaps and the difficulty we have in filling
them.

As regards the triangular cooperation among the
Council, the Secretariat, TCCs, PCCs and other
stakeholders, Japan would like to reiterate its
importance not only for the purpose of improving the
quality of United Nations peacekeeping operations, but
also from the point of View of the transparency of the
activities of the Council. We have made significant
progress by holding dialogues with the force
commanders of various missions in the Council as well
as in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (C-34).

The meetings with TCCs, PCCs and other
stakeholders are intended to enhance the understanding
of the Council through the first-hand views of TCCs,
PCCs and other stakeholders, so that peacekeeping
mandates may appropriately reflect the reality on the

ground in the form of a resolution. It is perfectly
reasonable that such meetings be held at least one week
before the adoption of the relevant Council resolution,
which was not the normal practice several years ago.
As to the quality of the discussion in those meetings,
however, it must be said that it is not necessarily
action-oriented. The meetings generally take the form
of briefings from the Secretariat followed by a few
questions and answers. Japan strongly recommends
that TCC and PCC meetings be aimed at solving
concrete problems through practical and concrete
discussions.

To that end, Japan calls for the Council, TCCs,
PCCs and other stakeholders to act. The responsibility
in this regard lies first and foremost with the Council.
The Council is the only body with the power and
responsibility, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, to adopt resolutions and
apply force to realize its intention to maintain
international peace and security.

Over the past two decades, the Council has been
successful in adjusting to a drastically changing world
by transforming peacekeeping operations appropriately.
However, some of the critical shortfalls currently
occurring in missions have the potential to cause
serious damage to the credibility of the Council. In
order to avoid such an outcome and fulfil its duty more
proactively, the Council should clarify and explain
what exactly are the issues and points to be amended in
the mandate, so that peacekeepers on the ground may
conduct their work more efficiently and effectively.

Japan would like to stress the important role and
responsibility of the Council, and therefore
recommends that agendas and points of discussion of
the meetings be clearly set sufficiently in advance of
the meeting date.

Security Council obligations notwithstanding,
responsibility for this issue does not rest with the
Council alone. The TCCs, PCCs and other stakeholders
should be strongly encouraged to share their first-hand
experience and awareness to the problems on the
ground. In this regard, Japan also concurs with the
proposal in the concept note. At the same time, my
delegation intends to continue its outreach regarding
this important issue in the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations and the C34.

In conclusion, Japan would like to highlight the
fact that United Nations peacekeeping operations have

come to entail increasingly complex and interlinked
situations. Thus, further cooperation and coordination
among the Council, the General Assembly, the Member
States and the Secretariat are required. It is now time
for all United Nations peacekeeping actors to enhance
their efforts in order to respond to the high
expectations of the international community.

