Mr. Seek (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would first
like to thank the Japanese presidency for organizing this
briefing on the implementation ofresolution 2231 (2015).
I also thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, as well as Ms. Joanne
Adamson, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, and Ambassador
Sebastiano Cardi, Permanent Representative of Italy
and Facilitator of the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), for their briefings.

By adopting, on 20 July 2015, the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action through resolution
2231 (2015), the Security Council confirmed an
agreement on Iran's nuclear programme, marking the
culmination of 12 years of intense diplomatic efforts
made collectively by the United States of America,
the Russian Federation, Germany, France, the United
Kingdom, China, the European Union and the Islamic
Republic of Iran. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/ 1030) on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) that we are discussing today - the fourth
of its kind submitted under the provisions set out in
annex B of the resolution - provides a comprehensive
outline of the provisions relating to the nuclear field,
ballistic missiles, weapons, travel bans, the freezing
of assets, and accompanying measures to promote the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

On nuclear-related provisions, it is encouraging that
the report makes it clear that the Islamic Republic of
Iran continues to respect its obligations, as confirmed
in the reports issued by the International Atomic
Energy Agency on its verification and monitoring
activities in the country, as well as the monitoring of
Iran's implementation of its commitments related to the
Plan of Action. It is an equally reassuring and positive
evaluation that the Procurement Channel continues to
consider the various proposals under its consideration,
as illustrated by the various notifications on the supply,
sale and transfer activities that involve the Islamic
Republic of Iran, thereby guaranteeing visibility,
inclusiveness and transparency. The delegation of
Senegal also welcomes the efforts of the Secretariat and
the Facilitator in the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), including the practical information provided
on the Procurement Channel, which merits our full
support and cooperation.

Despite all of those encouraging efforts, it is clear

that many challenges remain to be solved, not least
in ensuring that the private sector fully understands
resolution 2231 (2015). We must address the relationship
between the business world and the Security Council,
particularly with regard to the pre-approval procedure.
We also agree with the recommendation of the Secretary-
General that Member States should make greater
efforts to ensure that they understand the restrictions of
the Procurement Channel, including the procedures for
submitting proposals and their review process.

The delegation of Senegal is very concerned
about the information regarding the possible transfer
of ballistic missiles, component parts and related
technologies by the Islamic Republic of Iran, to the
benefit of the Houthis in Yemen, who may have used
them in firing on the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. My
delegation will therefore remain very attentive to
the results of the Secretariat's investigations into
those allegations.

My delegation supports the idea of a joint meeting
in due course between the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) and the
2231 format on their respective conclusions.

In conclusion, the delegation of Senegal is of the
view that the situation is generally positive with regard
to the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and
encourages the Facilitator, as well as all the parties
to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and States
Members of the United Nations, to persevere along
that path.

