Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): I thank the Under-
Secretary-General for his introduction of the report and for
the additional information that he has provided. The report
overall seems quite positive, although we have Sir Kieran's
concerns in mind of the worrying economic situation in
Guinea-Bissau.
As the Secretary-General states in paragraph 23 of his
report, Guinea-Bissau serves as a positive example of a
case in which the region, the international community and
the United Nations together were successful in promoting
a peaceful solution with relatively modest means. We must
keep the subject on the agenda to help Guinea-Bissau
consolidate peace and democracy and to see to it that the
moderate elements will continue to prevail.

The return to constitutional and democratic order in
Guinea-Bissau is now complete, and it is important that the
extra-constitutional structures, which had a role to play
under the Abuja Accord and related agreements, now give
way to the newly established constitutional institutions.

Our chief concern in this regard remains the military
junta. The junta must be told in no uncertain terms that
with the installation of the new Government its role has
come to an end, and the military must now be depoliticized.
The international community will not tolerate a revival in
any form of the junta on the political scene in Guinea-
Bissau.

Another remaining source of concern is the slow
pace of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
The Government of Guinea-Bissau must take up this
matter with priority. We also encourage the World Bank
to accelerate its efforts in this regard. As a member of the
Group of Friends, the Netherlands will continue to
support the United Nations Peace-building Support Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) Trust Fund and is ready in
principle to make a further contribution of 500,000 Dutch
guilders.

Finally, my delegation will be happy to support the
presidential statement to be made by you, Mr. President,
and we thank the delegation of Mali, which currently
holds the chairmanship of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), for its efforts in
preparing these statements.

