Mr. Ramos-Horta: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to introduce the two reports of the
Secretary-General (8/2013/680 and 8/2013/681) on the
continuing efforts to help restore constitutional order
in Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNIOGBIS).

As the Secretary-General indicates in his report,
progress towards the restoration of constitutional order
in Guinea-Bissau, especially with respect to the holding
of credible presidential and legislative elections, has
continued to be slow. Lengthy consultations among
national stakeholders to agree on the voter registration
system and to finalize the electoral budget and timeline
have significantly contributed to the delay in advancing
electoral preparations, including in mobilizing the
required resources to cover the elections.

On 31 October, the Transitional Government
announced that digital voter registration would
take place both in Guinea-Bissau and in the
diaspora from 1 to 22 December. The Transitional
Government subsequently announced that the voter
registration period would be modified to run from 1 to
31 December. On 15 November, Transitional President
Serifo Nhamadjo issued a decree announcing that
general elections would be held on 16 March 2014. He
also indicated that the costs of the elections would be
fully covered by pledges made by the country's key
international partners.

While some progress has been made in the past
few weeks in advancing preparations for the elections,
much remains to be done. To assist in these efforts,
the Transitional Prime Minister has established a
coordinating committee for the electoral process and
financial support to the general elections 0f2013-2014,
under his chairmanship, to ensure coordination among
partners.

On 5 November, an electoral mission from Timor-
Leste, headed by the Timorese Secretary of State of
Administrative Decentralization, Mr. Tomas Cabral,
arrived in Bissau. The delegation, which includes 20
advisers from the election management body of Timor-
Leste, will remain in Guinea-Bissau for four months to
provide advice to the Government's technical electoral
support office. The Government of Timor-Leste has
pledged $6 million for the voter registration process
and donated 200 electoral kits. Overall, pledges made
by international partners are now well in excess of the
budget prepared by the Transitional Government.
Please allow me to say a few words on other key
developments in the country since the issuance of the
two reports of the Secretary-General.

With respect to political developments, the first
ordinary session of the 2013-2014 parliamentary year
opened on 18 November and is expected to end on
18 December. Parliamentarians will discuss, inter alia,
the amnesty bill in favour of the authors of the coup d'etat
of 2012, the public finance management transparency
code, and the State budget for 2014. Members of the
Council will recall that the amnesty bill proposed by
the Transitional Government, with the support of the
Social Renewal Party (PRS), was initially rejected by
the National Assembly on 10 September. At that time,
the PRS Secretary-General had announced that his
party would resubmit the bill, arguing that amnesty
was part of the "normalization process" under way.

As to the judiciary, since the assassination of a
Nigerian citizen in Bissau on 8 October and the opening
of an investigation into the case, 10 individuals have
been formally charged with the crime and are being
held at the Judiciary Police detention centre pending
their trial. The Prosecutor-General has also opened
another investigation into the attack on the Minister
of Transport and Communications of the Transitional
Government, Mr. Orlando Viegas Mendes, which
occurred on 5 November. The Minister is still out of
the country receiving medical care for the injuries he
sustained during the violent beating. We have been
informed that 11 individuals have been questioned by
the Judiciary Police in relation to the attack.

With respect to the UNIOGBIS mandate, delays
in preparations for the elections have had a negative
impact on its implementation. Most of the mission's
efforts have been focused on responding to the
country's immediate political, security and human
rights challenges. However, the Mission has made
some progress, in establishing two regional offices, in
the north-central region of Bafata and in the southern
region of Buba. The inauguration ceremonies on
9 November were attended by hundreds of people,
including the Governors of Bafata and Quinara, sector
administrators, military and security personnel,
traditional and religious leaders. In my statements on
the occasion, I emphasized that the regional offices
would contribute to bringing the United Nations closer
to the people and help the Organization to have a better
understanding of the problems facing the people in the
interior of the country.

In conclusion, allow me to highlight two key points.
First, progress in the restoration of constitutional
order in Guinea-Bissau remains frustratingly slow.
Indeed, and as highlighted in the two reports, the
human rights and security situation in Guinea-Bissau
has continued to deteriorate, with increased cases
of intimidation, threats, and restrictions of freedom
of expression and assembly, as well as continuing
interference of the military in the affairs of the State.

In a joint letter to the Transitional President dated
19 September, the Economic Community of West
African States Special Representative in Bissau and
l expressed concern over continuing human rights
violations and impunity in the country. We also
referred to the generalized climate of fear created by
the unlawful behaviour of the defence and security
forces. That climate of fear has persisted to date and
is not contributing to establishing an environment
conducive to the holding of peaceful and credible
elections. The transitional authorities must ensure that
those responsible for these unlawful acts are brought
to justice. The United Nations will continue to provide
support for the implementation of the recommendations
of the National Conference on lmpunity, Justice and
Human Rights, which was held in Bissau in July. I invite
other international partners to lend further support in
this area.

Secondly, the holding of credible and peaceful
presidential and legislative elections in Guinea-Bissau
on 16 March 2014, as announced by the Transitional
President, should remain our key priority in ensuring
a return to constitutional order in the country. I would
like to commend Guinea-Bissau's international partners
for their generous pledges of financial support to the
electoral process, which I urge them to disburse rapidly,
following arrangements for proper management. As
stressed by the Secretary-General in his report, the
onus is now on the Transitional Government to take
the necessary steps towards the timely holding of the
elections.

