Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): As I take the floor in the
Security Council for the first time this year, I would
like to say how glad I am to see your Royal Highness
presiding over the Council during the month of January,
only one month after your country's election. I wish
every success to Jordan and to the other newly elected
Security Council members - Chad, Chile, Nigeria and
Lithuania. I am also grateful to the Secretary-General
for his briefing.

Today I will touch upon two issues: first, the Middle
East peace process, and secondly, the situation in Syria.

First, I wish to express my heartfelt condolences to
the Government and the people of Israel over the sad
passing of Mr. Ariel Sharon, former Prime Minister of
Israel.

The direct negotiations between Israel and Palestine
are now entering a crucial phase. We have fewer than
four months left for a deal to be made. This nine-month
time frame for the negotiations had been agreed upon
by both parties last year.

We would once again like to call upon both parties
not to take unilateral actions that might negatively affect
the peace process, but rather to continue negotiations.
In that context, we deeply deplore the decision made
by the Israeli Ministry of Housing and Construction
on 10 January to publish tenders to build new housing
units in the West Bank and East Jerusalem.

We believe that helping Palestinians create viable
economic foundations will contribute to advancing
the political process. Given the current phase of
negotiations, it becomes all the more important
for the international community to work towards
the coexistence and prosperity of Palestinians and
their neighbours. From that standpoint, Japan will
continue with its own initiatives aimed at mobilizing
private-sector investment in Palestine. As I said in
this Chamber last October (see S/PV.7047), Japan is
promoting two projects - the Corridor for Peace and
Prosperity and the Conference on Cooperation among
East Asian Countries for Palestinian Development
(CEAPAD). Today, let me focus on the CEAPAD.

CEAPAD was launched in Tokyo in February 2013,
where Japan and Palestine co-hosted the Conference.
In addition to the two hosts, seven countries from

Asia - Indonesia, Singapore, Thailand, Malaysia,
Viet Nam, Brunei Darussalam and the Republic of
Korea - as well as five international organizations,

including the United Nations, participated. It is a
process aimed at mobilizing and sharing East Asian
economic development experiences and resources for
the sake of Palestinian development.

As a follow-up, Japan hosted a private sector
promotion meeting in Tokyo last December.
Participants explored ways to strengthen the
Palestinian private sector and to enhance their business
relations with Palestine. The outcome of the meeting
will be submitted to the second ministerial meeting of
CEAPAD, scheduled to be held in Indonesia in March.
We are grateful to Indonesia for hosting the Conference
and we hope that it will result in tangible outcomes. For
its part, at the meeting in Indonesia, Japan is planning
to announce additional and substantial assistance for
Palestine.

Turning to the situation in Syria, the successful
conduct of the upcoming second Geneva Conference
on Syria is of the utmost importance in moving the
political process forward. Foreign Minister Kishida
will represent Japan at the Conference. Japan strongly
urges both the Syrian Government and the opposition
parties to engage seriously and constructively in direct
negotiations, with a view to putting an end to all forms
of violence and establishing a transitional governing
body in accordance with the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex).

The political process needs to be sustained by
international efforts designed to step up humanitarian
assistance on the ground. We would like to express our
appreciation to the Government of Kuwait for hosting
the pledging conference for Syria on 15 January and
for making a very generous pledge on that occasion.
At that conference, Japan's representative announced
our country's additional humanitarian assistance in the
amount of $120 million. Our humanitarian assistance,
including support for neighbouring countries, since the
beginning of the Syrian crisis, now totals $275 million.

However, humanitarian aid remains meaningless
if it is not delivered to those in need. Japan therefore
demands that all parties, in particular the Syrian
authorities, take the necessary steps to ensure
immediate, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access to
all areas affected by the conflict.

In addition, I would like to reiterate Japan's
commitment to providing the greatest possible
cooperation towards the disposal of Syria's chemical
weapons. In that context, my Government has
decided to contribute a total of $18 million to the trust
funds established under the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.

