Mr. Daccord: I am honoured to address the
Security Council today on the topic at the heart of the
mission and mandate of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC), and at the centre of all
aspects of our daily work in armed conflicts around the
world. My wish - and, I believe, our wish - is that,
for once, we could discuss the protection of civilians
in a positive, celebratory tone; that we could say the
impressive progress on the normative and policy fronts
has been matched finally by action on the ground. That
is our wish. Sadly, we cannot. Once again, the gap
between the two remains enormous, while the reality on
the ground is characterized by a dire lack of protection.
We all know what that reality looks like. It is the child
left orphaned and permanently disabled after the family
home was hit in an air strike. It is the doctor threatened
by fighters for treating someone from the other side;
the detainee languishing in an overcrowded jail with
no procedural safeguards; the woman living in torment
for decades without news of her missing husband; and
it is the countless men, women and children suffering
the long-lasting consequences of armed conflicts in
every region of the world - each one with their own
tragic story.

Our focus here today, as always, is how best to
respond to such terrible suffering; how to prevent it
from happening in the first place; and how to close
the gap between words and action and actually protect
civilians. Our basic message is simple and clear: the
single most effective way to reduce suffering in war
is to uphold the fundamental principle of humanity.
The most important tool for achieving that is already
in our hands. That tool is international humanitarian
law, which is designed to respect and preserve life and
dignity even in the worst circumstances. Equally clear
is that the primary responsibility for respecting and
ensuring international humanitarian law falls to States.

There can be no excuses and no exceptions to the
applicability of the law - no matter how complex,
protracted or fragmented an armed conflict may be
and what labels or designations are given to the parties.
We often see States and their partners claiming that
they are fighting individuals designated as terrorists
or foreign terrorist fighters, which sometimes includes
children, rather than a conventional enemy and that
international humanitarian law somehow does not apply
or applies differently. There is also a general trend of
denial of responsibility for international humanitarian
law violations, including for direct or proxy partners
and of passing responsibility to someone else down the
line. That only increases the climate of impunity and
ultimately causes yet more suffering.

Let us be clear. International humanitarian
law protects everyone who is not, or is no longer,
taking part in hostilities. Exceptional behaviour by
one side - even including large-scale violations of
international humanitarian law - cannot justify an
unlawful response. On the contrary, States must not
only respect international humanitarian law, but they
must also influence those with whom they partner
or whom they support to ensure compliance with
international humanitarian law. In many of the ongoing
armed conflicts that we see in the Middle East, Africa
and elsewhere, belligerents receive significant support
from States, for example, in the form of logistical
support, training, financing and partnered operations.
States that supply belligerents with weapons have a
special responsibility and are particularly influential,
as they are providing the means by which violations
might be committed. The message must be clear: there
will be no support without compliance with the law. A
failure to follow the rules, which is essentially a failure
in terms of humanity, results in much of the suffering
that we see every day in our work. I would like to
highlight four ongoing issues that we find of particular
concern, with clear recommendations for improving the
situation on the ground.

The first issue, which echoes the concerns of the
Secretary-General, is the enormous impact on civilians
from the use of heavy explosive weapons in populated
areas. Working on the front lines of armed conflicts
as we do, the ICRC sees close-up the often-devastating
humanitarian consequences of such weapons - in
Syria, Iraq, Yemen, Ukraine, Afghanistan, Libya and
elsewhere. With conflicts becoming more urbanized
and protracted, those consequences are becoming
more widespread and are lasting longer, sometimes for
generations. That is not only in terms of the traumatic
loss oflife, livelihoods, infrastructure and services, but
also in terms of deep mental scars. The obvious solution
lies in changing behaviour. In view of the unique
vulnerabilities of civilians living in population centres,
it is crucial that parties to armed conflicts reassess
and adapt their choice of weapons in urban warfare.
To that end, we once again urge States and parties to
armed conflicts to avoid the use of explosive weapons
that have wide-area effects in densely populated areas.
That avoidance principle suggests a presumption of
the non-use of such weapons owing to the high risk of
their indiscriminate effects and of the consequent harm
to civilians.

Damage and disruption to essential services brings
me to the second main issue of concern, that is, the
protection of health care. Resolution 2286 (2016) was
a significant first step towards better implementation
of existing international humanitarian law on medical
care in armed conflict. However, during the two-year
period since its adoption, from May 2016 to April
2018, the ICRC recorded more than 1,200 violent
incidents targeting health care in 16 countries whereby
health workers were killed, threatened or kidnapped;
ambulances were obstructed; medical supplies were
destroyed or prevented from crossing front lines; and
hospitals were bombed or looted. The gap between
words and actions is rather dramatic. It is imperative
that all States 4 not only parties to conflicts - uphold
international commitments and make the protection of
health care a national priority.

One of the best ways to do so, we believe, is to
focus on national and regional initiatives, including
the exchange of best practices between States. More
specifically, we urge all States to take the following
five priority measures. First, they should review their
military doctrines, procedures, planning and practices
to protect medical care in the conduct of military
operations; secondly, ensure that their domestic
legislation enables health-care professionals to carry
out their work impartially and safely under international
humanitarian law and medical ethics; thirdly, ensure
conflict-specific training and support for health care
professionals, and capacity-building and preparedness
of health-care systems; fourthly, gather good quality
data to develop better tools to prevent violence from
happening and to mitigate its consequences when
it does; and, fifthly, support behavioural change
initiatives and other means of awareness-raising
aimed at increasing respect for health-care workers, in
general, so that they can work in safety even under the
most difficult circumstances.

The third issue of particular concern that I would
like to highlight today concerns the deprivation
of liberty. The ICRC visits hundreds of places of
detention in conflict zones around the world every year.
In many of them, the use of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment and punishment are
the norm, with dramatic consequences for detainees'
physical and mental health. Severe overcrowding is
also common. That is often due to a high incarceration
rate, shortcomings in the judicial process and limited
infrastructure. All too often, places of detention are
inhumane and unmanageable. In the long-term, that
has very negative repercussions on society as a whole,
while fuelling cycles of conflict and abuse. How can
that be remedied? States have an obligation to respect
human dignity at all times, including in temporary
places of detention. Prison infrastructure needs to
be planned in line with the Nelson Mandela Rules.
Detention staff should have the training, capacity and
independent oversight to manage places of detention
humanely and adequately. Judicial guarantees and
procedural safeguards must be enforced rapidly
following capture or arrest under the relevant law.
ICRC visits to places of detention in conflict zones can
play a critical role in ensuring that detainees are treated
humanely. We therefore call on States and other parties
to armed conflicts to grant the ICRC access to places
of detention.

The fourth and last issue concerns the many people
who go missing in armed conflict. No one can even be
sure how many people are affected, In Iraq, for example,
estimates on the number of missing persons from past
and current conflicts range from 250,000 to 1 million.
The plight of those people, and of their families, can
go on for many years, even decades. People have the
right to know what happened to their missing relatives.
International humanitarian law includes a range of
provisions to prevent people from going missing in
armed conflict and to account for those who do. Parties
to conflict have an obligation to provide information
and make efforts to put families back together, no
matter who they are or where they come from. The
way in which cases of missing persons are handled can
have a long-term impact on reconciliation, stability and
peace, for better or worse. We can help. We can support
parties to conflict to fulfil their obligations, which
will, in turn, help people to rebuild their lives. This
year, we are launching a four-year project with a global
community of practitioners to develop professional
standards and practices to improve the response to
missing persons and their families.

Despite that very gloomy picture, it would be
wrong - and indeed dangerous - to believe that
international humanitarian law is always violated and
therefore is useless. Any normalization of violations
could have a terrible impact on those affected by armed
conflict. Conversely, we believe that a more positive
focus on international humanitarian law can actually
strengthen compliance.

While we are rightly concerned by violations of
the law, we must equally recognize the many positive
examples of respect for it. Those, of course, rarely
make the headlines. To that end, the ICRC is currently
undertaking a project on international humanitarian
law in action to collect and promote evidence-based
examples of respect for the law from parties to
conflict around the world. That, we hope, will reaffirm
and strengthen the positive impact of international
humanitarian law in today's armed conflicts.

In conclusion, there is clearly still a long way to go
before the various normative and policy achievements
regarding the protection of civilians are felt where they
really matter - not on paper, but on the ground. The
ICRC therefore urges States to take decisive action in
the four particular areas that I highlighted, namely, to
avoid the use of heavy explosive weapons in populated
areas, counter a wide range of threats to health care,
ensure humane treatment and conditions of detention
for all detainees and commit to preventing people
from going missing and properly accounting for those
who do. Those are the responsibility of not just States
themselves, but their partners and proxies too.

We stand ready to guide and support States and
other stakeholders to take practical measures to achieve
those goals. Action in those four areas would go a long
way towards ensuring better protection of civilians in
armed conflicts everywhere, and it would do much to
restore faith in our common humanity.

