Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the Security Council, and we thank him
for his comprehensive briefing.

South Africa expresses deep concern that it has
been over a year since Bosnia and Herzegovina held its
general elections and yet it has not been able to
establish a State level Government. That situation
holds the potential to undermine the unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the country. Bosnia and
Herzegovina lies at the heart of Europe, and the lack of
a State-level Government may damage peace and
stability in the Balkans. We are also concerned that the
lack of progress on that issue will continue to prevent
the country from fulfilling important obligations and
from completing the objectives of the five+two agenda.
We therefore call for all the parties to find a way to
resolve the deadlock on those matters.

It is our view that peace and stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina are dependent on a number of
elements. It is important that all parties respect the rule
of law and the international instruments that underlie
the political structures in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is
crucial that the political leadership and the
international presence remain focused on recognizing
the balance brought about by the Dayton Agreement
and the subsequent political structures. All efforts
should be made to ensure that that balance be respected
and maintained. This is also important in completing
the process of forming a Government.

We are reminded of the fact that the Dayton
Agreement is supposed to be replaced by a permanent
constitution in Bosnia and Herzegovina. My delegation
calls on all parties involved to begin once again to
focus on constitutional reform, as the Constitution is an
important instrument required for sustainable peace.
None of the parties is served by actions that take the
country backwards and away from constitutional
reforms already agreed to and whose purpose is to
establish strong and representative State structures that
supersede all other structures.

We are also concerned that the parties have not
instituted a sustainable way to achieve reform of the
police service. However, it is noteworthy that the
defence force has been successfully reformed.

In establishing lasting peace and stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, there is significant need for
dialogue between the parties, as no considerable
progress can be made without constructive dialogue
among the many ethnic groups and entities, as well as
between the Bosnian structures and the High
Representative.

Dialogue between all parties will also be essential
for reform of the constitution as well as for the
establishment of the State-level Government. A
decision should also be made as to whether the office
of the High Representative should be closed as soon as
the outstanding objectives and conditions set by the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board in
February 2008 are met. My delegation notes with
concern that none of the outstanding objectives and
conditions have been met during the reporting period.
We therefore encourage all parties to engage actively in
the completion of that process, which in turn is
required by the High Representative to complete his
work and for Bosnians to take full responsibility for
their country.

We call on all parties not to act in a manner that
will further undermine State institutions or cause
further protraction of the current political dialogue. We
therefore call for all parties to carefully decide whether
the reopening of the liaison office in Sarajevo at the
end of this year will not create further challenges.

Reconciliation should be the ultimate aim of the
continued dialogue. An essential aspect for
reconciliation is the commitment by all parties to fight
impunity by bringing to justice those accused of
committing war crimes. That process must be
conducted in an impartial manner and using the
judicial instruments agreed by the various parties.
Reconciliation is jeopardized by provocative, divisive
nationalistic rhetoric and actions aimed at undermining
the Bosnian State.

Regarding the EUFOR mandate in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, South Africa supports its renewal for a
further 12 months. We hope that the renewal of that
mandate will assist the country in resolving all
outstanding political issues.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to highlight
that political will is significant. We therefore
encourage all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina
recommit themselves to full implementation of their
obligations under the peace accords and agreements.
South Africa remains dedicated to its task as a member
of the Security Council to support Bosnia and
Herzegovina in those efforts.

