Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): I join previous
speakers in thanking Assistant Secretary-General
Bintou Keita and Special Envoy Ismail Wais for their
comprehensive briefings and commitment to seeking a
solution for the crisis in South Sudan. My delegation
would like to make the following comments on
three issues.

First, on the humanitarian situation, the continuing
military actions, widespread violence and economic
decline have resulted in escalating a humanitarian
crisis in which more than 5 million people are suffering
from severe food insecurity and 4 million South
Sudanese have been displaced. Timely and effective
humanitarian assistance is therefore extremely critical.
Despite the presidential decree of 9 November, which
ordered free movement for humanitarian actors, there
is still no tangible improvement in humanitarian access
to those in greatest need. At the same time, aid workers
continue to be attacked and killed in different parts of
the country. We therefore call on all signatories to the
agreement of 21 December 2017 to immediately cease
all hostilities and facilitate humanitarian access in
accordance with that greement and strictly adhere to
international humanitarian law and human rights law.

Secondly, on the political process, Kazakhstan
praises the efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) to implement the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, which is the only way to achieve stability and
progress in the country. We welcome the conduct of the
second phase of the IGAD's High-level Revitalization
Forum, which took place from 5 to 16 February, and
hope that the Forum will result in the conclusion of
a political agreement. It is of critical importance that
the Council remain united in supporting the High-
level Forum and in encouraging the parties to act in
good faith. Furthermore, the support of South Sudan's
neighbours is equally important if the Forum is to
succeed. To be more effective, the political negotiations
should be bolstered by intercommunal reconciliation
and confidence-building among local populations,
as well as comprehensive strategies in economic
development and resilience-building, with the full
engagement of women and young people.

Thirdly, on the upcoming reconfiguration of the
United Nations Mission inSouth Sudan (UNMISS),
including the Regional Protection Force (RPF),
Kazakhstan highly appreciates UNMISS for
implementing its mandated tasks under very difficult
circumstances. We support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General's independent review of UNMISS,
which asserts that the current mandate of Mission
remains relevant, but that it should be modified to
strengthen capacity-building and training of the armed
forces and State institutions through a long-term
security-sector reform programme.

We note some progress achieved in deploying
the Regional Protection Force, which will enhance
the capacity of UNMISS to protect civilians and
improve the security environment. At the same time,
we agree with the conclusion of the special report
that the concept, mandate and configuration of the
RPF need to be adapted to the current political and
security environment.

