Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Special
Representative David Shearer for his briefing and for
the good work he has been doing since assuming his
new post a few months ago. We also thank the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Senegal for his briefing
on the activities of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan.

We remain extremely concerned about the worsening
security and humanitarian situation in South Sudan.
All reports indicate that what is happening in the
country is indeed deeply disturbing, and, with every
passing day, the situation seems to get worse. Fighting
has continued unabated across several parts of the
country with devastating consequences for the civilian
population. The high level of insecurity coupled with
the drought situation in the country has left many
South Sudanese food insecure. The dire humanitarian
situation requires urgent attention, and, before it is too
late, all necessary measures must be taken to save lives
and forestall the famine. In that connection, ensuring
safe and unhindered access for humanitarian actors is
absolutely critical to reach those in need of life-saving
assistance, and it is incumbent upon all the parties on
the ground to facilitate that without any preconditions.

The cessation of all hostilities and violence in
the country is imperative not only for facilitating the
delivery of humanitarian aid, but also for creating the
conditions necessary for the holding of genuine and
inclusive dialogue so as to achieve lasting peace and
reconciliation in South Sudan. It is important that the
Government honour its commitments to its unilateral
ceasefire, and all other parties should also be urged to
immediately stop fighting. The 2015 Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan remains an
important framework to end the conflict in South Sudan,
and we believe that it is through the full implementation
of the Agreement, greater inclusivity, forgiveness and
reconciliation that peace and stability can be restored
in the country. That is what necessitates the need for
reinvigorating the peace process and, in that regard, we
continue to believe that the national dialogue initiative
announced by the Government has the real potential
to facilitate that objective if it is conducted in an all-
inclusive manner.

We cannot overemphasize the need for unity of
purpose among the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the African Union (AU) and the
United Nations in the search for lasting peace, security
and stability in South Sudan. In that connection, the joint
press statement of 29 January continues to represent a
useful framework for cooperation among those three
organizations in their joint efforts to reinvigorate the
South Sudanese peace process. Its implementation
remains the key to addressing the South Sudan issue.
Of course, we fully understand the growing frustration
within the international community because of the
prevailing situation on the ground and the lack of any
meaningful progress. However, there is no option for
the three organizations other than redoubling their
efforts to reverse the current alarming trajectory.

In that regard, we would like to stress one very
critical point that Special Representative of the
Secretary- General Shearer mentioned earlier. At no time
has the alignment of voices and actions of the region,
the AU, the United Nations, the Security Council and
the international community in general been as critical
as it is today. A one-voice message is what could make
a difference in South Sudan.

The countries of the region are being inundated
with thousands ofrefugees fleeing South Sudan because
of the rapidly deteriorating security and humanitarian
situation. Therefore, they have a stake in resolving
the South Sudanese conflict and can indeed play an
important role in the search for a lasting solution to it.
Recently, there has been progress in adopting a common
regional approach to deal with the South Sudanese
issue. That was demonstrated during the thirtieth
extraordinary summit of IGAD Assembly of Heads of
State and Government on South Sudan in Nairobi, and
the communique issued at the conclusion of the summit
is a testament to positive developments in the region.
That is why the assertion in the final report of the Panel
of Experts on South Sudan established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015) (S/2017/326) - that the region
is fractured in its response to the conflict in South
Sudan - does not, in our opinion, accurately reflect the
reality on the ground. Nevertheless, we acknowledge
that there have been deficiencies. The need to do more
remains so as to consolidate the unity of the region. I
would like to indicate that every possible effort is being
exerted in that direction.

We also know full well that no matter what we in
the region and the rest of the international community
do, nothing can be achieved without the willingness
and readiness of the South Sudanese parties to stop
the fighting and find a lasting solution through
reconciliation and dialogue. That is why the Council
needs to continue to urge them to do so in order to end
the suffering of the South Sudanese people.

Finally, with regard to the deployment of the
Regional Protection Force, we are working with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to expedite
the deployment of an advance infantry company,
as indicated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/328). We welcome the limited progress made in
the deployment preparation but also note the challenges
that still need to be addressed. We hope that the United
Nations and the Government of South Sudan will reach
a common understanding in addressing those issues
and pave the way for the full and speedy deployment
of the Force.

