Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda): My delegation
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity
to address the Security Council on the important issue
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR). We would like to assure the Council of my
Government's full support and cooperation as the
Tribunal continues to implement the Completion
Strategy. My delegation expresses its thanks to Justice
Byron and Prosecutor Jallow for their respective
statements.

We note that the number of persons whose trials
either have been completed or are in progress is 60.
Eight detainees are awaiting trial; of these, five are
being considered for transfer to national jurisdictions.
With the recent arrest of Augustin Ngirabatware in

Germany and three others - Laurent Bucyibaruta,
Wenceslas Munyeshyaka and Dominique
Ntawukuriryayo - in France, the number of indicted

ICTR fugitives still at large has dropped from 18 to 14.
However, we note that the remaining 14, including
Felicien Kabuga, Colonel Serubuga, Colonel
Rwagafirita and many other key masterminds of the
Rwanda genocide, are some of the most notorious
fugitives.

We appeal once again to the Security Council to
take urgent measures to ensure that those indicted do
not evade justice. The arrests this year are a positive
development worth appreciating, but there is fairly
good information about the whereabouts of high-level
fugitives. We therefore urge the Council to take the
measures necessary to ensure that all States cooperate
in apprehending and handing over those fugitives for
trial. States that fail to do so must be held to account
by the Council.
Rwanda welcomes the initiative of the ICTR
Prosecutor regarding the transfer of cases to national
jurisdictions, principally to Rwanda. The Rwanda
Government and the Prosecution have made
remarkable progress with respect to the referral of
cases. The Rwanda Government is committed to
continuing those preparations. For example, organic
law No. 11/2007 has been promulgated to govern all
legal matters pertaining to the referral of cases to
Rwanda.

Other arrangements have been made with a View
to ensuring that all the requirements set forth under
rule 11 bis are met. In addition to a modern prison
facility built 100 kilometres from Kigali, a modern
holding cell has been completed in the capital to
accommodate detainees who will be on trial there.
Consequently, the five transfer requests are pending
before the various ICTR Chambers. We are pleased
that our partnership with the Office of the Prosecutor
has enabled us to make significant progress in all these
areas.

The Rwanda Government strongly holds the
position that pending cases must, to the extent possible,
be transferred to Rwanda's national jurisdiction for
trial. That position is based on the following reasons.
First, justice must be seen to be done within the
territory where crimes were committed. Secondly, it is
more efficient and effective to try cases in Rwanda,
since most evidence and witnesses are located in the
country. Thirdly, on the basis of sovereign equality,
Rwanda, having cooperated with the ICTR, an
international judicial institution, should not be
subordinated to other national systems. Fourthly,
transferral would complement and reinforce
Government policies towards reconciliation, which is
central to the mandate of the ICTR.

There should be no doubt regarding Rwanda's
willingness to take over all cases from the ICTR and to
supervise the sentences imposed by the Tribunal. All
the necessary preparations are being made, in
partnership with the ICTR and with valuable support
from our development partners. Thus, the following
actions have been taken.

First, a law has been enacted to govern the
referral of cases to Rwandan courts from the ICTR.
The law abolishes the death penalty and sufficiently
addresses the procedural and substantive aspects of
prospective trials, as well as monitoring mechanisms. It
also creates a legal-aid fund for indigent accused and a
witness protection mechanism, to which we hope the
international community will contribute, as it has done
for the ICTR. The Government has included a specific
amount of money in its 2008 budget to provide for
legal aid, thereby increasing the capacity of the legal-
aid scheme.

Secondly, to improve the management of the
scheme and of issues affecting witnesses, an office
headed by the Assistant Attorney General has been set
up to ensure that the legal-aid system is operating at
full capacity. There is a system in place to address
issues affecting witnesses and victims, ranging from
their security to their psychological and economic
rehabilitation.

Thirdly, although there has been significant
development in the country's justice sector, a
comprehensive technical support programme and plan
are under way for longer-term purposes. In that regard,
we wish to express our appreciation to our
development partners for their support. We also
appreciate the ICTR's initiatives in the area of
technical support for capacity-building. We welcome
the continued support of the international community
for those capacity-building efforts.

We would welcome the Council's continued
attention on the question of the transfer of convicts to
serve sentences in Rwanda. The execution of sentences
is vital to the criminal justice process. My Government
is concerned about the issue of another six months
without progress. We would urge the Security Council
to take urgent steps to remedy that situation. In
particular, we urge the Security Council to provide
clear deadlines with regard to the necessary steps to
ensure that convicts are transferred to Rwanda without
any further delay, in accordance with article 26 of the
ICTR Statute.

As we continue to consider the legacy of the
Tribunal on international justice in general, but more
specifically its effect on Rwanda, we believe that the
Completion Strategy should incorporate the transfer of
court documents and materials to Rwanda. We
emphasize that those records constitute an important
part of our country's recent history and that they are of
critical importance to our reconciliation and civic
policies. That overrides any desire to acquire those
archives simply for research or similar purposes. In
deciding on that issue, we hope that Rwanda will not
be prejudiced against on the pretext of its limited
material means or any other basis. We think it is
important for the United Nations and the Government
of Rwanda to begin consultations on that important
issue a soon as possible.

The issue pertaining to the management of ICTR
appeals needs to be discussed. To date, the two
Tribunals have one appellate body. There is a need for
more effective and efficient management of the
appellate process. We may have to consider splitting
the Appeals Chamber into two, so as to enhance its
efficiency and effectiveness. We look forward to the
Security Council's consideration of that issue.

We would like to conclude by expressing our
profound appreciation to the Security Council for its
continued support for the Tribunal. We also wish to
express our appreciation to Member States for their
support through both assessed and voluntary
contributions. As we enter the last leg, we urge the
Council to continue its commitment to ensuring that
the Tribunal is adequately resourced to conduct its
work efficiently and effectively. We also thank the
President and Prosecutor of the Tribunal and their
respective teams for their work in ensuring the
implementation of the completion strategy.

