First of all, I would like to congratulate the Russian Federation on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month and to welcome the holding of today's open debate on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on the theme of women and peace and security. This anniversary coincides with the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing World Conference on Women and the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations. In adopting resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council recognized not only the differential, disproportionate and multidimensional impact of conflict on women and girls but also, and most significant, the importance of their active participation in peace processes. With the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the prevention of violence against women, the protection of their rights and the promotion of their involvement in decision-making became essential markers in all peace policies and strategies at global, regional and national levels. Accordingly, through the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and its subsequent Declaration of Shared Commitments, endorsed by 151 States Members of the United Nations and four regional organizations, which are aimed at revitalizing efforts to make peace missions more inclusive and effective, the international community has renewed its commitment to increasing the number of civilian and uniformed women at all stages of peace processes. Equally important is the Secretary-General's gender strategy, under which important international peacekeeping responsibilities have been assigned to women, including gender-equality and women's protection advisers deployed in several theatres of peace operations. Despite this significant progress, the results of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) are slow and structural, and cyclical and economic challenges, including in the area of financing and institutional reform, persist, as was so well highlighted in the latest report of the Secretary-General on the subject before us today (S/2020/946). In conflict areas, in addition to being considered as weapons of war, women continue to be victims of all kinds of abuses, including sexual and gender- based harassment by armed groups and regular armed forces. This is compounded by their low representation in the defence and security sectors, as well as in conflict prevention, resolution and peacebuilding processes. Senegal, believing that nation-building is based on individual freedom and respect for the human person, has consistently reiterated its faith in, and commitment to, strengthening the rule of law and justice in the country with regard to women, as evidenced by the ratification of almost all of the international instruments aimed at the promotion of women's rights. In keeping with the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000), Senegal has put in place a legal framework as well as policies and strategies for the implementation of its commitments, with the goal of ending gender-based violence and promoting the rights of women and girls, especially in the area of peace and security. With respect to measures that integrate the gender dimension into issues of peace and security, my country has drawn up and is implementing a national action plan for the eradication of gender-based violence, as well as a gender-related sectoral strategy for the period 2012-2022, whose main objective is to reach the goal of a 10 per cent proportion of women in the armed forces by the deadline. That reform has made it possible to revise all texts relating to military personnel with the aim of creating conditions conducive to the integration, advancement and professional development of women. It has also led to the introduction of a gender curriculum in schools and training centres for military and police personnel. The appointment of a female commissioner to head the national police in 2013 was one of the strongest expressions of that policy and provided additional motivation for young Senegalese women dreaming of donning a uniform. My country's strong commitment to increasing the number of women in its defence and security forces is also evident in its contributions to peacekeeping operations. Senegal currently has 60 female soldiers, 121 female police personnel and three female prison staff, that is, more than 2 per cent, 9 per cent and 14 per cent of the total staff of those components, respectively. In addition, following its creation in 2011, a monitoring committee on the implementation of the national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000) was set up within the Ministry of Women, Family and Gender, and an interministerial committee on women and peace and security was set up in 2017 under the auspices of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Senegalese Abroad. Like many other countries, Senegal has also drawn up a second national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), this time for the period 2020-2024, on the basis of resolution 2122 (2013), which calls on Member States to assess the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and to identify the strengths and weaknesses of such implementation, with a view to taking new and more ambitious approaches. Promoting women's participation in peacekeeping also requires the elimination of material obstacles to the recruitment and retention of female personnel in theatres of operation and, consequently, sufficient consideration of their specific needs in the establishment of infrastructures and services related to those operations. Likewise, the issue of sexual abuse and exploitation deserves to be highlighted once again. By endorsing the declaration of the Circle of Leadership on the prevention of that phenomenon, Senegal is in lockstep with the zero-tolerance policy in that area and remains convinced that an increased presence of women in peace operations is of vital importance in the provision of assistance to victims. Senegal therefore remains determined to support all international initiatives aimed at ensuring gender equality in the maintenance and consolidation of peace. However, my country believes that the effective implementation of such initiatives must involve an ongoing dialogue between the United Nations and the contributing countries, whose gender policies, it must be admitted, have made fairly uneven progress. Such an approach will help the Organization support those countries while setting realistic and achievable objectives in terms of promoting the participation of women in peace operations.
