Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): France
takes note of the Council's unanimous adoption of
resolution 2444 (2018). From the outset France has given
unwavering support to the ongoing rapprochement
process in the Horn of Africa. This is a historic
development, creating unprecedented opportunities
for stabilization and development in the region. France
would therefore like to commend the courageous
decision of Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed of Ethiopia,
without whom these developments would not have
been possible.

It is the Security Council's responsibility to support
these developments in the Horn of Africa, including by
lifting the sanctions on Eritrea. Nevertheless, we believe
that the Security Council still has legitimate demands
with regard to Eritrea. First and foremost, the Eritrean
authorities must cooperate with the Council, given that
the Panel of Experts on Somalia has not been able visit
Eritrea since 2011. Above all, Eritrea must give concrete
signs that it wants to work with Djibouti to settle the
issues of the border dispute between the two countries
and of the Djibouti prisoners of war, in accordance
with the provisions of resolution 2385 (2017). Those
two issues continue to be unresolved, as the resolution
that we have adopted today acknowledges. In that
context, while France welcomed the meeting in Jeddah
in September between the Presidents of Djibouti and
Eritrea, we now expect that meeting to lead to concrete
progress on the ground and a commitment to moving
forward together.

In that regard, we believe it is crucial to ensure that
no country in the region is left on the sidelines during
the evolving situation in the Horn of Africa. France
therefore welcomes the fact that with this resolution,
the Security Council commits to regular monitoring
of developments in the relationship between Eritrea
and Djibouti in order to support peace, stabilization
and reconciliation in the Horn of Africa. We are of
course ready to work in coordination with all of the
stakeholders in the region to contribute to strengthening
this regional dynamic.

With regard to Somalia, France is of the View that
the sanctions regime remains crucial to combating illicit
trafficking in arms and Somali charcoal, which fuels
the terrorist group Al-Shabaab, still the main threat to
Somalia's security. In that regard, I would like to express
France's condolences to the Somali authorities and to the
families of the victims of the terrible terrorist attacks
on Mogadishu on Friday, 9 November. I would also like
to point out that the Somalia sanctions regime is aimed
mainly at supporting the Somali Federal Government
in their fight against terrorism. The exemptions from
the arms embargo that the sanctions regime provides
for enable them to acquire the equipment they need
to combat terrorist groups, with the support of their
international partners. It is therefore in the interests
of the Somali Federal Government to pursue effective
cooperation with the Panel of Experts on Somalia.

