Mr. Kakanur (India): We thank Belgium for convening this open debate on the importance of transitional justice in achieving reconciliation and durable peace. We appreciate the insightful remarks of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights; the President of the Commission for the Clarification of Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition of Colombia; and the Executive Director of the Foundation for Human Rights in South Africa (see S/PV.8723). Since the end of the Cold War, activities by the international community involving peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding have grown rapidly in number, complexity and sophistication. The creation of the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund are just two examples of recent institutional innovations. Transitional justice approaches emerged and developed following the demise of military dictatorships, apartheid and post-Cold War theatres, when there was an increasing international consensus that transitional justice measures were needed to deal with past human rights abuses. Those approaches also coincided with the goals of some donors, banks and aid agencies, all of which prioritized the strong rule of law to enable economic development. However, the involvement of external actors in the internal or quasi-internal conflicts of States has not only become more frequent but has also entailed increased levels of coercion and _ State-building activities that are at odds with the traditional concepts of sovereignty. Effective transitional justice is not only a question of whether there should be a domestic versus an international trial, a truth commission versus an international trial or a cultural alternative versus a traditional trial. The question is: What is beneficial to the people whose lives have been disrupted or even destroyed by the perpetrators of violence? Too often, the international community adopts a technocratic, one-size-fits-all approach that can be damaging. Transitional justice has become steeped in Western liberalism, often appearing distant and remote to those who actually need it most. Rebuilding social capital and livelihood systems is harder than restoring infrastructure and institutions. It involves redefining relationships, promoting public deliberation, creating a healthy civil society, facilitating the healing process and making institutions both trustworthy and effectively trusted. There is also a perception that transitional justice mechanisms have been providing a form of ideological obfuscation that is intended to divert attention away from those who benefited, and still benefit, from and in the system. Specifically, we note that the historical injustices inherent to colonialism are rarely the focus of transitional justice. If transitional justice is conceived merely as a Band-Aid that can be put on to past harms during some unspecified and limited time of transition, without any suggestion that it is attached to some deeper change in the society, it is unlikely that those measures will have any transformational capacity. Reconciliation is a long and arduous process; artificially imposed standards or timelines are unlikely to achieve success. Reconciliation within a nation must be not only homegrown but also home-nurtured. It is important to identify and clarify goals of any transitional justice mechanism before proceeding and designing processes and projects to fulfil those goals. Gender justice has to be fully integrated into all institutional mechanisms and wider structural reforms of the country concerned. Transitional justice mechanisms can play a crucial role in societies torn apart by the violence of conflict, but they must contribute effectively to the will of the local actors to take their destiny into their own hands by devising political and institutional safeguards to prevent a repetition of mass crimes.
