Ms. Anderson (United States of America): Let
me begin by welcoming to the Council Mr. Haris
Siladeic', Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I thank him very much for his comments
today. Let me also welcome High Representative Inzko
and thank him for his comprehensive and excellent
briefing. The United States deeply appreciates his
dedication and hard work in support of implementation
of the Dayton Accords.

Nearly 15 years have passed since the signing of
the Dayton Accords. In that time, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has made significant progress to
overcome its past. The country now has a single
military, has signed a Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the European Union (EU) and has
taken steps towards NATO membership.

We welcome the decision of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's leaders to destroy excess arms and

ammunition. The United States is proud to be a partner
in that important effort. And in January of this year, we
welcomed Bosnia and Herzegovina as a valued
colleague on the Security Council. These important
accomplishments all show that the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina want to live in a stable, functional
State capable of European and Euro-Atlantic
integration. The United States supports the aspiration
of Bosnia and Herzegovina's people for a European
future.

With this in mind, let me highlight three concerns
raised by High Representative Inzko's report (see S/2010/235). First, while some progress has been made
on defence and other necessary reforms, more needs to
be done. We share the High Representative's
conclusion that Bosnia and Herzegovina has made only
limited progress in addressing constitutional and other
reforms necessary for EU candidacy. We urge Bosnia's
leaders to cross the ethnic divide and find the
compromises needed to build a functional State that
can meet EU and NATO requirements.

As Vice-President Biden said to the Bosnian
Parliament on 19 May 2009, the United States is proud
to support a peaceful, successful Bosnia and
Herzegovina. But to achieve this goal, Bosnia's leaders
must work together across ethnic lines and party lines
and interact with the rest of the world as a single
sovereign State.

Along with our European partners, the United
States will continue to engage with participants from
all of Bosnia and Herzegovina's communities in
promoting the constitutional reforms needed for the
country's eventual integration into the EU and NATO.
But ultimately, the burden of achieving the country's
aspirations rests on Bosnia and Herzegovina's political
leaders and depends on their responsibility,
commitment and willingness to compromise.

Secondly, like many in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and many in this Chamber, the United States looks
forward to the day when the Office of the High
Representative will no longer be needed. Again, we
urge Bosnia's leaders to find the compromises needed
to fulfil the remaining requirements, particularly on
immovable defence property. In this regard, we also
share High Representative Inzko's concerns about what
the report calls a deteriorated political atmosphere,
including challenges to the High Representative's
authority. In numerous resolutions, the Council has
affirmed the High Representative's Bonn powers and
his responsibility to exercise them to ensure peace,
stability and compliance with the Dayton Agreement.

Thirdly, as we approach the October 2010
national elections, we are concerned that divisive and
damaging political rhetoric may threaten regional
reconciliation efforts, undermine progress on the
country's Euro-Atlantic agenda and distract attention
from real national priorities. It is simply unacceptable
to propose or speculate about the dissolution of the
State, even a peaceful dissolution. It is important for
the country's leadership to break the troubling cycle in
which narrow ethnic and short-term political interests
are pursued at the expense of long-term objectives that
would benefit all of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
communities.

Despite the challenges that lie ahead, Bosnia and
Herzegovina's responsible and constructive tenure on
the Council to date demonstrates again the positive role
that the country can play in the international
community. We welcome the progress that Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its neighbours have made to promote
reconciliation, improve bilateral relations and confront
the legacy of the past by condemning war crimes.

In April, NATO foreign ministers invited Bosnia
into NATO's Membership Action Plan, but with the
clear expectation that the issue of immovable defence
property must be resolved before Bosnia and
Herzegovina can advance in the process. This decision
shows the international community's confidence that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will undertake the important
reforms still needed to strengthen its institutions and
function more effectively as a State. The ultimate
responsibility for resolving these issues rests with its
leadership.

The United States remains committed to the
framework established by the Dayton Accords and to
strengthening State institutions. We also remain firmly
committed to Bosnia and Herzegovina's sovereignty
and territorial integrity and its integration into Euro-
Atlantic institutions, in line with the goals of its leaders
and the wishes of its citizens.
