Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): The people of
Ukraine have spoken. Last Sunday, they cast their
votes for the future of a united Ukraine in an election
that was widely recognized as free and fair and in line
with international standards by numerous international
observers. As Ilkka Kanerva, head of the delegation
sent to the elections by the Parliamentary Assembly
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) said, "The impressive turnout
offered a powerful rebuke to those who would challenge
Ukraine's unity and progress".

Intimidations, kidnappings and seizures of ballot
boxes and voting premises by pro-Russian separatists
could not stop those who care for their country from
expressing their will democratically and freely through
a ballot box, in stark contrast to those who only know
how to impose their will at gunpoint. Everywhere,
including south-eastern Ukraine, the lead of President-
elect Petro Poroshenko was clear and obvious, leaving
no room whatsoever for speculations regarding the
legitimacy of the election.

Importantly, Ukraine's Sunday election demolished
the myth okaraine's radical extremism, which has been
staple fodder for a repulsive anti-Ukrainian propaganda
campaign. It is time to put to rest once and for all the
shameless incitement against and demonization of
Ukraine and the Ukrainian people, which have done
enormous damage to relations between the two nations
and led to bloodshed under false pretexts on Ukraine's
soil.

The people of Ukraine have spoken. Sunday's
election results confirmed what we knew all along.
While many in eastern Ukraine have legitimate
grievances regarding their socioeconomic conditions
and the relationship between the centre and the regions,
they do not seek Ukraine's fragmentation. On the
contrary, the overwhelming majority of Ukraine's
citizens, including those in the east and south of the
country, see their future in a united and democratic
Ukraine.

The challenges facing the new President and
his Government are enormous, as they will have to
overcome decades of neglect and pervasive corruption,
restore the rule of law, rebuild trust and confidence
among the citizens and regions, as well as between
the citizens and their Government, by implementing
comprehensive and inclusive political and economic
reforms. The national dialogue meetings and the
recently adopted memorandum on peace and concord
offer good grounds for openness and inclusiveness,
as well as the involvement of the broadest groups of
Ukraine's society as the country seeks to break away
from the corrupt legacy of past rule. We wish the
President-elect and the people of Ukraine all the very
best in that important endeavour.

At the same time, we stress once again that
Ukraine's independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity are non-negotiable and must be respected by
all. We welcome the statements by Russia's leaders
that they will respect the outcome of Ukraine's vote.
It is now time for them to walk the walk. It is time for
Russia to discard its propaganda war against Ukraine
and to engage in a genuine and meaningful dialogue.
We urge Russia to fully withdraw its troops from the
Ukrainian border and to stop the free flow of arms,
weaponry and foreign fighters into Ukrainian territory.
Ukraine's borders and air space must be respected.

In view of Russia's influence on and contacts
with illegal armed groups, it is key that Russia
unequivocally denounce, condemn and disassociate
itself from the militant separatism plaguing Ukraine's
south-east. Such steps are essential to helping restore a
sense of trust between the two neighbouring States and
to embark on a path of de-escalation, on the basis of
the 17 April Geneva statement and with the continued
monitoring and support of the international community
on the ground.

Crimea's occupation has led to growing numbers of
internally displaced persons, who now number nearly
10,000. The countless acts of violence committed by
heavily armed separatist groups - such as ongoing
banditry and looting, extortions, intimidation,
abductions, beatings, torture, bloody ambushes
and killings - are in direct violation of the human
and social rights of the people they falsely claim to
represent. The separatists in eastern Ukraine defy the
very basic principles of national and international law
and flaunt their contempt for human rights. Cases of
illegal self-proclaimed people's courts sentencing local
officials to death, followed by actual executions, have
been reported. The increasing involvement of foreign
fighters, including Chechen mercenaries, is deeply
worrying and may, if unchecked, spin out of control.

The false and dangerously misleading narrative of
fighting Ukrainian fascists continues to be exploited.
The deliberate targeting of journalists, including attacks,
beatings and abductions, as well as the confiscation and
destruction of their equipment, have been reported. A
young Italian journalist lost his life. Such attacks must
be firmly condemned. Only a few days ago, the self-
proclaimed mayor of Sloviansk confirmed that his
group alone held some 40 hostages. The overall number
of hostages and forced disappearances is obviously
higher and remains a cause of serious concern. For
example, 12 high-ranking police officers were abducted
by armed separatists in the Luhansk region on 26 May.

International monitors are increasingly under
attack, including the abduction on Monday, 26 May, of
four representatives of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) special monitoring
mission, which was the second such incident in
two months. Earlier today, we received alarming
information that another 11 OSCE monitors had been
detained by pro-Russian separatists on their way from
Donetsk to Dnipropetrovsk. They have now been
released. Lithuania strongly condemns all interference
with the work of international observers and urges all
parties to ensure that they can carry out their important
work in safety and security.

No country would sit idle and watch indifferently
as groups of insurgents armed with illegally obtained
weapons, increasingly with the help of foreign
mercenaries, go about disrupting the functioning of the
State and its very statehood by intimidation, violence
and force. In the face of the ongoing onslaught against
the State of Ukraine, we stress Ukraine's legitimate
right to defend its statehood and territorial integrity
from illegal separatist groups that have taken up arms
against their own country and demonstrate utter disdain
for its Constitution, its laws and its people. While
reiterating our commitment to Ukraine's independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, we stand ready to
support its new leadership and the people of Ukraine on
the path of democratic reforms and peace. The people
of Ukraine have spoken. Each and every one of us must
respect their choice.

