Ms. Lnj (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The Central and
Eastern Europe countries associated with the European
Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia
and Slovenia - and the associated countries Cyprus,
Malta and Turkey, as well as the European Free Trade
Association country member of the European
Economic Area Iceland, align themselves with this
statement.

Allow me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, and
your delegation upon assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of October. The
European Union pledges to cooperate fully with you in
your important tasks.

The European Union welcomes the opportunity to
once again review the work of the Security Council's
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). At the outset,
the European Union would like to express its strong
support for the work of the Committee and for its
efforts to make its activities as transparent as possible.
Likewise, we commend the great effort made by the
members of the Committee, its experts and the
Secretariat to process and analyse the wealth of
information provided in the reports.

The fight against terrorism remains an absolute
priority for the European Union. In that regard, we
acknowledge the central role of the United Nations,
through the Security Council and the CTC, and we
remain fully committed to the closest and fullest
cooperation with the Committee, in the spirit of
paragraph 6 of resolution 1373 (2001).

As the Chairman of the CTC outlined this
morning, the second phase of the review of national
and other reports is well under way. We urge those who
have not yet submitted an initial or a subsequent report
to do so.

However, the European Union reiterates that
compliance with resolution 1373 (2001) is not met
through the mere presentation of reports. We have to
move beyond words if we are to be successful in our
attempts to eliminate international terrorism. It is,
therefore, essential to fully implement the resolution by
adopting and implementing the necessary legal and
practical measures at the national and regional levels.

As we have heard again and again, there must be
no weak links in the chain. The European Union fully
agrees with this and, thus, stands ready to assist third
countries. There is scope for further assistance, and we
encourage those in need of assistance to provide
specific requests in that regard. An overview of EU
assistance programmes appears on the CTC's web site.

Furthermore, the European Union is stepping up
its efforts to assist third countries in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We are
identifying a number of countries with which to
cooperate in launching pilot projects. That assistance
will be based on an assessment of needs, on which we
will be cooperating very closely with the CTC. The
European Union reiterates the importance of effective
and adequate coordination among donors in order to
avoid duplication of work.

Thus, the European Union intends to make
progress to incorporate the fight against terrorism into
all aspects of the Union's external policy, in particular
by strengthening the role of the Common Foreign and
Security Policy in that area: for instance, to include
anti-terrorism clauses in EU agreements with third
countries, to focus more sharply on a political dialogue
with third countries and to actively promote
coordination with relevant international and regional
organizations.

The European Union supports the report of the
Policy Working Group on the United Nations and
Terrorism. We underscore that the United Nations
system as a whole should continue to ensure its
readiness to assist in the implementation of measures to
counter terrorism, in particular the efforts of the CTC.

The European Union continues to urge the speedy
signing and ratification of all 12 international terrorism
conventions, especially the one related to the financing
of terrorism. In that context, we take note of the
proposals of the Secretary-General to strengthen the
Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations
Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention. The EU
also remains committed to finalizing the work on a
draft comprehensive convention against terrorism.

The European Union emphasizes that our efforts
to establish effective instruments to fight terrorism
must be conducted with respect for the rule of law,
human rights and fundamental freedoms. We must not
fall into the trap of responding to terrorist attacks by
undermining our own democratic values. We, therefore,
commend the contact the CTC has developed with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.

In conclusion, the fight against terrorism requires
a comprehensive approach and effective instruments
for legal collaboration. That fight can be won only
through strong and sustained international cooperation.
The United Nations, most notably the CTC, will remain
crucial in that regard, and the EU urges all Member
States and international organizations to show their
fullest commitment to this important cause.

