Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Ithank the Secretary-
General and Mr. Yamamoto, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
for the latest report on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2017/1056). I also thank all of our briefers.

As the Secretary-General's report acknowledges,
Afghanistan continues to face many challenges to its
peace and stability. However, it is important to recognize
the significant progress that has been made. Some
6.4 million children now attend school, the country
has a democratic Government, and Afghan security
forces are fighting to protect their fellow citizens. We
remain committed to supporting the Afghan people on
their path towards peace and prosperity bilaterally and
through the United Nations. The United Kingdom will
spend up to $1 billion by 2020 to support the Afghan
Government's work to improve security, the quality of
life and access to education.

I will take this opportunity to focus on three
important elements of peacebuilding in Afghanistan:
the holding of timely elections, the Afghan-led peace
process and the protection of human rights.
First, credible, inclusive and timely elections are
essential for long-term stability. We remain committed,
together with the international community, to
supporting the Afghan Government's efforts to deliver
parliamentary and district elections in 2018. We call on
the Government and the electoral management bodies
to deliver the elections that the Afghan people deserve.

There is no purely military solution to the conflict
in Afghanistan. The only viable option for achieving
lasting peace and stability is an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace process. The Taliban must
choose to engage with that process. We welcome the
actions taken by the United Nations, including by the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, to
act on the recommendations in the strategic review of
UNAMA, which recognized the importance of placing
peace efforts at the forefront of the United Nations work.
The Kabul Process for Peace and Security Cooperation
will convene its second meeting in early February, and
we call on all parties to engage constructively with the
Afghan Government through that process so as to give
Afghanistan the best hope of achieving peace.

It is also encouraging that human rights remain
an essential part of UNAMA's mandate, and I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto for highlighting the United Nations work to
support the meaningful participation of women in the
upcoming elections. In that regard, I would like to thank
Ms. Wazhma Frogh for her compelling briefing, and we
pay tribute to her many years of tireless activism in
support of women's rights in Afghanistan. Her invitation
to brief the Security Council today demonstrates the
importance that we place on those issues.

The United Kingdom is supporting Afghanistan so
as to prevent violence against women and girls, improve
girls' education and ensure women's full participation
in political and economic life. We are also mentoring
the trainers of future female leaders at the Afghan
National Army Officer Academy. The Council's
adoption of resolution 2344 (2017) ensures that women
and peace and security remain at the heart of the United
Nations work in Afghanistan, and we welcome the
Afghan Government's work on its national action plan
on women, peace and security, while urgently calling
for its full implementation.

With Afghanistan's recent election to the United
Nations Human Rights Council - on which we
congratulate that country once again - we look
forward to working with Afghanistan to promote and
protect human rights around the world, including
through the fulfilment of its international human
rights commitments.

Looking ahead to next month, we fully support
Kazakhstan's decision to prioritize Afghanistan and
Central Asia during its presidency of the Council. We
look forward to working with Kazakhstan, Council
members and regional and international partners
to support the efforts of Afghan President Ghani
and his Government to build peace and security,
with a particular focus on regional connectivity and
sustaining peace.

The instability in Afghanistan inflicts tremendous
suffering upon the Afghan people. The international
community can help to change that. If we work together,
the people and the Government of Afghanistan can build
the harmony and prosperity that have been inaccessible
for many decades.

