Ms. Power (United States of America): Two
thousand nine hundred and eighty-eight: that is the
number of people who, according to the International
Organization for Migration, have died trying to make
the journey across the Mediterranean so far this year.
These are the deaths that we know about, and we also
know that the actual number is surely much, much
higher.

The resolution adopted by the Security Council
today aims to address one dimension of the refugee
and migration crisis by authorizing the member States
of the European Union to play a more robust role in
rescuing refugees and migrants aboard ships originating
from Libya and in going after the people who smuggle
them. That is important. Smugglers exploit the
desperate situation of people who are fleeing violence
and hardship. They routinely subject those they are
transporting to sexual violence, extortion and beatings,
and they smuggle them in horrific conditions, denying
them food and water and stacking them atop one
another, like cargo, in the sealed holds of boats. Many
die during the journey and some are found trapped
ordeceased behind hatches that have been locked from
the outside.

But the scale of the current crisis also requires us
to speak candidly to the challenges that we must still
address - and by we, I mean not only the Security
Council but the broader international community. I will
speak to just a few.

We must fill growing gaps in addressing the needs
of the people rescued as well as those of others who
survive the perilous crossing. Those individuals are
arriving daily by the thousands in Europe - nearly
530,000 this year alone. The same is true of the
unprecedented number of refugees from the region,
including more than 4 million from Syria alone. who are
on average spending longer periods of time away from
their homes. In 1993, a little more than two decades
ago, refugees remained away from their homes for an
average of nine years. Today, that average is between
20 and 25 years and growing.

We strongly believe that States have the
responsibility to protect the human rights of everyone
in their territories, including migrants and refugees.
We must see to it that the needs of those people are met,
that their children can attend school, that their sick are
cared for and that their families are fed. And of course,
as others have noted, we must redouble our efforts to
end the conflicts and reduce the extreme poverty that
drives many individuals to leave their homes in the
first place. As we all know, for as long as the Assad
regime is dropping barrel bombs on neighbourhoods
or the Eritrean Government is repressing and forcibly
conscripting its citizens for indefinite periods of time
or the Sudanese Government-backed militias in Darfur
are razing villages, there will be Syrians, Eritreans and
Sudanese, and so many others to fill the boats leaving
Libya and its shores, among other routes, no matter how
perilous the journey.

The United States is committed to doing our part
in this effort, starting with giving more refuge to more
people fleeing those hardships, and providing additional
support to fill the growing gaps for people who have
already fled. Just in recent weeks, President Obama has
committed to going from admitting 70,000 refugees
this year to 85,000 next year and 100,000 the year
after that. He has also announced nearly $419 million
in additional relief to Syrian refugees and displaced
persons, which comes atop the more than $4.5 billion
we have already dedicated to that essential cause. But
even with that, we know that we have to find ways to do
more and we will.

In conclusion, I would encourage every
representative on the Council and every Permanent
Representative at the United Nations, for that matter,
to press his or her country to find concrete ways to do
its own part in responding to the crisis, which is far too
great for any country or any region to shoulder alone.

