Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): Madam President,
allow me at the outset to convey to you the gratitude of
President Alpha Oumar Konare for having included the
African Union Commission in this Council meeting on
the relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in particular the African Union,
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
Allow me as well to express our appreciation for your
initiative in diligently bringing to the Security Council
the debate on a matter crucial for our continental
organization, one which was also the subject of a
decision of a recent African Union summit and which
is particularly dear to our hearts within the
Commission.

The question of financing by the United Nations,
through assessed contributions, of peacekeeping
operations undertaken by the African Union or under
its authority has been discussed regularly in recent
years in view of the growing involvement of our
organization in peacekeeping missions. The idea of
involving our continental organization in peacekeeping
operations, beyond the deployment of military observer
missions that are short-termed and limited in scope,
reappeared during our discussions on the Constitutive
Act of the African Union. As the Council knows,
articles 4 (h) and 4 0") of the Constitutive Act granted
the Union the right to intervene in member States. That
power of the Union was stated in article 6 (d) of the
protocol establishing the Peace and Security Council.

During the deployment by the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) - during the transition period
towards the African Union (AU) - of the African
mission in Burundi in 2003 and 2004, the major
question of financing arose. All eyes, of course turned
to the mother Organization and its Security Council,
which has been entrusted with the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security.

It is worth recalling here that the decision of the
OAU/AU to deploy a peacekeeping mission to Burundi
07-28578
was taken with a view to, and while awaiting the
deployment of, a peacekeeping operation by the United
Nations. The European Union came to the aid of the
OAU/AU, as did other, bilateral partners who provided
logistical and financial support, thus facilitating the
deployment of and the support for that mission for 13
months.

Following that period, the AU mission was
transferred to the United Nations, which in the
meantime had considered that conditions had now been
met for the deployment of a peacekeeping operation.
But the commitment of European funding initially
earmarked for development to finance peacekeeping
operations raised ethical and moral problems. The
problem arose more specifically when, wishing to build
on the example of a partnership for peace in the case of
Burundi, in order to give a new impetus and a long-
term perspective to that partnership, the AU made a
proposal to the EU that a facility be set up to support
peacekeeping operations undertaken by the AU or
under its authority, using European funding, including
the resources earmarked for development.

There was no final decision on that ethical
debate, and it still haunts discussions on the renewal of
the Facility, whose usefulness has certainly been
proven. It is the position of the African Union that that
Facility must not only be maintained, but also
reinforced. Thus, the AU has put forth the idea of
setting up a peace facility within the framework of the
partnership with the G8++, thus giving effect to the
commitments taken during the Kananaskis summit and
reiterated at the summits of Evian and Gleneagles.

However important and innovative those
initiatives for financing peacekeeping operations
through ad hoc arrangements are, they cannot replace
the mechanisms found in the framework of Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter. In that context, and
strengthened by our faith in the United Nations ideals
of peace and solidarity and by our commitment to the
primary role of the Security Council in maintaining
international peace and security and to the principle of
the indivisibility of international peace and security,
the Commission of the African Union took the
opportunity of its meeting with the High-level Panel on
Threats, Challenges and Change, set up by former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, to formally propose
that the United Nations consider the possibility of
financing peacekeeping operations undertaken by the
07-28578
African Union or under its authority through assessed
contributions.

In submitting that proposal, the Commission was
of the opinion that each time the African Union was
called upon to become involved in a conflict situation
in Africa, it would, in accordance with its founding
principles, act on behalf of the international
community and more particularly of the United
Nations. The African Union should be able to move
rapidly to contribute to the immediate stabilization of a
given situation and to create conditions favourable to
the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping or
peacebuilding operation. That would be done through
role sharing based on complementarity and solidarity.

The Commission was encouraged to note that in
its report, the High-level Panel recognized in chapter
XVI, on regional organizations, the growing role of
those organizations in restoring and maintaining peace
and recommended that

"The rules for the United Nations
peacekeeping budget should be amended to give
the United Nations the option on a case-by-case
basis to finance regional operations authorized by
the Security Council with assessed
contributions." (A/59/565, para. 272(f))

In his report to the General Assembly entitled, "In
larger freedom: towards development, security and
human rights for all" (A/59/2005), in particular in
paragraphs 213 to 215, the Secretary-General endorsed
that recommendation and proposed a 10-year plan for
capacity-building with the African Union.

The question of lasting and foreseeable financing
for peacekeeping operations undertaken by the African
Union became even more pressing at the time of the
deployment of the AU mission in Darfur in the Sudan.
More recently, the AU decision - spurred by the
possibilities for peace and reconciliation in Somalia
following recent events in that country - to deploy a
peacekeeping operation has given a sharper aspect to
that question.

In taking that decision fraught with
consequences, the AU was aware that its means are
pathetic - that must be emphasized - but at the same
time it was moved by its principle to not remain
indifferent and by its staunch faith in international
solidarity. Once again, eyes turned, naturally, to the
United Nations and its Security Council, which has in

fact authorized the deployment of the African Union
Military Observer Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
That is the thrust of a decision taken at the recent
African Union summit, which

"Calls upon the United Nations to examine,
within the context of Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter, the possibility of funding,
through assessed contributions, peace-keeping
operations undertaken by African Union or under
its authority and with the consent of the United
Nations." (decision 145(VIII), para. 20)

The question before you is fundamental, because
it is at the heart of the essential relation between the
Security Council and regional organizations, and it
raises the problem of cooperation among the various
levels of the global structure for security. Regional
organizations such as the African Union and its
subregional organizations are in a perfect position,
having been given a mandate to intervene in
conflicts - in conformity with the United Nations
Charter. Increasingly they are called upon by crisis
situations and cannot evade their responsibility.
Africans expect that their institutions will accept their
duty with regard to assistance and solidarity, at the
very time when the United Nations is facing
difficulties because of its growing needs in the area of
peacekeeping operations. It is reasonable to think that
regional organizations must give relief to the United
Nations and assume their share of the burden within
the legitimate framework of the Charter of the United
Nations and its Chapter VIII, which should be made
more specific and updated to bring it into line with new
international realities and the aspirations of all the
peoples of the world.

In the light of the path followed by the African
Union and African subregional organizations, and in
View of the expectations of the people of Africa and
their commitment to the United Nations ideals of peace
and solidarity, the African Union Commission
fervently hopes that the Security Council will
favourably consider the request of the African Union
Summit and decide to establish a follow-up mechanism
to pursue this question. The Council will undoubtedly
be inspired by the ongoing efforts of the United
Nations aimed at supporting the African Union mission
in Darfur, which should lead to a hybrid mission to be
financed by the United Nations through mandatory
contributions.

Certainly, what is at stake is the credibility and
the effectiveness of regional organizations, as well as
the durability and solidity of their relations with the
United Nations. Ultimately, it will also affect the
credibility and authority of the Security Council as the
guardian and the ultimate guarantor of international
peace and security.

