The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I Wish
to invite the representatives of Argentina, Australia, the
Bahamas, Canada, Chile, Cuba, the Dominican
Republic, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Israel, Japan,
Mexico, Nicaragua, Norway, Peru, the Republic of
Korea, Spain, Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to participate in this meeting.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome the
President of Haiti, His Excellency Mr. Rene Garcia
Preval, and request the Protocol Officer to escort him
to a seat at the Council table.

Mr. Rene Garcia Preval, President of Haiti, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 39
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
His Excellency Mr. William J. Clinton, United Nations
Special Envoy for Haiti, to participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I also invite His Excellency Mr. Jose'
Miguel Insulza, Secretary General of the Organization
of American States; His Excellency Mr. Luis Alberto
Moreno Mejia, President of the Inter-American
Development Bank; and His Excellency Mr. Percival
Noel James Patterson, Special Representative of the
Caribbean Community for Haiti, as requested by the
Permanent Representatives of Chile, Colombia and the
Bahamas to the United Nations, respectively, in their
letters of4 April 2011.
Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the Acting Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, His Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, to
participate in this meeting.

I wish to welcome warmly the President of Haiti,
the Secretary-General, the Ministers and other
representatives participating in today's meeting. Their
presence in the Chamber affirms the importance of the
topic under consideration.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/l83*, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti.

I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/20ll/218, which contains a
letter dated 31 March 2011 from the Permanent
Representative of Colombia addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.

I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity.

"Men anpil chay pa Ion". Allow me to begin this
statement using a language that is not one of the
official languages of the United Nations but is part of
the lives of several million inhabitants of the
Caribbean. "Men anpil chay pa loa" is a Creole
proverb that means "Many hands make the load
lighter". Today, before the body responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, in the
presence of such noteworthy guests, I wish to say that
the hands of the world can make Haiti's load lighter. I
say it in Creole because our heart today speaks the
language of that island.

On assuming the presidency of the Security
Council, Colombia wishes to promote an open debate
on Haiti that renews the impetus towards the
stabilization and strengthening of the rule of law in that
country. This is not specifically to congratulate
ourselves for the good that we all have done. The
meagre results achieved require us to reflect on the
way in which we are carrying out our work.

Haiti's social and economic problems and its
reconstruction problems are not new, although they
11-29014
were exacerbated by the tragic earthquake of
12 January last year. Haitians themselves say that it is
necessary to rebuild their country, physically and
institutionally, and the international community has the
moral duty to contribute to that end. However, we must
do so in a coordinated and coherent manner, seeking
concrete, sustainable and long-term achievements and
leaving aside the chaos of well-intentioned but short-
term cooperation without lasting outcomes. Today, the
proliferation of organizations acting on the island
without coordination among themselves or with the
Haitian authorities undermines any effort to strengthen
institutions and affects the ability to undertake long-
term initiatives, preventing these efforts from yielding
concrete results. What is worse, the feeling of failure
feeds the vicious cycle of poverty and corruption.

During my visit to Haiti last year, I realized that if
we truly wish to help, we must do so in different manner.
Haitians yearn to be heard. An international community
that does not take Haitians' views of their problems into
account does not serve Haiti. In this we must be clear.
We know that the primary responsibility - the central
responsibility for reconstruction - falls to the
Government of Haiti and to Haitian leaders. We also
know that the tragedy suffered by Haitians will not end if
local efforts are not complemented by foreign help.

Likewise, if Haitians accept renewed support
from the international community, we propose that it
be built on foundations that guarantee the effectiveness
of our joint action. These foundations would include
the development of concrete projects with transparency
measures that truly lead to an improvement in the
quality of life; the elaboration of a long-term
development strategy; a commitment to accountability;
and ownership by all Haitians of their common destiny.

It is necessary to combat the enemies of
development and stability, such as institutional
weakness, the absence of laws or the failure to comply
with them, and the fragile control and supply of basic
services by the State, including the provision of justice.
We have to believe in and think about Haiti in the long
term to contribute to solving these pressing problems,
which we must admit we have not achieved in the
current cooperation framework.

As I said in September last year before the
General Assembly (see A/65/PV.15), we must all
commit to a different vision for rebuilding Haiti. If we
use the available resources in a more efficient and
11-29014

effective manner, ensuring economic and social
welfare, we will be able to take more concrete and
coherent measures, including through resort to existing
structures such as the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission.

I also believe that we should go beyond the
discussion about whether or not the mandate of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) should be modified. At some point we
will have to do so, as it is clear that Haiti's peace and
security problem will be resolved only if that country
achieves economic and social development.
Meanwhile, the medium- and long-term development
goals set by Haiti should become the required point of
reference for coordinating the activities of MINUSTAH
and United Nations agencies - a task in which the
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General is essential. I take this opportunity to highlight
and recognize the good work of Mr. Edmond Mulet,
who assumed that position and the leadership of
MINUSTAH after the earthquake and has achieved
much in the midst of difficult conditions.

Now we believe that, even working within
MINUSTAH'S agreed mandate, we can contribute in
areas that are essential to the Haitian population. Let us
consider what could be achieved if, rather than having
a high percentage of military personnel, the Mission
had more civilian personnel and engineers who could
coordinate priority matters, such as debris removal - a
task in which, fortunately, significant progress can
already be seen thanks to the efforts of Haitian
authorities. On the one hand, the pre-earthquake
landscape would begin to re-emerge, restoring the
sense of normalcy that would lead Haitians to believe
that things can change; on the other, employment
opportunities would be generated, a vital goal for the
viability of our common efforts towards recovery. Let
us look at this matter from a practical standpoint. If we
already have a United Nations operation in Haiti, why
not use it to address immediate needs and begin to lay
the foundations for its transition towards development?

Another vital project that can be implemented by
the international community is the rebuilding of
housing, which we could undertake through bilateral
and multilateral projects, with the support from start to
finish of donors with their architects, engineers,
environmentalists and landscapers. In supporting the
construction of dignified and well-planned housing that
elevates the population's quality of life, not only would
jobs be generated, but the situation of thousands of
people still living in tents would be resolved.

The one-plus-one framework, which involves
both the Government and the society of Haiti in their
own recovery, is the only viable one if we want to
strengthen its institutionalism. It is Haitians themselves
who can and should help us to prioritize the resources
which, within that framework, are aimed at the long-
term recovery of Haiti. And this should be the same
framework that we apply to the other sectors that need
to be reorganized. Health, agriculture, education, and
the construction of roads and infrastructure, such as
aqueducts, must be a part of this comprehensive
support. Health and education, for example, cannot
remain in the hands of foreign charity organizations,
but must be progressively transferred to the leadership
and management of the Haitian State itself, with the
decisive cooperation and support of the international
community. We are talking about training a population
of which 60 per cent are young people, who cannot
depend on sporadic aid. When donor funds fail to
arrive and the organizations that provide these services
are gone, what will happen to Haitian children and
youth?

Ultimately, I also want to reiterate my country's
resolute commitment to strengthening Haiti's security
institutions. We understand that security is a necessary
condition for the rule of law, healthy democratic
institutions, and the achievement of sustainable
development, and that is why we are contributing to
strengthening the Haitian National Police. We have 31
Colombian police officers cooperating with the Haitian
police, and we renew our commitment to having them
fulfil their support mission.

I do not wish to conclude without acknowledging
President Rene' Preval for the progress made in the
country, for his respect for liberties, and for ensuring a
peaceful and orderly electoral process, which,
according to the preliminary results reported by the
Organization of American States and the Caribbean
Community, have yielded Michel Martelly as the
winner. In the coming months, a new Government will
come into office on the island, and this is an ideal
opportunity to reorganize our cooperation with Haiti
and our contribution to its sustainable development,
because peace is not built by increasing dependency
and welfarism.
To paraphrase the Liberator Simon Bolivar,
whom Haitians helped in a very difficult - and
perhaps the most difficult - moment in his life,
providing him refuge and supporting him in his
military campaign, we could say that peace and the
development that makes it possible "will come about
not through divine providence but through sensible
planning and well-directed efforts".

That is why today, as Colombia presides over the
Security Council, we call on the other countries that
make up the Council and the Organization to reflect on
what we have done so far in Haiti and on how we can
implement new methods and concepts in rebuilding the
country. Let us think about building a better Haiti, not
just today or tomorrow but for the next 25 years. We
must imagine the Haiti of the future and lay the
foundations so that it is Haitians themselves who
continue its reconstruction. I am sure that this task is
not beyond our capacities or the resources that we have
already committed and the ones we are willing to
commit in a more coordinated cooperation framework.

1 would like to conclude with a central message.
Let us not give in. Let us not leave Haiti behind. Let us
not forget Haiti because we feel that no effort is
enough. Let us retake the course of our contribution
with clear, precise and executable goals. Today, I call
on the international community to look at Haiti in a
different way. I also call on Haiti to welcome a new
cooperation strategy that fulfils a basic precept,
namely, that cooperation through the United Nations
system is successful only as long as there are exit
strategies and progress is made towards a horizon
where the assisted country can live without that
cooperation and without the omnipresence of the
system.

It is time for Haiti to rise up, make progress and
take on the task of building its future - with
international cooperation and with the decisive efforts
of Haitians themselves. As I said at the beginning,
many hands make the load lighter.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I very warmly welcome His Excellency
Mr. William Jefferson Clinton, United Nations Special
Envoy for Haiti. We are very grateful for his
participation at today's meeting.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon.


