Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
have had three very valuable briefings this morning
and I, too, am very grateful for those, which were
based on some very recent experience of all three
briefers in the region. I will go through each in turn,
very quickly.

Under-Secretary-General Guehenno mentioned
the good progress made at the meeting between the
Committee of Six of the Mediation and Security
Council of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the Government of Sierra Leone,
the United Nations and the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF) at Abuja on 2 May. We very much appreciate
the role of ECOWAS in facilitating that meeting and
are very grateful to Ambassador Ouane for his further
updating this morning.

I want to say by way of background that the
United Kingdom remains absolutely determined and
committed to bringing peace to Sierra Leone and its
neighbours through its support for the Government of
Sierra Leone, the United Nations and the international
community's efforts in the subregion. We have already
committed several hundred million dollars to that
objective and we are not going to stop looking for a
result from that investment in terms of the stability and
the orthodox development of Sierra Leone and its
neighbours - what Ambassador Ouane referred to this
morning as "good governance" throughout the region.
We therefore welcome the RUF 's renewed commitment
at what we call "Abuja II" to complying with the terms
of the Abuja ceasefire Agreement of 10 November and
its agreement to withdraw from Kambia. The RUF's
agreement to allow the Sierra Leone army, in
coordination with the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL), to deploy to the border area
between Sierra Leone and Guinea will reduce tensions
in that area. It is an important step in protecting the
territorial integrity of Sierra Leone and in calming the
situation in south-western Guinea.

We hope now to see the immediate reinvigoration
of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme in Sierra Leone and, in this regard, we look
forward to hearing the outcome of the meeting in
Freetown on 15 May between UNAMSIL, the
Government of Sierra Leone and the RUF, because that
meeting needs to lead to immediate results on the
ground. The onus is on the RUF to prove to the
international community that it is genuinely committed
to peace and we want to see visible evidence soon that
the RUF is complying with the provisions of the Abuja
agreement of 2 May, namely, freedom for UNAMSIL
deployment throughout Sierra Leone to re-establish the
authority of the Government of Sierra Leone;
immediate disarmament; and the handing back of
weapons and ammunition seized from the ECOWAS
Monitoring Group last year - something that should
have happened six months ago. We hope that it will
indeed be complete by 30 May.

I have a couple of questions here for the Under-
Secretary-General. First of all, does he think that the
trend that he is now observing in Sierra Leone with
these agreements and their hope for implementation is
in line with our expectations that the situation can
improve sufficiently for elections, an essential part of
the peace-building process in Sierra Leone, to be held
at least within the next 10 months or so? I have a
second question of detail as regards the alleged Civil
Defence Forces (CDF) attacks on RUF positions in the
east of Sierra Leone. Is it actually clear that the CDF
were responsible for those attacks, because there is
some doubt about the actual events that have taken
place? We say that against the observation that the
RUF has, of course, consistently failed so far to
implement the Abuja ceasefire Agreement.

I am particularly grateful, also, to Carolyn
McAskie for her presentation. The United Kingdom
remains very concerned about the regional
humanitarian situation and sees a strong need for
increased coordination. We agree that this meeting
exemplifies that. We are aware of the growing numbers
of internally displaced persons, especially in Guinea,
and think it essential for the humanitarian effort in
Guinea to be strengthened by the appointment of a
Humanitarian Coordinator in Conakry. Is there a date
for that? We also need a clearer idea of the number of
refugees still to be relocated within Guinea from the
conflict zones and a timetable for completion of that
exercise. We are interested in the idea of a subregional
office for the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. Are there plans to set that up on
a particular timing?

We, too, note in passing her reference to the
impressive and senior membership of the Mano River
Union Women's Peace Network and we agree with the
link which Assistant Secretary-General Fall has made
between national reconciliation and the potential
impact of such civil society organizations as that one.

I thank, too, Assistant Secretary-General Fall for
his briefing and for his leadership of the Inter-Agency
Mission to West Africa. The Mission report presents a
vivid illustration of the need for a more collective and
integrated United Nations effort, where economic
development and humanitarian dimensions are factored
into the United Nations system's analysis and
response - in other words, a real regional strategy for
West Africa. Many of his recommendations reinforce
the general findings of the Brahimi report in this
context and build on recommendations outlined in the
report of the Council's mission to Sierra Leone last
October. I have said before that we support the setting-
up of an integrated mission task force for that
subregion and we hope that this proposal will now be
followed up urgently.

Worthy of particular note in his report was the
message conveyed to the Mission by the heads of State
of the region, who thought that greater subregional
integration in the political, security, economic and
social spheres should remain a key objective for the
United Nations family if durable solutions to conflict
and to the tragic humanitarian suffering that
accompanies conflict are to be secured. More and
more, we are seeing evidence of the need to strengthen
regional and subregional institutions in preventing
conflicts and developing comprehensive responses to
shoring up peace-building efforts. The Fall report
underlines this; and yet, we agree with his impression
of a recent deterioration in relationships between
neighbouring countries in the Mano River Union
region. There clearly needs to be more intensive action
on this.

The report contains a number of
recommendations which affect the operational arm of
the United Nations effort in West Africa. These
recommendations merit serious and careful
consideration and the United Kingdom is already
reviewing them. We have noted the report's findings on
coordination and strategy and we hope that this
important analysis and assessment will be matched by a
serious effort on the part of the United Nations
intergovernmental machinery to take stock of their
implications and to determine how we can best respond
collectively to these challenges.

The capacity of ECOWAS as the regional
institution is an essential aspect of this. The Fall report
calls for the strengthening of ECOWAS in those areas
which should better enable it to act as a driving force
towards subregional integration and for greater
cooperation between the United Nations system and
ECOWAS. We should consider how we, as a Council,
might develop a more operational relationship within
ECOWAS. Here, I hope that the European Union will
pay careful attention to the recommendations in this
area. It is time, I think, for some individual donors also
to see what specific help they can be giving to the
regeneration of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) as an operational institution.

We welcome the proposal for a United Nations
office for West Africa, but it is important that it be
complementary to, and not reduce, the flexibility and
responsiveness of the command structure of a United
Nations mission in the region, such as UNAMSIL. In
addressing the appalling humanitarian situation in the
Mano River Union countries, the Fall report
recommends the expansion of UNAMSIL's functions
and mandate. I note that there was no representative of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on the Fall
Mission. I have to say that, given the history of
UNAMSIL and the need for concentrated action on the
security situation in Sierra Leone over the next few
months, expansion of the mandate is probably not a
good idea at this stage. There needs to be intensive
political and diplomatic work to restore the
relationships among Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone
before we can consider an expanded peacekeeping
operation. That intensive work should be taken forward
within an ECOWAS framework.

As Ms. McAskie made clear, the humanitarian
situation in Liberia is fast deteriorating. It is now more
important than ever that President Taylor and the
Liberian Government comply with the demands in
resolution 1343 (2001). The Council has made clear its
resolve to ensure that they do so, and we will need to
follow up energetically. We are not yet confident that
President Taylor has got the message of the need for
100-per-cent compliance with that resolution.
Sanctions will be lifted as soon as the Council is
satisfied that its requirements have been met. In the
meantime, it is essential to ensure that the arms
embargo, the travel ban and the diamond embargo are
made to bite. We call on all United Nations Members
to fully implement and enforce those measures; it is
important that the Liberia sanctions Committee should
swiftly designate the list of those subject to the travel
ban. We welcome the fact that the expert panel on
Liberia has now started its work, and we call on all
United Nations Members to cooperate fully with the
panel and to pass on to it any information that might
facilitate its work. The greater the input, the greater the
panel's ability to put together an independent and
authoritative report.

We note that the President of Liberia has invited
the United Nations and ECOWAS to send border
monitors to Liberia. We are sceptical that this would be
cost-effective; the border is notoriously difficult to
seal. We note that, at present in any case, the United
Nations expert panel exists with a mandate to look at
Liberian compliance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. However, once the panel's mandate has
expired we will be ready to look at options for a system
of checks on Liberian ports and airfields.

We welcome the accelerating pace of United
Nations action on this subregion and the evidence of
more effective coordination. This morning's briefings
make it clear that there is still a huge amount of work
to be done. We have enough analysis, enough missions:
let us get on with the action.

