Mr. Al-Jaafari (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate the Russian Federation
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We also thank the Russian
presidency for its transparent efforts in organizing
the Council's work. I also thank Nigeria for its efforts
during its presidency of the Security Council last month.
I also commend Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on his
briefing on the subject of terrorism.

We have reiterated to the Security Council the
importance of promoting cooperation among all
States. Any hesitation will only strengthen terrorist
organizations and enable their expansion to other
regions and States. The most recent unfortunate
incidents - whether in Tunisia, Egypt, Syria, France
or in other countries and regions - are proof of what
we have said on many occasions.

My country, Iraq, on its own behalf and on behalf
of States throughout the world, has been combating
terrorism and extremism. That leads us to underscore,
once again, the need to promote international
cooperation. We must implement the commitments
and resolutions of the Security Council, in particular
resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015),
which condemn the recruitment of fighters by the Daesh
terrorist organization and establish the obligation of
States to prevent the flow of foreign terrorist fighters
and limit the funding for the operations of organizations
such as Daesh and other associated armed groups via
the sale of oil and the trafficking in works of art and
other forms of robbery and illicit acts.

The attacks by Daesh against the Government of
Iraq and that terrorist organization's occupation of
our cities and towns has led to an exodus of more than
2.5 million citizens who have fled the group's savagery.
The Government of Iraq is working to take every
possible step to protect displaced persons, including
children, women, religious and ethnic minorities,
and to pave the way for their return by ensuring their
security. The Government has also taken steps to meet
the urgent needs of a growing number of internally
displaced persons, despite Iraq's budget deficit as a
result of the decrease in the price of oil, which is the
major source of our budgetary income. We also have
significant military budgetary expenses.

Iraq is facing enormous and dangerous challenges
because of the savage terrorist attacks that directly
target markets, schools, hospitals and thousands of
innocent civilians. The terrorists systematically violate
human rights, and some of their violations can be
considered war crimes and crimes against humanity.

My country's Government continues to provide
support at many levels. We assist local communities
so that they can take on more responsibility in
recovering the areas controlled by Daesh. We have
also taken measures to ensure stability in the areas that
have been recovered from Daesh and to ensure their
reconstruction. My Government is working to promote
efforts and participation at the national level aimed
at achieving greater reconciliation by holding regular
meetings in order to reach consensus on a global
strategy to enhance national unity and to promote
peace and stability.

We are convinced that national unity is the most
effective way to tackle violent extremism in Iraq. The
occupation of Mosul took place 15 months ago, and the
international coalition was established 12 months ago.
The Iraqi forces are continuing their heroic struggle to
defeat the Daesh terrorist organization with the support
of the friendly air forces of the international coalition.
That has led to the defeat of Daesh in the region that
forms a ring around Baghdad, as well as Baiji, Ishaqi,
Salah Al-Din and Fallujah.

I would like to draw attention to the number of
States from which terrorists are flowing in. Last year
there were 82 such States; today there are 100. That
situation requires additional rosbust measures on the
part of those countries. Terrorism now exists in a
broader swathe of territory, extending into Europe,
Canada and Australia. It is no longer limited to a single
State of the Middle East.

Finally, my country's Government thanks those
countries taking part in the international coalition, as
well as the States of the European Union.

We also underscore that the violation of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque is a very dangerous incident. We are
compelled to raise this issue once again because there is
an intention to violate religious sites in order to further
finance terrorism.

Iraq's experience is very important for the
coexistence between Shiites and Sunnis. Iraq has a
rich history of coexistence among different religions.
We therefore thank all the countries that have taken
part in the international coalition and the States
that are combating terrorism for their logistical and
military support to my Government, our army and our
people. We thank them for their efforts, which have
enhanced Iraq's own efforts aimed at recovering the
territory occupied by the Daesh terrorist group. We
thank the Security Council for urging the international
community to assist Iraq in combating Daesh and
associated armed groups.

We call on the international community and
regional partners to work to combat and defeat
terrorism. We cannot put an end to terrorism unless we
have a legitimate and coherent structure that includes
the participation of all States and international and
regional organizations and that can ensure more
effective cooperation.

