Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would also like to join
others in thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Chambas for his comprehensive
briefing on the activities of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS)
and the progress made in the past six months in the
implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. We commend Mr. Chambas and
his team for the excellent work they have been doing
in the areas of conflict prevention, mediation and good
offices to sustain peace in the region. We take note
of the overall political, security, humanitarian and
socioeconomic trends in West Africa, the Sahel and
the Lake Chad basin during the reporting period.

On the political front, in several countries of the
region we welcome the positive developments in the
areas of constitutional and security sector reform
that aim at improving governance and consolidating
democracy. Furthermore, the conduct of peaceful
elections and democratic transitions that were seen in
Liberia and Sierra Leone have also been encouraging.
The role of UNOWAS in support of the upcoming
elections in Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mauritania,
Nigeria and Senegal will be vital for facilitating
peaceful, inclusive and credible electoral processes in
those countries.

On the security front, assymetric terrorist attacks,
maritime piracy, transnational organized crime,
and trafficking in persons, arms, drugs and natural
resources continue to cause serious challenges. It
is important that the Security Council continue to
support the regional initiatives to address the impact of
terrorism and transnational organized crime as well as
strengthen border security. It is in this context that we

welcome the efforts and commitments of the countries
of West Africa and the Sahel aimed at fighting
terrorism and transnational organized crime through
the Group of Five for the Sahel and the Multinational
Joint Task Force. We commend the Multinational Joint
Task Force for its successes in the fight against Boko
Haram in the Niger and Nigeria, thus reducing the
group's operational capacities and geographical reach.

On the other hand, we have also observed the rise
of piracy, armed robbery and other criminal activities
in the Gulf of Guinea, which has indeed been a
matter of serious concern not only for Equatorial
Guinea and other countries of the region but also the
wider international community. There is therefore
is a need for greater mobilization of regional and
international cooperation and for lessons to be drawn
from experiences in fighting piracy and other criminal
activities off the coast of Somalia and other important
international sea lanes, taking into account the specific
challenges being faced in the Gulf of Guinea.

Climate change, food insecurity, forced
displacement, unemployment, inequality and lack of
opportunity continue to threaten the socioeconomic
stability of the region as well as its humanitarian
prospects. It is in this context that we underscore the
importance of complementing the security response
with a comprehensive and coordinated development
and humanitarian approach in order to address the
root causes. In this regard, we wish to emphasize in
particular the importance of stepping up efforts aimed
at ensuring the full implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. We welcome
the recalibration of the Strategy, in line with the
needs of the people of the Sahel and with national and
regional priorities, in close collaboration with partners
and countries of the region through the development
of the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. We
also welcome the appointment of Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw
as the Secretary-General's Special Adviser for the
Sahel and his efforts in the development of the United
Nation Support Plan in working towards changing the
narratives on the Sahel as well as in mobilizing further
resources and support for the region's immediate and
long-term needs.

Of course it would have been useful if we had had
the opportunity to hear the African Union perspective
today. The African Union has stressed the need for
African ownership of initiatives in favour of the
countries of the Sahel countries and reaffirmed the

importance of the Nouakchott process in the promotion
of peace and security in the Sahel-Saharan region.
In this context, strategic consultations were held in
Nouakchott, within the framework of the efforts aimed
at harmonizing the various initiatives and promoting a
shared strategic vision for facing the challenges in the
region. The African Union Peace and Security Council
also met at the ministerial level in Nouakchott and
adopted important decisions in this regard.

Finally, the coordination of efforts with the
African Union on the Sahel is of absolute importance
in the light of the foregoing developments, and we hope
that we will have another opportunity to hear from the
African Union, although we understand today that we
were not able to do so for various reasons.

