Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me join previous
speakers in thanking the Indian presidency for
organizing this important open debate, and Deputy
Secretary-General Eliasson for his very insightful
briefing.

Today I would like to make three points, first, on
the lessons learned in dealing with piracy in various
regions and the approach that follows from that;
secondly, on the role of the various actors in counter-
piracy activities; and thirdly, on the prosecution of
convicted pirates.

At the outset, I would like to align myself with the
statement to be made later on by the observer of the
European Union, which will provide an overview of
the activities of the European Union (EU) in combating
piracy. Germany actively participates in those efforts.

On the first point, we welcome, as have others, the
substantial progress made in the fight against piracy,
reflected in the sharp decline in the hijacking of vessels,
especially off the coast of Somalia, and the lower
number of hostages currently held in Somali waters.
That certainly reflects the success of the international
naval forces jointly patrolling the waters off Somalia
and better self-protection by the shipping industry.

Nevertheless, piracy continues to pose a serious
threat, since seafarers and vessels continue to be held
hostage and piracy attacks in other regions, particularly
the Gulf of Guinea, have been on the rise.

We are convinced that, in the long term, the fight
against piracy can only be won on land, by addressing
the factors facilitating piracy in an integrated and
strategic manner. Such a strategy needs to combine
elements for building State capacities based on the rule
of law and on functioning law enforcement structures,
as well as social and economic circumstances that

provide for the livelihoods of the people on the ground.
It is obvious that the international community is called
upon to continue its support in that regard.

On my second point, the role of the division of
labour, it is primarily the responsibility of the States
concerned to prevent criminals from launching attacks
on vessels off their coasts. It is therefore important that
those States build the necessary police forces and coast
guards, with international support where that is needed.
Furthermore, we welcome the joint political
and military efforts undertaken by the international
community to secure the waters off the States concerned.
We also welcome the efforts of regional actors to
define and implement regional polices and strategies
in the fight against the scourge of piracy in Africa. In
that regard, we commend the initiatives taken by the
States in the Gulf of Guinea region, aimed at fostering
cooperation with a view to enhancing maritime safety.
We encourage the international community to support
those efforts.

Concerning Somalia, the activities of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and the Trust
Fund supporting the Group's initiatives are the most
useful contributions in that regard. We have therefore
decided to make a new contribution of $2 million to the
Trust Fund. We call on Member States, but especially on
the shipping industry, to contribute to the Trust Fund,
which finances critical projects in various sectors of
counter-piracy, ranging from prosecution and detention
efforts to projects that focus on hostages.

The private sector also has a role to play when it
comes to the prevention of hijackings. The use of best
management practices launched by the International
Maritime Organization and developed by the shipping
industry has been crucial to the decrease in successful
attacks. We therefore reiterate our call on shipowners
and shipowners' associations to further engage in the
promotion and implementation of the best management
practices.

My third and last point concerns the prosecution
of convicted pirates. The effective prosecution and
imprisonment of those responsible for piracy and armed
robbery has made progress, but remains a challenge. It
is the primary responsibility of the States concerned
to prosecute, sentence and imprison pirates operating
from their shores. As pointed out again in the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/783),
the Somali judicial system and its prisons still face a
number of challenges. Capacities must be enlarged,
and conditions further improved. Germany commends
and actively supports all initiatives in that respect,
especially those of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the United Nations Development
Programme.

In conclusion, let me stress again that modern
piracy remains a considerable challenge. In the past
few years, however, the international community has
achieved a lot with regard to the fight against piracy.
It must continue to coordinate, operate jointly and
support regional efforts to tackle the root causes and
effects of piracy.

