Mr. Soini (Finland): We live in an increasingly
interdependent world. Security Challenges emerging in
one country affect us all. Ultimately, it is the Security
Council's responsibility to maintain international peace
and security. Of course, we all share the responsibility
to respond to security challenges, old or new. Inaction
is not an option.
The situation today in many parts of the Middle
East and North Africa is intolerable. I would like
to commend and express my strong support to the
mediation efforts of the United Nations in the crises
in the region. The work of its Special Envoys and
Representatives in resolving conflict there is greatly
appreciated.

Our primary focus should be on the root causes of
conflicts. Millions of young people are unemployed
and lack future prospects, which can lead to their
exclusion from economic, social and political life.
Unfortunately, terrorist organizations use discontent
and marginalization to their advantage. Democracy,
human rights and inclusive economic development are
fundamental elements in creating stable societies. The
key word is inclusiveness. It is essential to use society's
full potential, especially when addressing difficult
social problems.

Here I would like to highlight the importance
of women's full participation in decision-making. I
firmly believe that we need the equal participation of
men and women alike if we are to achieve sustainable
peace. Religious and traditional leaders are also often
important and influential representatives of local
communities when it comes to questions related to peace
and mediation. Finland sponsored the establishment of
the Network for Religious and Traditional Peacemakers.
The network brings together religious and traditional
leaders, men and women alike, in their efforts for peace
in conflict areas.

We also need decisive action against terrorist
groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
At the same time, we must make sure that all measures
to counter terrorism comply with international law,
human rights law, refugee law and international
humanitarian law. The rule of law and the protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms are essential
components of the fight against terrorism.

