Mr. Yap (Singapore): We are pleased and
honoured to see you, Mr. President, presiding over this
meeting. It confirms the importance that Bulgaria
attaches to the Kosovo issue.

We would like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Annabi for his useful update on the situation in
Kosovo. It is right that he highlighted adverse reactions
to the recent arrests of former members of the Kosovo
Liberation Army and the unsuccessful planned arrest of
Milan Ivanovic. We condemn these negative reactions,
and we welcome and support the efforts to calm down
the situation.
To suggest that there are political motivations in
the actions of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), and to
stage protests against them, is not only destabilizing; it
is also a direct challenge to UNMIK's authority in
enforcing the rule of law in Kosovo. This is of great
concern, more so since establishing the rule of law is
central to any peacekeeping operation. Listed as one of
the benchmark areas for the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999), the rule of law is a key
condition for the readiness of Kosovo society and
institutions to establish a process for determining the
final status of the territory.

The benchmarks document prepared by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Steiner, is clear on what the rule of law entails. Explicit
guidelines on what needs to be accomplished under the
rule of law demonstrate the usefulness of the
benchmarks process as a tool for measuring progress
and directing the way forward.

At the last public meeting on Kosovo, we made
the point that the benchmarks process appeared to have
already contributed to substantial progress in a number
of critical areas, such as responsible Government
institutions, law and order, and return and
reconciliation of displaced persons. However, we also
noted that much more remained to be done to bring
security, stability and advancement to the province, and
that the vision of an all-inclusive multi-ethnic society
was still some distance away. In this regard we hope
that the negative reactions to the arrests will not lead
Kosovo in the opposite direction from the vision that
Mr. Steiner has set out for the province. We call on the
Kosovo leaders to play their part in strengthening
respect for the rule of law and for UNMIK's authority
in Kosovo.

As the Security Council regularly discusses
Kosovo, we would encourage deeper reflection and
analysis of the benchmark areas to ascertain the trends
and any threats that may emerge. Reinforcing and
preventive actions can then be taken as necessary. The
unhealthy situation in Mitrovica and some other parts
of Kosovo and the plaguing energy problem are issues
of particular concern. We note from Mr. Annabi's
briefing the potential threat looming on the horizon of
ethnic Serb displaced persons blocking crossing points
at the Kosovo administrative border. This could
undermine the returns programme and efforts to
reintegrate the ethnic Serbs and other minorities into
Kosovo society. We urge UNMIK, Belgrade and the
Kosovo leaders to make their best efforts to resolve
these problems.

