Mr. Wirajuda (Indonesia): I wish to begin by
expressing the appreciation of our delegation to you,
Sir, for convening this pertinent and timely meeting on
such an important subject.

The conflict in the Middle East is not only
protracted but also complex. On the Israeli-Palestinian
track alone, the conflict is awash with diverse factors.
Core issues include the status of East Jerusalem, the
borders of a Palestinian State, settlements in the West
Bank, Palestinian refugees, security and water
resources.

While recognizing the multifaceted nature of the
Middle East conflict, I will focus my statement on the
Israeli settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territories.
Land is an indispensable dimension of every
State. By that, I refer to our own land and not that of
our neighbour. As Israel's occupation of the Palestinian
territories continues and its settlers keep encroaching
further into the territory, Palestinians watch their land
claims disintegrate before their eyes, making a viable
Palestinian State very difficult.

With the construction of settlements in the West
Bank having nearly doubled in 2007 and the Israeli
authority-backed initiative of new construction in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, in 2008,
prospects for a two-State solution are steadily
declining.

Israel's settlement policies and practices, which
have been aimed at altering the demographic
composition, physical character and status of the
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, are
nothing but a blatant violation of international law.

Among the provisions of international law that
bind an occupier such as Israel are those under the
Geneva Conventions, which clearly underline that the
occupier must maintain the occupied area as intact and
unaltered as possible, without interfering with the
customary life of the area and any changes must be
necessitated by the immediate needs of the occupation.
The transfer of civilians to occupied areas, whether or
not in settlements which are under military control, is
contrary to the sixth paragraph of article 49 of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, which clearly states:

"The Occupying Power shall not deport or
transfer parts of its own civilian population into
the territory it occupies".

Furthermore, settlement activities are also in
contravention of the principle of the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory by force, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations. As such, it
contravenes Israel's commitment to be faithful to the
principles of the Charter.

My delegation is deeply concerned over the
negative effect of the settlement activities on the
ongoing peace process under the Annapolis framework.
President Abbas has stated that Israeli settlement
presents the greatest obstacle to the peace process. It is
intricately related to and at the crux of nearly all other
final status issues. If Israel has a genuine commitment
to peace, it must stop all settlement construction,
expansion and planning in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, and dismantle the
settlements built therein, in compliance with relevant
Security Council resolutions.

Israel must also abide by the obligations under
the Road Map and the commitment to the Annapolis
goals. Under phase I of the Road Map, Israel bears the
obligation to freeze all settlement activity. Under the
Annapolis agreement, Israel agreed to

"immediately launch good-faith bilateral
negotiations in order to conclude a peace treaty,
resolving all outstanding issues, including all
core issues without exception, as specified in
previous agreements".

With regard to the social consequences of
settlement activity, we are concerned about the damage
caused by unlawful attacks by Israeli settlers against
Palestinians, as well as about the limits on freedom of
movement. Indonesia therefore wishes to join the
Secretary-General, the international community and the
Quartet in calling on Israel to end all settlement
activity, including natural growth. We also urge the
Quartet principals, who will meet later today, to
reaffirm their call for the end of Israeli settlement
activities.

We attach primary importance to the role of the
Security Council in responding to the settlement issue.
Back in 1980, through resolution 465 (1980), the
Council called on Israel to

"dismantle the existing settlements and in
particular to cease, on an urgent basis, the
establishment, construction and planning of
settlements in the Arab territories occupied since
1967, including Jerusalem" (resolution 465 (1980), para. 6).

We believe that the same step could be taken by
the Council in the very near future.

My delegation wishes to reiterate its full support
for the efforts to reach the Annapolis goals. Our
commitment to an independent, viable and democratic
Palestine living side by side in peace and security with
its neighbours is absolute. A just, comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East based on the relevant
resolutions of the Council - including resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003) -
must prevail. It will be a tragedy for the Palestinians,
the Israelis, other nations in the region and, indeed, all
humankind, if peace in the region is persistently
rejected.

