Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) (interpretation from Arabic):
The Security Council is meeting for the second time in one
day to take up the deteriorating situation in Lebanon,
having earlier considered a similarly deteriorating
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. This
testifies to the international community's concern with
regard to the escalation of violence, the extension of
military operations, and the growing number of deaths.
Peace in the Middle East is indivisible. That is a fact
that we have learned through the bitter experiences of the
Israeli-Arab conflicts over recent years.

Today we are experiencing another tragedy in
Lebanon, where the cycle of violence and tension is
getting worse. Civilian populations are the victims of a
whole series of attacks; even the capital itself, Beirut, is
under attack. This has caused thousands to be killed or
wounded, thousands to be sent into exile, bringing us
back to a time which we thought was over forever, just as
Lebanon was beginning to salve its wounds, to renew its
strength, to regain its health, and to rebuild what war had
destroyed.

Lebanon has suffered an act of aggression against its
sovereignty and its territorial integrity. This is another
form of collective punishment based on the logic of force,
violating the basic principles of the Charter and United
Nations resolutions, particularly resolution 425 (1978).

This new situation is another obstacle to peace, an
inevitable consequence of the climate of tension created
by the situation in Palestine and in the region in general.
The situation has reached a point where we fear the
consequences.

What has happened to the firm position adopted by
Heads of State at Sharm El Sheikh? When they
confronted terrorism to safeguard the peace process from
erosion or any failure, they condemned all forms of
terrorist acts, committed for whatever reason. They urged
the international community as a whole to take steps to
put an end to terrorist actions, and to root out their
causes. We are asked to safeguard the conditions likely to
give momentum to the peace process and to prevent
regression or failure.

Since 1948, the Middle East region has seen a cycle
of violence and counter-violence, leading to the
international community's consensus convening of the
Madrid Conference, where parties unanimously
recognized and adopted the principle of land for peace.

 

Resolution 425 (1978) called upon Israel to withdraw
from southern Lebanon, but that resolution has not yet been
implemented, statements made by Israeli leaders
notwithstanding. This shows that there is no real desire on
the part of those authorities. What Israel really wants is to
continue its occupation of Lebanon.

We call upon all parties to safeguard the peace process
and to prevent it from stalling or failing. An immediate stop
must be put to Israel's operations against Lebanon, and
negotiations must begin immediately to withdraw forces and
to halt military operations, for bitter experience has shown
that such operations are at odds with and cannot attain the
goals they are intended for, as they are rooted in vengeance
and deepening hatred.

The fact that the Security Council is considering on
the same day the situation in Palestine and Lebanon once
again shows that the question of the Middle East, with its
various ramifications, is a single issue. There is no other
way to resolve this crisis than by having the necessary
courage to start negotiations on the question of Palestine as
soon as possible in order finally to find a solution. Israel
must withdraw from southern Lebanon and the Golan in
order that the region can finally experience lasting,
comprehensive peace and all the peoples of the region can
enjoy prosperity and stability, respecting each other and the
rule of law.

