The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of South Africa.

At the outset, we thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing. Allow me to also
welcome the presence among us of the representatives
of Serbia and Kosovo, respectively, who have joined us
for today's meeting.

South Africa reiterates its support for the important
work ofUNMIK in creating an environment conducive to
compromise, reconciliation and stability. We commend
UNMIK's continued engagement with all stakeholders
in pursuit of building trust among communities through
dialogue and through initiatives aimed at empowering
youth and women. My delegation expresses its concern
at the arrest of UNMIK personnel, and we welcome the
conclusion of the investigation team and the submission
of its report.

The continued stalemate in the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina is of concern, and we call on
the two sides to refrain from actions or rhetoric that
may increase tensions and further entrench divisions
between the two parties. Such actions create instability
on the ground and jeopardize the gains that have
already been made through dialogue. Through its
own history, South Africa can attest to the fact that
pursuing the path to achieving long-term solutions to
what seem like intractable situations may not be easy
but is vital to peace and security in the region. South
Africa's own experience has shown us that we would
not have succeeded if we had not engaged in sincere
and constructive dialogue.

In conclusion, South Africa encourages all parties
to show flexibility and take the necessary steps to
actively pursue the resumption of dialogue, with the aim
of working towards a viable and mutually acceptable
solution and the normalization of relations between
the two sides. This approach is important not only to
stability in Belgrade and Pristina but to the security of
the wider region in its entirety.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of
October, I would like, on behalf of the delegation of
South Africa, to express our sincere appreciation to
the members of the Council and the Security Council
Affairs Division team for all the support they have
given us. It has indeed been a busy month in which
we rallied to consensus on several important issues
within our purview. We could not have done that
alone or without the hard work, support and positive
contributions of every delegation and the representatives
of the Secretariat, including the conference service
officers, interpreters, verbatim reporters and security
staff. We also appreciate the kind words expressed by
various delegations at this meeting with regard to our
presidency of the Council. As we end our presidency, I
know I speak on behalf of the Council in wishing the
delegation of the United Kingdom good luck for the
month of November.

The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.
