Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Like others, I would
like to start by thanking Ambassador Wronecka, Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan, for her briefing and
for her continued efforts as Chair, based of course on
her considerable personal experience. It is disappointing
that owing to a lack of consensus within the Committee
she was unable to give a more comprehensive briefing
on her activities.

The subsidiary bodies of the Security Council,
including its Sanctions Committees, are a vital part
of our collective work to maintain international peace
and security. We rely on and require the wider United
Nations membership to implement the sanctions regimes
that the Council agrees on, and we have a responsibility
to demonstrate transparency in the Committees'
conduct of their work. The United Kingdom continues
to support fully the 1591 sanctions regime and the Panel
of Experts, annd I would like to thank the Panel for
its ongoing efforts to provide the Committee with a
comprehensive analysis of the implementation of the
sanctions regime and the wider political and security
dynamics in the Sudan and the region.

I take issue with the Russian delegation's depiction
of the position of the United Kingdom and of Western
countries on sanctions in general and on the Sudan in
particular, which has no relation to the facts. Sanctions
regimes and the criteria that underpin them are agreed
on by the Council, as set out in the Charter of the
United Nations. That is proper and right. The United
Kingdom will continue to act objectively on this and all
sanctions regimes, and we encourage all our colleagues
to do likewise.

In relation to the activities of the Panel of
Experts, the United Kingdom welcomes the increased
cooperation of the Government of the Sudan. However,
we note the concerns that have been raised with regard
to the regular presence of Government officials at some
of the Panel's meetings. We therefore encourage the
Government of the Sudan to cooperate with the Panel
with full respect for its independent and investigative
mandate. As noted by the Chair, the Panel recently
transmitted its final report to the Committee, in which
it singled out the clashes between the Sudan Liberation
Army-Abdul Wahid and the Government of the Sudan
forces in the Jebel Marra region of Darfur as the main
development during the reporting period. We have
heard during briefings on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) that
these clashes have resulted in a significant number
of civilian casualties, new displacements and human
rights violations and abuses perpetrated by all sides.
The reports ofindiscriminate shootings, the looting and
burning of villages and conflict-related sexual violence
are particularly alarming.

There have been welcome improvements in the
security situation in some parts of Darfur, and we saw
some progress in the peace process with the signing of
a pre-negotiation agreement by the Sudan Liberation
Army-Minni Minawi and the Justice and Equality
Movement with the Government of the Sudan in Berlin
in December. However, the clashes in Jebel Marra
are a stark reminder that the situation in Darfur is
not yet normalized and remains fragile. It is therefore
incumbent on the Council to ensure a responsible
drawdown of UNAMID and to hold the Government to
account for progress on achieving the exit benchmarks
and indicators, as we agreed in presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/19, adopted in December. In addition, the
arms embargo continues to be violated by all armed
groups and the Government of the Sudan. The Panel's
report details the destabilizing flow of weapons into
and out of Darfur. We call on all parties to adhere to
the arms embargo and remind the Government of the
Sudan of the requirement to request approval from
the 1591 Committee for transfers of military material
to Darfur.

The Chair also noted in her remarks that the
Committee was briefed by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten. During her briefing, the Special
Representative reminded the Committee that conflict-
related sexual violence remains widespread in Darfur
and that survivors and first-hand witnesses regularly
identify members of the security forces as perpetrators.
She also highlighted the fact that sexual violence
continues to be chronically underreported owing to
fear of reprisals, acute stigma, a lack of protection for
victims and inaction on the part of law enforcement.
The United Kingdom welcomes the Government's
engagement on a framework of cooperation to
prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence.
An agreement on the framework and its complete
implementation are necessary if the Sudanese armed
forces and rapid support forces are to be delisted from
the Secretary-General's reports on sexual violence
in conflict.

However, I would like to draw attention to the
important recommendations made to the Committee by
Ms. Patten. They were, first, that sexual violence be
elevated as a stand-alone designation criterion; secondly,
that the Panel of Experts be granted adequate resources
and expertise to investigate sexual violence and that the
Committee explicitly request the Panel to investigate
and document alleged incidents of sexual violence in
Darfur; thirdly, that any future benchmarking process
for the possible lifting of targeted sanctions include the
provisions related to sexual violence in resolution 2429
(2018) and the prevention and accountability measures
required under resolutions 1960 (2010) and 2106
(2013). The United Kingdom expresses its support for
those recommendations and for the continued efforts
of Special Representative Patten and her Office to
address the worrying prevalence of sexual violence in
the Sudan.

While this was not discussed by the Committee, I
would also like to take this opportunity to say a few
words about the current situation in the Sudan with
regard to the ongoing protests. The United Kingdom
is concerned about the current situation. The use of
lethal force and arbitrary detentions by the security
forces in response to peaceful protests is unacceptable
and should stop. We are appalled by reports that the
security forces have used tear gas and violence inside
hospitals against those being treated and doctors
who are providing medical assistance. We repeat our
calls for restraint in policing the protests, the release
of detainees and accountability for those killed. The
Government of the Sudan's response to the protests will
shape the United Kingdom's approach to engagement in
the coming months and years.

In conclusion, let me again thank the Chair of the
Committee for her ongoing commitment. I would also
like to reiterate the importance of the sanctions regime
in the Sudan and to express our hope that all members
of the Committee will be constructive as we approach
the renewal of the sanctions regime established by
resolution 1591 (2005) next month.

