Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): Combating climate change is one of the main
thrusts of His Excellency President Ali Bongo
Ondimba's L'avenir en confiance project. My
delegation therefore fully supports Germany's initiative
to have the Security Council consider, for the second
time, the security implications of climate change,
which is a phenomenon that has been at the heart of the
international community's concerns for many years.

We would like to thank the Secretary-General and
the Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme for their detailed statements.

As members are aware, on 17 April 2007, under
the presidency of the United Kingdom, the Council
held a historic debate on this important issue, focused
on the issues of energy, security and climate. As
witnessed by the negotiations on the draft presidential
statement, which unfortunately did not enjoy
consensus, many continue to express strong
reservations as to the relevancy of the Security Council
taking up this issue. My delegation remains convinced
of the contrary.

It is increasingly clear that climate change leads
to water scarcity, which is a source of tensions among
riparian countries, such as those in Central Asia, and
among communities in those countries. This also
happens in numerous African countries. In other cases,
climate change helps to exacerbate conflicts and
imbalances in the world's ecosystems. Without
effective cooperation, climate change could not only
lead to cross-border population movements; it could
also significantly contribute to making energy,
biological, forest and aquatic resources even more
scarce. It is precisely because of the cross-cutting
nature of this phenomenon that greater involvement by
the Security Council is required.

Given developments on the international stage,
the maintenance of international peace and security is
no longer unidimensional. The military perspective
continues to be important, but it alone cannot be how
we define the convergence of threats that today impact
our collective security. Faced with new threats to
international peace and security, the Council should
have the tools to allow it to assess both the scope and
gravity of a situation, and therefore to act in advance.
In our view, preventive diplomacy is a tool that can
help States, as part of a synergistic effort, to reduce the
effects of new threats. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the considerable assistance provided to
States by United Nations regional offices in developing
and implementing prevention strategies.

Beyond our differences of opinion on this central
issue, it is crucial that the Security Council define, in
cooperation with other relevant United Nations bodies,
a framework for cooperation aimed at more effectively
combating this phenomenon. The effects of climate
change are real and are already having an impact on
our daily lives. Temperatures are rising, and extreme
weather events are becoming more frequent.

Owing to its low adaptation capacity, Africa is
one of the continents that is most vulnerable to climate
change. We draw the international community's
attention to the need to help Africa to address this
phenomenon. The same goes for island States, which
are increasingly exposed to the devastating effects of
climate change and whose survival depends upon our
commitment to act with the greatest urgency. The
concerns of those States will be set out in the statement
to be made later by His Excellency Mr. Marcus
Stephen, President of the Republic of Nauru, whose
presence at this debate I would like to welcome.

Lastly, I would like to assure the Council that, for
its part, Gabon will continue to closely associate itself
with international efforts aimed at reducing the
negative effects of climate change.

