Ms. Shalev (Israel): I would like to acknowledge
the presence of Under-Secretary-General Pascoe and
thank him for his informative briefing.

Our region is at an important juncture that may
determine the future of the Middle East for some time
to come. There is much reason for optimism, but also
cause for concern. In the Middle East, moderates are
working towards peace. These are the true partners in
building a secure future for the region. In contrast,
there are also extremists who use every opportunity to
sabotage progress made and seek to destroy good will,
hopes and aspirations on all sides. Among these are the
Hamas and Hizbollah terrorist organizations, led,
supported, harboured, financed and trained by their
Iranian and Syrian patrons. Many would agree. Iran
continues to threaten to wipe Israel off the map, and its
development of nuclear capabilities should sound
alarms across the globe. Iran is indeed the real danger
to our region, the world and the future.

Let me state in no uncertain terms that Israel is
committed to the peace process. However, the peace
process must be based, among other things, on the
three clear principles set out by the Quartet and the
international community: recognition of the State of
Israel, renunciation of terrorism and violence, and
adherence to previous agreements between Israel and
the Palestinians. Any future Palestinian Government
must therefore abide by the same basic conditions,
which are fundamental to any relationship between
peoples. Lasting peace can be forged only on solid
foundations of mutual respect and recognition between
leaders, peoples and societies.

Relations between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority continue to advance in real terms and in a
number of areas. In the economic realm, overall
domestic production in the West Bank increased by
5 per cent in 2008 and trade with Israel increased by
over a third. In addition, over $1.76 billion in aid was
distributed in the West Bank in 2008 - an increase of
74 per cent over the previous year - showing an
increase in international confidence in the management
of the Palestinian economy. Israel recently removed
about 10 roadblocks and 130 temporary barriers in the
West Bank. Among these, one particular road, from
which a roadblock was removed just recently, remains
open in spite of the ruthless murder by terrorists, nine
days ago, of two Israeli police officers. As mentioned
already, a few days ago, an extremely dangerous car
bomb was found and defused at the entrance to a
shopping mall in the city of Haifa, preventing
catastrophic consequences and the loss of many lives.
Meanwhile, the Government of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority have increased their security
cooperation in an effort to improve the lives of both
Israelis and Palestinians.

These positive developments, and others, are
proof that confidence-building steps, taken by those
who cherish a genuine desire for progress, can bring
the parties closer to their common goal.

In contrast, the situation in Gaza remains
problematic. Since 18 January, over 100 rockets and 60
mortars have been launched into Israel from Gaza,
including a Qassam rocket that landed near the coastal
city of Asheklon just yesterday. As we have stated
before, Israel will not tolerate a return to the status quo
ante, with continued terrorist attacks jeopardizing
civilians throughout the southern part of my country.
Israel's obligation was, is and will continue to be to
safeguard the security of its citizens.

Let me turn for a minute to the Palestinian
Permanent Observer. I would like to say that, indeed,
civilians on both sides, including children,
unfortunately bear the burden of the conflict. I could
tell the story of the children of Sderot, Ashkelon and
Ashdot, who are also asking themselves and their
parents why more than 1,000 rockets were fired at
them, preventing them from living a normal life - and
this, after Israel fully withdrew from Gaza. For
example, the child Osher Tuito, who was a successful
football player and lost his leg from a Qassam, is
asking those questions every day after he had to move
from Ashdot to Ashkelon, where he is still exposed to
Qassam rockets. Indeed, each side has stories to tell.
Let us not use those stories - except only to advance
and try to unite in order to achieve peace for our
peoples.

Unfortunately, some actors in the region continue
to give direct support to Hamas in Gaza, by various
attempts and through various venues, providing it with
offensive capabilities. The use of tunnels under Gaza's
southern border is ongoing. The danger remains. While
we are encouraged by the willingness of members of
the international community to tackle the smuggling of
military capabilities, as witnessed at the recent London
conference, tangible measures must immediately be
taken against smuggling, as only concrete action will
help to stabilize the region.

Let me remind this important Council that
Corporal Gilad Shalit continues to be held hostage by
terrorists. This is a dire humanitarian problem. Four
days ago we marked 1,000 days and nights since his
unlawful, criminal detention in June 2006. During this
time, all access to him has been denied. Defying all
standards of decency and humanity, Hamas has been
attempting to cruelly manipulate the hearts and minds
of the Israeli people, raising the price of his release
during negotiations. Hamas is exploiting in a most
cynical way Israel's sensitivity for human life and the
moral values demonstrated throughout the years by the
Government of Israel and its people.

It is worth remembering that in the military
operation that ended in January, the true targets of
Israeli actions were Hamas terrorists, not the citizens
of Gaza. Ordinary Gazans were used as human shields
by Hamas, who deliberately staged attacks from, and
hid in, heavily populated civilian areas.

In spite of the ongoing attacks from Gaza, and
despite Israel's commitment to its crucial security
needs, we are not indifferent to the humanitarian
situation of Gaza's population. More than 140,000 tons
of humanitarian supplies and 13.5 million litres of fuel
for Gaza's power station have been delivered into the
Gaza Strip since 18 January. That amounts to an
average of 140 trucks per day entering Gaza. However,
let me state clearly Israel's position: expanded activity
at the crossings will be discussed upon the release of
Gilad Shalit.

Turning to the situation in Lebanon, while we
recognize the work of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the Lebanese Armed Forces
(LAF) in southern Lebanon, more needs to be done to
ensure the continued stability of the area. Israel
recently witnessed the most serious violations of
resolution 1701 (2006) since it was adopted. Rockets
were fired from Lebanon into Israel, wounding
civilians. During the past several months, UNIFIL and
the LAF have discovered a number of other rockets,
preventing them from also being launched against my
country. These developments should be cause for great
concern to States that desire regional tranquillity.

For years, Israel has been alerting the Security
Council to Hizbullah's ongoing military build-up in
southern Lebanon. This terrorist organization, backed
and supported by Iran and Syria, continues to increase
its presence and strength in the area, using private
homes and other civilian property for its activities.

Thus, Israel joins the international community in
its call for robust action against arms smuggling along
the Syrian-Lebanese border, in accordance with the
recommendations set out in the report of the Lebanon
Independent Border Assessment Team II, transmitted
by the Secretary-General in document S/2008/5 82.

This is a time of great flux in the Middle East.
Radicals are competing with moderates for domination.
There is no better time than today for the international
community to show its support for moderate voices and
to assert its resolute opposition to terrorists and those
who support them. We ask Member States to add their
vocal and tangible support in the quest for a durable
peace in the Middle East.

