Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset to congratulate Uruguay on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January and to say how pleased
we are to see Uruguay in the Council once again.
Mr. President, based on your country's diplomatic skill
and experience, we are convinced that you will make
an important contribution to the work of the Security
Council during your two-year term of office. I should
like also to thank you, Sir, for having convened this
debate, and to thank the briefers for the information
provided.

Unfortunately, the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2015/453) reaffirms that civilians
continue to constitute the majority of victims in such
conflicts. The lack of distinction between combatants
and civilians results in civilians being killed, wounded
or displaced and in situations where there are serious
impediments to, if not outright attacks on, the delivery
of humanitarian assistance. The Security Council must
therefore remain committed to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict through the promotion of the full
respect for international law, in particular international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law, as
well as through the fight against impunity.

The authorization by the Council of robust mandates
and the implementation thereof by peacekeeping
operations should not compromise the discharge of such
operations' fundamental mandate to protect civilians
or distract them from their mission. Peacekeeping
operations must have clear mandates and be provided
with the resources necessary to implement them in a
timely and effective manner.

Many of these concepts are contained in the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and in the report
of the Secretary-General on peacekeeping operations.
However, one aspect that has not been sufficiently
addressed in these documents and that my delegation
wishes to emphasize is the obligation of United Nations
forces to respect international humanitarian law.

In that context, I would like to recall the Secretary-
General's Bulletin (ST/SGB/1999/13) on the observance
by United Nations forces of international humanitarian
law. Argentina hopes that the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations will address this matter
at its next session, in March. We emphasize that it
would be appropriate for the Security Council, in its
pronouncements, to include a reminder, which is always
useful, that the forces of the United Nations, as well as
those involved in operations authorized by the Council,
are also bound by international humanitarian law.

With regard to humanitarian assistance, the parties
to a conflict should make every effort to ensure that
effective and timely access to humanitarian action is
guaranteed, including shipments and equipment. Such
assistance enjoys special protection under international
humanitarian law, which is why it is troubling that, in
many situations, access to humanitarian assistance has
been impeded or even denied. It is in that context that
my delegation expresses its deep concern about and
condemnation of recent events in Syria, in particular
with regard to the cases mentioned this morning by the
Deputy Secretary-General, and in recent days by the
Secretary-General, with particular regard to the city of
Madaya. It is imperative that humanitarian assistance
reach the civilian population to avoid starvation. We
recall, as mentioned by both the Deputy Secretary-
General and the Secretary-General, that the intentional
use of starvation against the civilian population as a
tactic of war, including by deliberately obstructing the
provision of relief assistance, is a serious violation of
international humanitarian law and a war crime.

It is clear that the first challenge is to promote
compliance with the relevant standards. The existing
regulatory framework for the protection of civilians
must be translated into concrete results on the ground.
Argentina considers it a priority to continue the
debate on setting up new mechanisms to strengthen
compliance with international humanitarian law, as well
as to foment a constructive, transparent and inclusive
dialogue among States and other stakeholders. One
way to accomplish that would be to establish a forum
in which States can meet regularly to exchange views
on relevant issues - a possibility that was discussed
during the thirty-second International Conference of
the Red Cross and Red Crescent, and which will remain
under consideration for the next few years.

The Council should strengthen its efforts to
promote respect for international humanitarian law.
In that regard, Argentina believes that accountability
mechanisms play a preventive role. Impartial
mechanisms are essential to the investigation of
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights. Ad hoc commissions of inquiry, including
those established by the Human Rights Council, are
important. In that regard, I would like to emphasize the
work of the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding
Commission provided for in the Protocol additional to
the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949. We hope
that the Security Council will continue to recognize
the possibility of using the Commission, as expressed
in resolution 1894 (2009) and presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/2.

Also in relation to the need to strengthen
accountability by those responsible for heinous
crimes, Argentina stresses the role of the International
Criminal Court. It is important that States parties to
the Rome Statute adopt the necessary norms to that
end. The cooperation of all States with the Court is also
essential. Moreover, it is necessary that the Security
Council strengthen its commitment to combat impunity
for such crimes. In that regard, the implementation of
a method to effectively monitor Council referrals to
the International Criminal Court is a much-delayed
necessity. We urge the Council to implement the
commitment it made in the aforementioned presidential
statement.

In conclusion, I reiterate that, in accordance
with international humanitarian law and Council
resolutions, any attacks against civilians, in particular
women and children, or other protected persons,
schools, cultural property and places of worship, as
well as the recruitment of children and the obstruction
of access of humanitarian assistance, constitute a
violation of international law. In that context, we
reiterate that medical and hospital personnel cannot be
attacked, and we condemn the numerous cases where
such has occurred, in particular the attacks in Yemen
and elsewhere against Doctors Without Borders, about
which we heard testimony.

Finally, I wish once again to urge strict
compliance with the obligations arising from The
Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907; the four Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and the Additional Protocols of
1977; international human rights law; international
refugee law and Security Council resolutions.

