Mr. Cardenas (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): First of all, I wish to express my delegation's
pleasure at seeing you, Sir, in your capacity as First
Deputy Foreign Minister of the Czech Republic, presiding
over this meeting.

The members of the Security Council have received
a report from the Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee
of the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia
concerning the degree of compliance by the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) with its
commitment to close its border with the areas of Bosnia
and Herzegovina under the control of Bosnian Serb
forces. Certification of this fact is the necessary first
condition for this Council to consider continuing the

 

limited suspension of sanctions provided for under
resolution 943 (1994).

The report of the Co-Chairmen of the Steering
Committee also mentions certain difficulties in verifying the
closure of that border. However, we take the view that it
emerges clearly from the report that compliance by the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
with its commitments is, generally speaking, the rule, while
possible infringements - in no way exclusive to one
party - are in any event only exceptions.

We believe that such exceptions should be carefully
assessed in the context of endeavours to extend the cease-
fire and to set the peace process on the right track, as well
as in the light of the regrettable increase in tension in the
former Yugoslavia in recent days, which is causing our
delegation the most serious concern.

Any sanctions regime must necessarily be progressive,
rational and in proportion to the behaviour it is intended to
discourage. If we in the Council, having witnessed the
efforts of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to meet its commitments, failed to react in
accordance with these criteria, we would run the risk of
using the powers conferred on us by the Charter without
taking properly into account the purposes for which they
were granted.

For these reasons, the Argentine Republic is in favour
of continuing the suspension of the sanctions on the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) until the
expiry of the time period set in resolution 970 (1995). In
this respect, and in a spirit of broad cooperation, it will join
the consensus in the Council on the adoption of the draft
resolution now before us.

However, we also feel bound to express our particular
viewpoint respecting some of the provisions of this draft.

Operative paragraph 1 sets a specific date limiting the
validity of the resolution. The delegation of Argentina
interprets that date not as being necessarily some kind of
curtailment ex profeso of the deadline set by resolution 970
(1995), but, rather, as establishing a new and more clear-cut
operational policy. Indeed, it would not be particularly
meaningful to interpret it as a setting of a shorter deadline
for the suspension of sanctions, when it is acknowledged
that there have been no substantive changes, negative or
positive, in the de facto circumstances, whether political or
technical, warranting that suspension. We repeat that we see
no particular reasons, other than technical, in the report for
extending or shortening the deadline set in resolution 970
(1995).

We would like to express our thanks to the sponsors
of the draft for the change that they made to operative
paragraph 12, dividing it into two parts to become the
present operative paragraphs 11 and 12; this was to some
extent in response to views expressed by our delegation.
We also wish to recall that the agreement on sanctions
procedures presupposes negotiations between all the
members of the Committee concerned respecting technical
aspects of the regime. In that context, if there is a
continuation of the existing situation, which is marked by
what has shown to be a practice followed by some of
linking procedural aspects with others that strictly
speaking are outside the Committee's mandate, it will be
difficult to free the Committee from the impasse that has
existed for some time now with respect to these
procedures.

The Argentine delegation also wishes to place on
record its interpretation of operative paragraph 2 of the
draft resolution. It is our understanding that the
authorization granted to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to operate
commercial flights necessarily means its being able to
obtain the quantities of fuel, lubricants, equipment and
spare parts required to allow those flights to take place
safely and in reasonable conditions. That is the only way
to interpret the first part of the provision.

Lastly, we wish to express our most sincere hope
that the draft resolution will provide an incentive to the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
to continue to meet its commitments, and, indeed, to
increase its level of compliance with measures that, in the
view of the Council, are absolutely vital to the
continuance of efforts to restore peace to the region.

