Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I once again thank
the Special Envoy for all the work his team is doing and
thank Ms. Rajaa Altalli for being in the Chamber today
and sharing her story. I am very sorry for the suffering
that she and her family have experienced.

Like others, we thank the Special Envoy for his
tireless efforts aimed at bringing peace to Syria, but the
breakdown of talks during the second Constitutional
Committee meeting is extremely disappointing. As
we all know, if these long-awaited meetings are going
to succeed, they require serious engagement and
commitment from all sides. We support Mr. Pedersen's
position that the Government and opposition Chairs
need to agree on an agenda before a third round of the
Committee can be convened. We regret attempts by
the Syrian authorities to introduce conditions widely
accepted as unnecessary to intentionally stall the talks.
We call on these authorities to respect the rules of the
Committee and return to negotiations.

We are also concerned that the Syrian authorities
appear to be disassociating themselves from the
Constitutional Committee in official statements and
in the media, suggesting that the Syrian delegation
represents, "the point of View of the Syrian regime
but is not the regime itself". I would therefore like to
ask the Syrian representative to allay these concerns
by reaffirming to the Council that its delegation
to the Constitutional Committee is indeed the
"Government delegation".

We understand that Mr. Pedersen is not able to
share the full details of the negotiations and progress
towards the reopening of talks during his briefings,
not least because of time constraints, but we do believe
that there would be merit in considering other means by
which Mr. Pedersen could keep the Council apprised of
the details.

I once again thank Ms. Altalli for her briefing
and would like now to turn to what she told us. The
United Kingdom has always been clear that the political
process should reflect a broad and diverse cross-section
of Syrian society. We will need to remain mindful that
a successful political settlement in Syria goes well
beyond the Constitution. It is crucial that all elements
of resolution 2254 (2015) be taken forward in tandem.
That includes creating conditions for refugee return,
preparations for free and fair elections in 2021 and the
release of detainees.

We are therefore deeply concerned to hear of the
arrest of 174 people who returned to Homs from the
Rukban internally displaced persons (IDP) camp, which
happened despite having obtained clearance from the
Syrian authorities and guarantees that they would be
exempt from persecution. The Syrian authorities and
Russia need to stay true to their word and respect the
promises they have made.

On torture, I do not think that I can put it better
than the German representative did. These are truly
horrific cases. They are unacceptable and need to stop.

We support the Special Envoy in advancing all the
other baskets of the political process. I would like to
reiterate that the United Kingdom will not consider
providing any reconstruction assistance without a
credible, substantive and genuinely political process
being firmly under way.

I would now like to turn to Idlib. We remain
extremely concerned about the continued air strikes
there. We note reports on 2 December of attacks on
the markets of Saraqib and Maarat Al-Numan, which
killed at least 14 civilians. Attacks on hospitals, such
as in the Al-Qah IDP camp on 20 November, and
other civilian infrastructure are inexcusable and run
counter to the Geneva Conventions and international
humanitarian law. Furthermore, it is unbelievable that
the Syrian authorities would conduct more such attacks
given the ongoing board of inquiry investigation. The
United Kingdom looks forward to the board's update to
the Council.

We welcome the fact that the ceasefire in north-east
Syria continues, broadly, to hold, but we are concerned
about reports of an attack near a school in Tell Rifaat,
held by the Kurdish People's Protection Units, which
killed at least 10, including eight children. We call
on all parties involved to respect the ceasefire and
their obligations towards civilians under international
humanitarian law.

I would like to say a few words about Syrian
refugees. Syrians have a right to return to their
homes voluntarily, in safety and dignity, in line with
international humanitarian law. We support the United
Nations judgement that conditions in Syria are not yet
conducive to safe and dignified return.

Finally, the United Kingdom, as a member of the
Global Coalition against Da'esh, is proud of its role
in the successful fight to liberate the territory held
by Da'esh in Syria and Iraq. We remain committed to
securing the enduring defeat of Da'esh. Much remains
to be done, and we cannot lose sight of the threat they
pose, even without territory. The group's dangerous
and pervasive ideology needs to be eliminated.

