Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing and welcome
His Excellency Mr. Coulibaly to the Council today.

The United Kingdom continues to support the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We recognize the
challenging circumstances in which its military and
civilian personnel operate and unequivocally condemn
the recent attacks against MINUSMA personnel.
MINUSMA must receive the tools it needs to protect its
personnel adequately. At the same time we applaud the
positive impact MINUSMA has had, in particular in
supporting the recent progress on the peace agreement
ahead of the upcoming elections.

As the Secretary-General makes clear in his recent
report (S/20l8/541), the deteriorating humanitarian and
security situation in Mali is of great concern. During
the June-to-August lean season this year, more than
4.3 million people will require humanitarian assistance.
That is more than a quarter of the population. United
Kingdom is one of the largest humanitarian donors
to the Sahel region. Between 2015 and 2018, it has
provided over $250 million of humanitarian aid, with
an additional $67 million of assistance to the region
in 2018. The international community in Mali and the
Government must fulfil their humanitarian pledges and
commitments in the light of the impending crisis.

Political stability is crucial in order to address the
root causes of the situation in Mali. In that regard, the
United Kingdom welcomes the recent positive steps
taken by the parties towards the implementation of
some of the key provisions of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali and the Prime Minister's
support to implement the agreement ahead of the
upcoming elections. I agree with the representative of
France on the key concrete next steps that must be taken.

The Council has become increasingly concerned
about the slow pace of the implementation of the
peace agreement at a time when MINUSMA troops
are paying the price with their lives in unacceptable
numbers. I understand that elections are under way,
but I would urge the Malian Foreign Minister in the
most respectful and friendly way to take back to all
parties to the peace agreement and to the presidential
candidates the expectation of the Council for fast and
deep implementation of the agreement. Patience is
running out.

It is also important that the key constituencies of
Malian society, including women, play a central role
in the implementation of the peace agreement and
beyond. As we all know, an inclusive peace agreement
is much more likely to succeed. We hope the Malian
Government will observe the target it set for itself in its
law of 2015 for a 30 per cent minimum representation
for women in elected and nominated positions. The
upcoming elections, if they are credible, free and fair,
present an opportunity for Malians to express their
democratic rights and commitments. Above all, the
elections should not be the subject of violence. We call
for calm from all parties at this time and for MINUSMA
to support dialogue among the parties throughout the
upcoming electoral cycles.

The United Kingdom is concerned about recent
reports of human rights abuses in Mali and in particular
those allegedly committed by the armed forces. The
failure to protect civilians will erode trust in the
Government and feed extremist recruitment narratives.
We call upon all parties to comply with their obligations
and put an end to violations and abuses.

As we begin negotiations on MINUSMA's mandate
renewal, I again underline the United Kingdom's strong
support for the Mission. It is important that we address
the recommendations in the strategic review through
that process to continue to improve MINUSMA's
effectiveness on the ground. That includes further
development of a long-term strategy for MINUSMA,
a clear prioritization of tasks and recognition that
other actors, including the United Nations country
team, may be better placed to deliver results. While
we recognize the logic of consolidating MINUSMA's
presence, we believe that maintaining the current
geographical focus is important for the implementation
of the peace agreement and the long-term stabilization
of the country.

Lastly, it is essential that all actors across Mali and
the Sahel take a coordinated and integrated approach, in
line with the United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel. A solution that addresses the underlying causes of
instability is the only way to ensure long-term security
in the region. The ultimate solution will be a political
one, underpinned by effective security and economic
development. It must be inclusive, gender-responsive
and ensure the full and equal participation of the whole
of society, including in particular women, in order
to succeed. It must provide economic opportunities
and present an attractive alternative to violence and
extremism. That is the best way to improve the lives of
those who live in Mali and the best way to improve our
collective peace and security.

