Mr. Corr (Ireland): May I first thank you,
Madam President, and the presidency for arranging this
wrap-up open debate. The value of these concluding
wrap-up meetings is not just to thank the presidency
for its work during the month. It also, as you know,
allows us to reflect on and assess the work of the
Council during the month, and to do so at a public
meeting.

To say, "thank you" first, this was a presidency of
strong ambitions and goals with a clear agenda. My
delegation feels that in all these areas, these tasks were
very successfully met, and we very much appreciate
this.

At the beginning of the month, the Jamaican
presidency set its objective to support initiatives which
we believe best promote sustainable peace and security.
Let me briefly focus on these areas before also
referring to some of the issues that Ambassador
Greenstock and others have mentioned.

Ireland very much welcomed the strong focus that
the Jamaican presidency placed on African issues. On
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we had a very
useful and important meeting with the ministers of the
Political Committee of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement. Strong views were expressed at this
meeting - but vigorous and healthy debate is good -
and the Council adopted a very helpful resolution
which moves forward the United Nations Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the process.

The second public meeting that was also very
helpful, as has been said earlier, was the one with the
ministers of the Regional Peace Initiative on Burundi.
In both the case of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and that of Burundi, the Council was able not
just to debate and to interact with ministers but also to
signal frankly our own sense of engagement,
involvement and views on the range of issues. The
meeting on Burundi with President Mandela, in
particular, offered a chance to say thank you to the
President for his own central facilitation role.

On Ethiopia/Eritrea and the role of the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE), we
also had a very useful meeting with the ministers from
those two countries during the month. This allowed us
a chance to emphasize the importance that the Council
attaches to the removal of obstacles in the work of the
force and to give clear indications of concerns we may
have, as well as to listen to their concerns.

On Afghanistan, the presidency naturally and
rightly gave a great deal of attention to ensuring that
the Council received regular briefings and that we had
the chance to discuss the humanitarian situation, but
also to have broad discussions on the wider issues that,
I think, can only have been very helpful to Mr. Brahimi
in the period leading into Bonn. The humanitarian
issue, of course, was crucial in our discussions during
the month, and it provided a very useful chance not
only for the Secretariat to brief the Council but also for
the Council to express our own concerns on issues of
food security for civilians and on the rights under
humanitarian law not only of civilians but also of
persons seeking to surrender and of persons giving up
arms, about which the International Committee for the
Red Cross (ICRC) has reminded us over recent weeks.

I would like to pay particular tribute to Jamaica
on another issue: the Working Group on peacekeeping
operations. Again, this goes not just for the period of
the presidency but also the period before it. It is right
at this stage to pay particular tribute to Ambassador
Ward for his work in this area during the month and
over the recent period.

Madam President, I will briefly address some of
the points in your paper. On the normative side Ireland
found extremely helpful the debates on "Children and
armed conflict" and the "Protection of civilians in
armed conflict". They were debates in which we were
able to give clear views and cast light on issues of
enormous importance, not just to the Council but also
to the work of the Organization.

On transparency, my delegation has consistently
and strongly supported this as an important matter,
especially in the context of public meetings.

On the issue of normative debates, there are,
however, two caveats that do seem important to us, and
they echo some of the comments that Ambassador
Greenstock made. Because the Council has become so
engaged in so many issues over recent years - an
incremental process that is clearly continuing - there
is naturally and rightly a demand from within the
United Nations system for it to integrate the normative
framework into the work of the Council. The difficulty
with this, of course, is that the Council has limited time
at its disposal in any given month to address the range
of issues that come before it, and it is clear that, while
the normative framework is crucial, at the same time
the Council should not do what belongs to other United
Nations bodies, whether it is the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, agencies or other
bodies. The Council has its own role under the Charter.
It cannot do or re-do what should be or is being done
elsewhere. To do otherwise would dissipate its own
central Charter obligations and would also,
paradoxically, diminish the rightful and separate role
that other United Nations bodies have in these areas.

This is not in any way to say that the normative
role is not crucial or that we should not debate it, as we
did very substantially this month in key areas; but it is
to say that the crucial issue is for the Council to ensure
that in thematic areas where there is a normative
framework agreed - whether it is in peacekeeping,
peace-building, children, gender issues, humanitarian
issues or other spheres - the central role for the
Council must be to ensure that what is already agreed
must be fully operationalized in our own work. This is
true, for example, in issues such as peacekeeping and
peacemaking and in examples such as the Democratic
Republic of the Congo or Sierra Leone, where a whole
range of requirements is involved. What we have to do,
issue by issue, situation by situation, is to ensure that
what is already agreed is fully implemented.

How this can be done is difficult, given the
pressures on the Council's timescale. It could be done
by setting up a committee or by having one member of
the Council monitor these issues and report on them.
There are a range of options. But clearly there is
something of a weakness in this approach.

A further brief point I wish to make is about the
Council's workload. It does seem to my delegation that
the Council is too overloaded and, at times, is spread
too thin while assessing many of the issues before it.
We have to look seriously at our agenda and
procedures. For example, do we need to formalize
committees of the Council to filter issues before full
debates? Do we need time limits on speeches?
Whatever the answer, there is a problem in this area,
and we do feel that it needs to be addressed.

A final point in this area relates to the role of the
Secretariat, which performs heroically - not just for
the Council but across the United Nations spectrum.
There may well be a case for looking again at the
possibility of the Secretariat having a full analysis and
research unit to draw together all of these different
threads - normative, thematic and operational - into
a framework that would enable it to meet Council
requirements substantially in that area.

On the issue of press reports, we fully share the
view that there should be briefings in this area and that
it is unwise for the Council or for some Council
members to have to act simply on the basis of press
briefings.

On ministerial meetings, we also see great value
in this practice, particularly ministerial week. The
meetings this month on counter-terrorism and
Afghanistan were very useful. But as has also been
said, there is a risk in setting up a hierarchy of
importance of Council meetings. All Council meetings
are important; therefore, this matter needs to be
approached with some sensitivity and wisdom, while at
the same time with full agreement on the importance of
ministerial meetings from time to time.

In conclusion, my delegation thought that the
presidency's work programme was excellent during the
month, and we want to warmly thank you, Madam
President, and everybody on the Jamaican team. I
would also like to echo what was said earlier, that as
Jamaica leaves the Security Council at the end of the
year, you will be very much missed among those of us
who stay on. We very much admired the creativity, the
independence and the determination that Jamaica
brought to the work of the Council, and we pay you
warm tribute for your contribution.

