Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (interpretation from Russian): I congratulate you, Sir, on occupying the very
responsible post of President of the Security Council this
month, and wish you every possible success. I also thank
the Ambassador of Botswana for the skilful way in which
he conducted the work of the Council last month.

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak at today's
meeting of the Security Council, to share our Views on
the situation in Afghanistan, and to explore ways and
means of finding a political settlement to the conflict. The
Government of my country cannot fail to be concerned by
the many years of conflict in a neighbouring country with
which we share an 800-kilometre boundary. We are
linked by ties of good-neighbourliness which extend into
the distant past. Political, trade, economic and cultural
links have always been of great significance for the
peoples of our countries.

There are approximately 1 million of our ethnic
compatriots in the territory of Afghanistan. We have lost
many of the Turkmen - Dzhigit- in this senseless
Afghan war. The pain of these losses will never be erased
from our hearts, and for that reason we are very much
affected by the tragedy of the Afghan people. The
continuing loss of human life, including women and
children, and the tremendous destruction, have
compounded the sufferings of the people and caused great
damage to the country. Thousands of people have become
refugees.

In strict accordance with our strategic foreign policy
of neutrality, Turkmenistan maintains excellent relations
with all of the main Afghan military-political groups,
particularly with those which control the provinces
bordering our country. At the same time, Turkmenistan
does not maintain so-called special relationships with any
of the Afghan groups. Nor does it supply that country
with weapons, ammunition or other strategic material
which could be used to further protract the conflict. As
neighbours, we can indeed feel the "hot breath" of the
Afghan conflict and the problems which accompany it. It
prevents the realization of one of our major economic
potentials: the delivery through Afghanistan of sources of
energy.

The ongoing conflict in that country has exacerbated
the problems of the illegal drug and illegal weapons
trades, which directly affect the interests of the national
security of Turkmenistan and other States in the region.

The destabilizing effect of the protracted Afghan
conflict has also affected the situation throughout the
region, in particular the prospect of a speedy inter-Tajik
settlement, which has been the subject of ongoing talks
under the aegis of the United Nations in the capital of my
country, Ashkhabad.

 

I take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (A/50/908) to the General Assembly, entitled
"The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security". His evaluation of the
situation in Afghanistan, as well as the conclusions reached
in the report, are, unfortunately, expressed in a minor key.
A military solution to the problem continues, apparently, to
be the preferred scenario for the parties in conflict. The
continuing destructive intervention from outside has
complicated an already difficult situation. We
wholeheartedly support the idea of resolving internal
conflicts through negotiation and consensus, and wish the
Afghan people peace, unity and tranquillity. We are
opposed to any outside intervention in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan.

My Government is convinced that the time has now
come to step up collective efforts by all States that are
anxious to bring about a speedy and effective settlement of
the situation in Afghanistan. Naturally, a coordinating role
in this matter should be played by the United Nations. The
President of Turkmenistan, Mr. Saparmurat Niyazov,
proposed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the initiative of convening an
international conference in the near future, under the aegis
of the United Nations, on the question of Afghanistan.
Participants would include the leaders of the main military
and political groups in neighbouring and other interested
States. Such a conference could give a powerful impetus to
an inter-Afghan settlement and help to produce a broad
international consensus on ways to achieve peace in
Afghanistan. It would also help to neutralize destructive
outside factors.

In that context, we took note of the idea put forward
today in the Security Council that an embargo be placed on
arms deliveries to Afghanistan. Naturally, such an embargo
should be covered by an appropriate control mechanism. It
would be a great honour for neutral Turkmenistan to host
such a conference in our capital of Ashkhabad, where we
would provide every possible condition for success.

I hope that the discussion of the Afghan problem in
the Security Council will make it possible for the efforts of
the international community to focus on practical peace-
keeping steps which will shortly bring peace to Afghanistan
and strengthen the stability of our region.

