Mr. Rowe (Sierre Leone): Mr. President, my
delegation would like to associate itself with the
commendations received by you personally, and by the
United Kingdom, for initiating this interactive discussion on
how to make the United Nations partnership with Africa
more productive.

In our view, this meeting and its format are a
contribution, albeit a small one, to strengthening the
partnership of the Security Council with Africa. We believe
that it adds to the objective of observing transparency in the
Council's work on African issues. The format should be
made a regular feature of the Council's procedure.

The unfortunate aspect of speaking towards the end
of a long list of delegations is that one is left with the
option of not speaking at all or of merely repeating what
others have said. We heard a number of good and
constructive contributions on the subject under discussion
this morning.

However, I am not going to take either option, since
this is an interactive discussion. Ambassador Holbrooke's
immediate response this morning to Ambassador
Kumalo's comments gave the meeting this interactive
character. I would like to react briefly to a couple of
suggestions, some mentioned parenthetically and others in
some detail, and to go into more detail on them.

Allow me to take the liberty of deviating from the
beaten path. I will also be frank. First, let me say that we
share most of the suggestions presented this morning in
the areas of conflict prevention and resolution in Africa
and on what the Security Council could do as a partner
for peace and security in our continent.

As regards the four points raised by the Secretary-
General on the preventive aspects of the partnership, we
could add that the Council should assist him in making
more frequent use of quiet diplomacy in addressing some
of the conflicts - or potential conflicts - in the
continent. The continent itself should throw its
authoritative weight behind his initiative in sending, for
example, fact-finding missions to potential conflict areas;
this could help to defuse many of the potential conflicts
and avert a crisis.

Having said that, I wish to suggest two points under
the rubric of preventive intervention. In a sense, I shall
elaborate on part of what some other representatives
raised this morning - for example, the Gambia - on the
question of intelligence or sharing information concerning
arms delivery.

We believe that the Security Council could
strengthen its partnership with Africa more effectively by
what I call introspection. I think, Mr. President, that you
used the word "exposing" this morning, and I would like
to borrow that word. By "introspection" I mean
"exposing" collectively, with one voice: naming names,
including those of member States, including Security
Council members, which foment conflict in Africa by
covert means, which fan the flames of war and

 

destruction through the illegal transfer of arms and
ammunition to African countries. Others merely acquiesce
when their nationals or agents are involved in this traffic.
We believe that the Council should have the courage to at
least identify and expose them.

We know from experience that internal conflicts in
Africa have international dimensions. We heard this
morning and this afternoon about the roots of conflict in
Africa - poverty, disease and so on - but we sometimes
forget about the external factor, the role of State and non-
State actors in fomenting conflict in our continent. There is
some reluctance on the part of some of the powerful
Council members to exercise vigilance and exert pressure
when necessary on the merchants of death and destruction
in the continent.
On a related matter, we believe that the Security
Council should build on the experience of what I think the
Secretary-General described this morning as the Fowler
ground-breaking work. I should describe it as the "Fowler
formula" in Angola, regarding the relationship between
diamonds and the lack of a solution to the conflict in
Angola. The same could be applied to other areas where
recalcitrant actors use minerals to extend and bankroll terror
and instability in the continent.

Finally, we think that the Council should strengthen its
partnership with Africa in the area of conflict prevention by
taking action to dissuade Member States, starting with the
members of the Security Council, including the permanent
members, or some of the permanent members, from
supporting and arming rebel movements, movements which
destabilize many democratically elected Governments in
Africa. These rebel movements exploit the legitimate
grievances in some of our countries of some of our
people - disaffected people - by launching armed
conflict as a means of achieving political power for
themselves.

The Organization of African Unity (OAU), for its part,
has taken the bold step of discouraging military coups in
the continent. This, in our view, is a preventive measure.
The Security Council could supplement that by expressing
in a resolution, or in a declaration, or in some form or
another, its commitment to discourage Member States,
especially members of the Security Council, from
supporting rebel movements and the illegal supply of arms
to overthrow legitimate, internationally recognized
Governments in Africa. With some kind of solution to that
effect in place, we believe it would help solve and, where
possible, prevent conflict in Africa.

Finally, I would like to follow up on what the
representative of India said about the outcome of this
meeting. We do not expect any formal resolution from the
proceedings, Mr. President, but you will close with a
summation. We believe that your summation should be
made public; it should perhaps be issued as a document
or a note - your note - to the Security Council for
possible action by the Council at a later date.

