Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I should like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Ambassador Zahir Tanin,
his comprehension briefing on the latest development
in Kosovo. Obviously, Ambassador Tanin, and old
colleague, faces a major challenge; but I must say that
it is a very worthy duty that is called upon to discharge.

Let me also take this opportunity to welcome
the presence at today's meeting of the First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, His Excellency Mr. Ivica Daeic'.
I thank him and Ambassador Vlora Citaku for the
respective statements, which obviously were laden with
a lot of emotion and passion. We respect both of them.
The issues are not simple, and therefore, in our View,
the need for UNMIK.

Our position on the issue at hand has always been
consistent and clear. We reaffirm our support for a
peaceful and amicable resolution of all outstanding
issues between Belgrade and Pristina in accordance
with the Brussels Agreement. We also welcome the
ongoing efforts made by the European Union (EU) in
facilitating the dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo.
In that regard, we take note of the informal meeting
between the leadership of the two sides in Brussels
under the auspices of the EU High Representative, and
their commitment to work on starting a new phase of
the dialogue.

Nonetheless, we understand from the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2017/640) that there has
been limited progress in the EU-facilitated dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina. It is in particular the
lack of progress on some of the key provisions of the
EU-facilitated agreements, including, among others,
on the establishment of the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo, that remains a
source of concern. That is why we support the call made
by the Secretary-General on both parties to re-engage
in dialogue and bring new vitality to the process. We
hope that the new leadership in both Belgrade and
Pristina will do so in a positive and consturctive spirit
with a View to addressing outstanding issues and
disagreements through peaceful means.

That requires that both sides refrain for actions
and statements that could cause ethnic discord, and
instead exert efforts to create an atmosphere of
trust and confidence conducive to dialogue. Special
Representative Tanin was right when he said that
political reconciliation must be accompanied by social
reconciliation and by rebuilding trust and cooperation
at all levels. That is the basis for genuine cooperation.
Respect for each other's heritage is of course very vital
in that regard. Failure in that area would very much
be fatal - that is even more the case with regard to
concerns with respect to demographic issues, which the
Deputy Prime Minister expressed with passion. In our
view, that should draw our attention.

Ethiopia fully supports the work that they United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo has
been undertaking in discharging its mandate in line with
resolution 1244 (1999). The Mission's engagement with
municipal authorities and community representatives in
support ofthe efforts to protect the rights ofcommunities
and to promote inter-community reconciliation and
trust-building is commendable. Its efforts to promote
reconciliation in Kosovo through greater youth-
engagement in support of inter-community cooperation
is also encouraging, as is the effort being made by
Kosovo authorities to implement measures aimed at
preventing violent extremism and radicalization, by
constructively engaging youth and women. It is our
hope that UNMIK will continue to promote political
dialogue, strengthen community reconciliation and
ensure security and stability in Kosovo and the region.
We also recognize the significant role of the European
Union on matters concerning Kosovo, and commend the
European Union Rule of Law Mission and the Kosovo
Force for their valuable contribution to Kosovo in the
area of the rule of law and security.

In conclusion, I would like to say that security
and stability in Kosovo and the region will ultimately
be assured when there is political will and resolve on
the part of both sides. In that respect, we once again
encourage both parties to remain committed to dialogue
and negotiation with a view to finding a mutually
acceptable solution.

