Mr. Gokcen: First of all, I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the Kingdom of Morocco
for assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also wish to convey the gratitude of
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) Secretary
General Ihsanoglu for the initiative of Saad-Eddine El
Othmani to organize this important meeting and for
inviting the OIC. The Secretary General apologizes for
not being able to attend personally. However, I have the
honour to read out his statement:

"We are deeply concerned at the prevailing
situation in the Sahel region, particularly in Mali,
and seek to resolve the crisis through negotiation
and discussion. From the very beginning, the OIC

made repeated calls to the different parties involved
in the crisis in Mali to shun the path of violence
and settle their differences through dialogue and
negotiations. Furthermore, the OIC also supported
the initiative of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the African Union
and other regional and international organizations
aimed at finding a peaceful solution to the crisis in
Mali and the Sahel region.

"The fourth Extraordinary Islamic Summit,
held in Mecca Al-Mukarramah on 14 and
15 August 2012, discussed the situation in Mali
and the Sahel and expressed its deep concern over
the developments in that region. The leaders of the
member States were concerned with the resurgence
of terrorist acts fuelled by organized transnational
crime, notably arms and drug trafficking, which
threatens the peace, stability and socioeconomic
development of the Sahel countries, particularly
Mali.

"The OIC summit reiterated its support for the
maintenance of the territorial integrity, national
unity and sovereignty of the Republic of Mali. In
that context, it firmly condemned the attempts by
armed terrorist groups, which violate the territorial
integrity of that country. The summit also reiterated
its full solidarity with the transitional National
Unity Government and urged all member States to
provide the needed support and assistance to help it
achieve its objectives.

"The Conference also expressed deep concern
over the humanitarian tragedy in Mali and the
Sahel region and mandated the Secretary General
of the OIC to take necessary measures to mobilize
the resources needed to overcome the difficulties
confronting the hundreds of thousands of refugees
and displaced people in Mali and its neighbouring
countries. It strongly condemned the atrocities
perpetrated by terrorist groups against unarmed
civilians and the destruction of sites classified by
UNESCO as world cultural heritage, especially
in Timbuktu. It applauded and encouraged the
ECOWAS mediation and supported the current
efforts of the field countries - Algeria, Mali,
Mauritania and the Niger - the African Union, the
United Nations and Morocco to help Mali restore
its territorial integrity and stability.
"More recently, the thirty-ninth session of the
Council of Foreign Ministers, held in Djibouti from
15 to 17 November 2012, also discussed the situation
in Mali and the Sahel and reaffirmed its principled
position of safeguarding the unity of the Republic
of Mali as well as its sovereignty and territorial
integrity. The Council strongly condemned the
armed groups' actions threatening the safety of the
country, renewed its total solidarity with the Sahel
countries in combating all forms of insecurity and
destabilization, and supported the peace initiative
sponsored by ECOWAS and the African Union.

"We appreciate the important role being played
by His Excellency Mr. Blaise Compaore, President
of Burkina Faso, in his capacity as the ECOWAS
mediator on the crisis in Mali and reiterate our
continued support for his mediation efforts to find
a peaceful solution to the conflict in that country
within the framework of preserving its national
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity. We also
support the efforts of His Excellency Mr. Romano
Prodi, Special Envoy of the United Nations
Secretary-General for the Sahel.

"In order to support all those efforts in a
coordinated manner, the OIC intends to appoint a
special envoy for Mali and the Sahel. The overall
mandate of the OIC special envoy for Mali and the
Sahel would be to contribute to the ongoing efforts
of regional and international organizations to find a
peaceful solution in Mali and the region as a whole.

"Terrorism and organized crime should be
forcefully rejected, particularly when attempts are
made to link those activities with Islam. All parties
to the conflict should seriously engage in the
ongoing Burkina Faso-led mediation efforts, which
seek to find a peaceful settlement. We believe
that a partnership among local and international
Governments, institutions and civil society will
provide an all-inclusive setting for peaceful
dialogue and negotiation. Creation of a broad-based
coalition of local forces against non-indigenous
Al-Qaida affiliates in the region is necessary.

"After the joint mission to Syria in March
2012, the humanitarian partnership mission to
Africa's Sahel region was the second partnership
this year between the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
and the Humanitarian Department of the OIC. OIC
and OCHA officials jointly led a high-level mission
to Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger from 15 to
21 October 2012. In an innovation, representatives
of Azerbaijan, Brunei Darussalam, Kuwait,
Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, the African
Union, ECOWAS, the Islamic Development Bank,
Direct Aid, the International Islamic Charitable
Organization and the Red Crescent agencies of
the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Turkey
participated in the joint mission. The objective
was to raise awareness of the humanitarian crises
in the Sahel region and to highlight the role of the
multilateral humanitarian system in supporting the
national responses of the three countries visited.
In many cases, humanitarian efforts can no longer
stand alone if the progress in humanitarian field
is not sustained by stable development within
the region. In the Sahel, there is also a need for
a comprehensive and integrated approach to
addressing security, governance, development and
humanitarian needs.

"Finally, I wish to remind all members of the
larger international community that we all share
the responsibility of acting collectively in order to
help the population of Mali and the Sahel region
to live in peace, security, stability and sustained
development. I therefore call upon the international
community to work in a more active and
coordinated manner to put pressure on all parties
to end the crisis immediately and restore peace and
stability in Mali and the region. The OIC General
Secretariat, member States and OIC subsidiary and
specialized organs such as the Islamic Development
Bank, the Research Centre for Islamic History, Art
and Culture, the Islamic Education, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and International Islamic
Jurisprudence Academy stand ready to further
support the efforts of the international community."

