Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I join others in
welcoming today's meeting and the briefing from the
Secretary-General.

Since the Quartet's report (S/2016/595, annex)
issued in July, we have seen a worrying acceleration
of some Israeli policies in the West Bank that are, as
the report makes clear, eroding the viability of the two-
State solution. Far from stopping settlement expansion,
as the Quartet recommended, we have seen Israel push
forward plans for over 1,500 settlement units as well as
the continued demolition of Palestinian structures. The
numbers speak for themselves - over 800 structures
destroyed this year, over a thousand people displaced,
including over 500 children. As the United Kingdom
Minister for the Middle East and Africa, Tobias
Ellwood, made clear earlier this month, these policies
fundamentally call into question Israel's commitment
to the two-State solution.

The demolition orders issued against the Palestinian
village of Sussia and Khan Al-Ahmar school in the east
of Jerusalem are particularly concerning. Such steps
would have a terrible human impact on the inhabitants of
Sussia and the children of Khan Al-Ahmar. What hope
is there for the two-State solution when communities
are simply removed from the map and when futures are
literally bulldozed to the ground? So once again I hope
we can all urge Israel to cease its systematic policy
of settlement expansion, demolition of Palestinian
structures and limits on Palestinian development.

The Quartet report also set out the damaging effect
of incitement and violence. We deplore incitement on
both sides of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, including
any comments that could stir up hatred and prejudice.

Although levels of violence have dropped in recent
months, we continue to call on the parties to do all they
can to de-escalate tensions and prevent incitement. We
also continue to support the revival of the Trilateral
Commission on Incitement to address all allegations of
incitement on both sides.

Turning to Gaza, we remain extremely worried
about the ongoing dire situation there. It is estimated
that 90 per cent ofGaza's water is not fit for consumption
or even for agricultural use. Gaza continues to have the
highest unemployment in the world. And the risk of a
return to conflict hangs heavy over Gaza, as shown
by the rocket attacks and Israeli response last month.
Militant groups in Gaza must permanently cease rocket
fire and other attacks against Israel.

The United Kingdom welcomes the steps taken
by the Palestinian Authority and Israel to improve the
energy, gas, electricity and water situation in Gaza.
These are significant advances that will improve
conditions on the ground, and it is critical that these
measures are implemented quickly, given the severity
of the situation. We are also encouraged that education
and health facilities have largely been rebuilt, even
though reconstruction is far from complete. Efforts
now need to focus on completing house-building and
reviving the productive sectors, stimulating exports
and creating jobs.

We too have a role to play. Donors must honour all
commitments that are still outstanding from the Cairo
conference. The United Kingdom remains committed to
doing so and to reaching those in need. I would like to
once again thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
and reaffirm our full and continued support for the
work of Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Process. We look forward to hearing
from him in our closed consultations later this morning.

Since this is an open meeting, before I conclude I
would like to take this opportunity to publicly welcome
the announcement on Friday by the United States and
Russia that they would be renewing the cessation of
hostilities in Syria. That is a long-awaited positive
step. The level of violence has dropped in recent days,
and I hope that will continue and bring with it full
humanitarian access and, eventually, an environment
that will enable talks to resume between the parties.

But we have been here before. In the past, the
violence has lessened only to rise to new levels of
barbarity. We cannot afford to repeat history. So let us
all urge the parties to honour their commitments, and
let us specifically call on Russia to use its influence to
restrain Al-Assad. That will be no simple feat. Earlier
this week, Al-Assad said that it was his objective to
regain the entire country by force, something that he
is unable to do alone and that would only prolong the
conflict for many years to come. For the sake of the
hundreds of thousands of Syrians killed in the conflict,
for the millions upon millions displaced, that simply
cannot come to pass.

