Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Egypt for having its initiative to convene today's
meeting. I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Zerihoun for his briefing.

Under the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, sanctions measures, as one of the peaceful
means of conflict resolution, play a positive role in
maintaining international peace and security. Over the
years, the Security Council has established multiple
sanctions regimes to address conflict situations. Some
of those regimes have served their purpose and have
been lifted. At the same time, some sanctions regimes
have problems and require careful consideration by the
Security Council in order to improve them effectively.
We must pay particular attention to the following
aspects.

First, the use of sanctions by the Security Council
must be in full keeping with the provisions of the
United Nations Charter. There must be prudence and
responsibility when employing sanctions. As a matter of
priority, the Security Council should use non-coercive
means, such as negotiations, mediation and good
offices to respond to the threats to international peace
and security. The imposition of sanctions should be
predicated upon the exhaustion of non-coercive means.
Sanctions are peaceful means and should therefore be
implemented in a peaceful manner, rather than being
imposed through the use of force.

Secondly, the Security Council's decision to impose
sanctions must be part of an overall political settlement
package. Sanctions are not the end in themselves.
Sanctions alone cannot resolve issues. The fundamental
way out is through the use of political and diplomatic
means, such as dialogue and negotiation. In quite a few
cases, the weak link in the solution lies not with the level
of sanctions implementation, but rather with the lack of
progress in the political track. The Security Council's
decision on the overall political package should be
advanced holistically. The implementation of Security
Council resolutions should not be selective. The use
of sanctions measures by the Security Council should
serve the overall purpose of the political process. It
should be conducive to the mediation and good offices
efforts by the relevant countries, regional organizations
and the United Nations, thereby truly helping to ease
the situation on the ground and reach solutions.

Thirdly, the Security Council should enhance
the relevance of sanctions in order to avoid negative
consequences. The Council should determinedly focus
on the key aspects of issues at hand and be prudent
when considering the measures and scope of sanctions.
Sanctions should serve the purpose ofconflict resolution.
To the greatest extent possible, sanctions measures
should have a low negative impact on the general
population and third countries. In addition, sanctions
measures should not affect the normal legal trade and
economic relations of the sanctioned countries nor
people's livelihoods and the humanitarian situation in
the countries concerned. As the situation on the ground
and the resolution process evolve, the Security Council
should conduct timely evaluations and assessments of
the sanctions measures and, as needed, adjust, suspend
and, ultimately, terminate them.

Imposing sanctions is a very important decision.
It should be done properly and strictly in line with
decisions taken by the Security Council so as to avoid
any attempt outside the framework of the Security
Council to impose unilateral sanctions or wilfully
expand their scope. As a permanent member of the
Security Council, China will continue to maintain its
prudent and responsible approach in addressing the
issue of sanctions so as to ensure that the sanctions
measures decided by the Security Council will serve
the ultimate purpose of the political process and be
subject to it, in order for it to play its part in maintaining
international peace and security in a constructive and
positive manner.
