Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Mr. President, for calling this special
meeting to consider the question of Palestine and
Israel's construction of the separation wall.

We are seriously concerned about the
developments in the Middle East. We in Jordan are in
the middle of a circle of geographical and political
instability, not to mention the resulting social and
economic repercussions. The latest escalation threatens
the peace and stability of all the States of the region.
We therefore call on all parties to exercise the
maximum self-restraint and work effectively and with
determination to put the political process back on track.

On this basis, we reaffirm our support for the
vision for peace in the Middle East put forward last
June by United States President George Bush, and for
the road map, to which Jordan actively contributed.
They provide for a genuine change in the political
situation through mutual commitments, the end of
Israeli occupation and the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002), the principle of land for peace and
the Arab peace initiative.

The road map sets forth a time frame of three
years for the establishment of a Palestinian State and a
monitoring and assessment mechanism to ensure timely
implementation of the measures. We should be
focusing on expediting the establishment of a genuine
mechanism for monitoring the political and security
situation under the Quartet's auspices to ensure that
parties fulfil their reciprocal commitments made in
accordance with the road map. This is the path that will
enable us to use the present historic opportunity to
achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.

It is high time to implement the road map and
take significant and prompt steps to put the peace
process back on an irreversible track. But the Israeli
Government's continued security policies,
assassinations, extrajudicial killings and targeting of
Palestinian citizens directly threaten the future of the
peace process and implementation of the road map.
Moreover, its continued violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, the imposition of oppressive measures
against the Palestinian people and the occupation of
Palestinian land have been the main cause of the
Palestinians' unacceptable economic suffering and
difficult living conditions.

At the same time, Jordan took a principled moral
and political position against suicide operations. We
feel that these operations, which we condemn, have
reflected negatively on and diminished international
sympathy for the Palestinian cause and diverted
attention from the main issue ending the Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian territories.

The current circumstances will only help to
strengthen extremists on both sides. We believe that the
Israeli security policy has not and will not bring about
security for Israelis.

Israel's ongoing construction of the separation
wall and its settlement activities are a violation of the
principles of international law and of United Nations
resolutions on Palestine, especially Security Council
resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980). We condemn
the construction of the separation wall, which
entrenches the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territories, devours more land and imposes a de facto
situation on the future Palestinian State, in the sense
that it cuts deeply into the Palestinian territories and
does not conform to the Green Line of June 1967. The
completion of the wall means the annexation of more
than 10 per cent of the land of the West Bank to Israel
and the imprisonment of more than 95,000 Palestinian
citizens between the wall and the Green Line of June
1967. It affects the livelihood of more than 210,000
Palestinians in more than 67 villages and violates
human rights in the Palestinian occupied territories.

We call on Israel to stop the construction of the
wall immediately and emphasize the need to respect the
lines of 4 June 1967. We call on it to start immediately,
in conformity with its commitments in the first phase
of the road map, with the dismantling of all the
settlements built since March 2001. Israel's pursuit of
its settlement activities, construction of the separation
wall and expansion of the occupation of Palestinian
territories run counter to the vision of two States -
Palestine and Israel - living side by side in peace.
Indeed, it renders it completely impossible. This leads
us to ask if the Israeli side really wants to realize the
vision of two States or if it has another vision entirely.

