Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I would like to start by
thanking Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her briefing and
her nineteenth report to the Council on the situation
in Darfur. Both the report and the Prosecutor's
briefing show that the overall situation in Darfur has
not improved since she last briefed the Council in
December (see S/PV.7080). On the contrary, over the
past six months the situation in Darfur has continued to
deteriorate. Clashes between the Government and the
rebels continue. Civilians are affected by indiscriminate
and disproportionate attacks. Approximately 250,000
people have been newly displaced, including due
to attacks carried out by the Sudanese Government
supported Rapid Support Forces on villages and the
camps of internally-displaced persons. That number
dwarfs the number of people displaced in 2011 and
2012. Humanitarian aid workers and peacekeepers are
subject to attacks throughout Darfur. The deliberate
obstruction of humanitarian assistance must end.

The report also notes the persistence of sexual and
gender-based violence in Darfur. I strongly condemn
those horrendous crimes. It is imperative that an end
be put to the culture of impunity that allows sexual
and gender-based crimes to continue unabated. An
investigation into such cases should be made a priority.
All perpetrators of those and other serious crimes must
be brought to account. The Government of the Sudan
should do more to end attacks against civilians, fight
impunity, ensure accountability and guarantee justice
for the victims. Justice must be made the cornerstone
ofa lasting and sustainable peace agreement in Darfur.

The report before us contains multiple reminders
of the challenges the Prosecutor's Office is facing in
fulfilling its mandate. Resolution 1593 (2005) remains
a dead letter and has yet to be implemented. After
10 years and countless victims since the beginning
of the conflict in Darfur, only four senior officials
have been indicted for war crimes and crimes against
humanity; one of them is also accused of genocide.
They are the only ones who have been held to account.

We again urge the Government of the Sudan to meet
its obligations and to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court (ICC), including on the enforcement
of the arrest warrants issued by the Court. All States
parties to the Rome Statute and all relevant regional and
international organizations are required to cooperate
fully with the ICC, in accordance with resolution 1593
(2005).

We welcome the guidelines issued by the Secretary-
General last year on non-essential contacts on the part
of members of the Secretariat with individuals subject
to ICC arrest warrants, yet we share the concerns
expressed by the Prosecutor on high-level contacts with
individuals under ICC arrest warrants.

The Council can do to more to assist the Court.
One obvious step is to list individuals under ICC
arrest warrants on the Sudan Sanctions Committee.
Another step is to ensure an effective follow-up
of the cases referred to the ICC and to answer the
correspondence the Court has addressed to the Council
on cases of non-cooperation. As a matter of fact, in a
presidential statement on the protection of civilians last
year (S/PRST/20l3/2), Council members committed
themselves to carrying out effective follow-up.
However, there has been no agreement on a mechanism.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Lithuania's
full support for and cooperation with the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court in carrying out her
important mandate.

