Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, let me
thank Ambassador Tanin, as well as his staff, for their
work, the detailed report (S/2018/76) and the briefing. I
should like to add that it is also a great personal pleasure
to see Ambassador Tanin in person today.

We welcome the close cooperation of Ambassador
Tanin with High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Mogherini,

given the important role of the European Union in
Kosovo. Iwill focus on three points today: first, Kosovo
in the Security Council; secondly, the rule of law; and,
thirdly, accountability.

With regard to my first point, concerning Kosovo
in the Security Council, in our View, the situation in
Kosovo today allows for a reduction of the frequency
of our discussions in the Council from every three to
six months. We also favour changing the format of our
discussion to consultations. Furthermore, we call on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo to focus on its core tasks, and we look forward
to future options concerning its downsizing.

That brings me to my second point, namely, the rule
of law. We condemn in the strongest terms, as others
have done today, the recent murder of Mr. Ivanovie. It
is crucial that the perpetrators of that crime be found
and justice be done. The rule of law is important for
individuals to achieve a sense of closure, but it also has
a broader importance for society as a whole.

That brings me to my third point, on accountability.
Accountability is an important step on the road to
reconciliation in Kosovo's society. For Kosovo's
progress to be maintained, its judicial capacities must
be accompanied by sincere political will to protect
and promote the rule of law. In that light, recent steps
undertaken to undermine the authority and legal basis
of the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and the Special
Prosecution Office are reason for concern. We encourage
Kosovo's political leaders to fully act in line with the
obligations to which they have committed themselves.

In conclusion, Kosovo is on a positive path, but much
remains to be done to ensure accountability for past
crimes. In that regard, let me also refer to my European
colleagues' statements concerning the statement
made on behalf of the European Union yesterday. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands has confidence in Kosovo's
future, and we call on all the relevant parties to build
trust, continue peaceful dialogue and fully implement
reached agreements.

