Mr. Eliasson: I thank you, Sir, for giving me this
opportunity to brief the Council on the Darfur peace
process. Let me begin by giving on overall assessment
of the situation in Darfur. I will then outline the latest
developments and the proposed way forward.

When the Secretary-General briefed the Council
on 24 October, it will be recalled that he expressed
serious concern about the overall security and
humanitarian situation in Darfur, as well as the
continuous difficulties with the deployment of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). He also indicated his
preoccupation with the frictions between the
movements, as well as between the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement (SPLM) and the National
Congress Party (NCP) within the Government of
National Unity of the Sudan and their effects on the
Darfur political process.

It is, to begin with, important to recognize that
those issues are interrelated. Slow progress in one
aspect of our collective response to the Darfur crisis
impacts the progress in other areas. The political
process, the peacekeeping operation and the
humanitarian efforts are mutually reinforcing.

There is continued reason to be concerned by the
present security and humanitarian situation, which
clearly affects the political process. In October alone,
more than 30,000 civilians were displaced by clashes
between Government forces and non-signatories, as
well as among Darfur movements themselves, bringing
the total number of the displaced this year to almost
280,000 persons. Tragically, seven Sudanese
humanitarian workers were killed in Darfur in
October- the highest monthly casualties since July
2006. Fighting over the past two days in Chad
07-61468
underlines the volatility of the situation in the region.
All those developments reinforce the urgency of
finding a viable peace settlement.

Inter-tribal conflicts over land and water
resources continue and persist. There is increasing
concern of Arab unrest and militancy, as well as of a
spillover of the conflict into Kordofan. Tensions in
internally displaced persons (IDPs) camps are growing.
The raids of Government forces into camps, as well as
incidents in and around the camps, have led to loss of
life, destruction of shelters and violations of human
rights. Humanitarian access continues to be impeded.
The recent forced relocation of IDPs in South Darfur is
particularly worrisome. Those developments on the
ground do not foster the atmosphere of safety, mutual
trust and respect so sorely needed in Darfur. Let us
recall that the Government of the Sudan has the
primary responsibility for upholding security, justice
and respect for international law, including through
cooperation with the International Criminal Court.

Exactly one month ago, on 27 October, the Darfur
peace talks were launched in Sirte, Libya, under the
auspices of the African Union (AU) and the United
Nations and chaired by AU Special Envoy Salim
Ahmed Salim and me. They were attended by the
Government of the Sudan and representatives of
Darfurian movements, the regional partners Chad,
Egypt, Eritrea and Libya - also as host country - and
of the international community, as well as by civil
society, traditional and women's groups representatives
from Darfur.

The tone of the interventions at the Sirte talks
was positive and constructive. Delegates expressed
support for the AU-United Nations-led process and
made commitments to reach a political settlement. The
participation of representatives of civil society was
important, reminding us that addressing the plight of
the people of Darfur and the conflict's root causes must
be at the centre of our efforts. The people of Darfur
demand and strongly hope for protection and security,
compensation and reparation, safe and voluntary return
home, as well as recovery and development projects.

There was widespread recognition in Sirte that
there is no military solution to the conflict in Darfur. In
that context, Mr. Salim and I welcomed the
Government of the Sudan's announcement of a
unilateral cessation of hostilities on the first day of the
talks. Despite our request that it be upheld, the
07-61468

ceasefire was reportedly broken. As Council members
are aware, we had hoped to secure a similar
commitment from all parties. In fact, that was one of
the reasons why we had issued inclusive invitations to
the opening session. However, the movements were not
prepared to reciprocate that commitment due to
existing divisions, the absence of some key
personalities and, as they stated, a lack of trust in the
intentions of the Government of the Sudan.

In our meetings with the parties, Mr. Salim and I
emphasized the importance of creating an environment
conducive to political talks. We noted the need for
confidence-building measures that could have a
concrete impact on the security and welfare of the
population in Darfur, in particular in the camps, where
the situation is volatile. We cautioned against any
action, military or political, that could undermine the
trust between the parties and within the population of
Darfur.

We also made it clear to the Government of the
Sudan that the involvement of civil society and other
stakeholders is critical and that we expected all efforts
to be made to facilitate the dialogue. Regrettably, out
of the 25 civil society representatives we had invited to
the opening session in Sirte, only 13 were provided
with the possibility to travel.

We strongly made the point to the movements
that they should not delay their work on reaching
agreement on common positions and on a joint
delegation to the substantive talks while they were
working on their unification as movements.

As the Council is aware, some of the leading
personalities of the Darfurian movements did not come
to Sirte. Some requested additional time for unifying
activities and for the preparation of positions. Others
expressed reservations with regard to the personalities
invited and to the venue for the talks. Nevertheless, we
must make a distinction, I believe, between those who
did not come to Sirte but are still engaged in the peace
process, on the one hand, and those who have rejected
the talks or presented unrealistic preconditions for
them, on the other. All parties must be aware that
undermining the peace process comes at a price.

Of course, there is reason to be disappointed that
some key personalities did not attend the opening of
the talks in Sirte. Questions have been raised about
whether, for that reason, the talks should have been
postponed. Events of the past several months have
3
clearly shown, in my view, that there is nothing to gain
from delays. A gradual deterioration in the political,
security and humanitarian field has been evident since
the summer. The launch of the talks provided a catalyst
for the movements to intensify their restructuring
work. It was also essential to launch the talks
simultaneously with the start of the UNAMID
deployment. Let us also recall that this, after all, was
the first time that parties to the conflict had met face-
to-face since the Darfur Peace Agreement was signed
in May 2006.

The Darfur peace process should now be
considered irreversible. There is no way back. It is
critical to stay the course and maintain the political
momentum.

It is important to note that invitations to Sirte
were issued on an individual and inclusive basis for the
opening session only. We had originally envisaged that
the weeks following the opening would be devoted to
workshops and further preparations among the
movements, not least to choose their negotiation teams.
Because of the ongoing consultations among them in
Darfur and Juba, in the Sudan, we have had to readjust
our workplan.

First of all, in an effort to intensify high-level
contacts with the movements, we are now refocusing
much of our work on Darfur and Juba. Secondly, we
are working hard on the selection of representatives of
civil society and other stakeholders to take part in the
continued political process. Thirdly, we are
coordinating even more closely with our regional
partners.

For the African Union and United Nations to be
able to start the workshops and issue the invitations to
the substantive talks, the movements need to agree on
common positions and form negotiation teams for the
talks.

Some of the developments in Juba over the past
few weeks have been encouraging in that respect. The
SPLM. has assisted the movements to coalesce around
two major groups - the 11 different faction
representatives working to reconstitute the Sudan
Liberation Movement/Army (SLM/A) and five factions
which have agreed to work together under one
umbrella in what is called the new United Resistance
Front (URF). Those two groups have pledged to
coordinate their positions on the issues for the talks.
The movements now intend to return to Darfur to
connect with field commanders and other factions on
the ground in order to solidify their alliance.

In addition to those groups, there are ongoing
efforts within SLM/Unity in Darfur to restructure and
coordinate positions. As a result of those efforts, we
hope to soon see two or three groups of movements
instead of the many factions we have worked with
during the past year.

These are positive developments, which,
however, should be welcomed with a dose of caution.
Unification efforts remain fragile. Loose coalitions and
alliances have, in the past, failed due to competition
over leadership. Thus far, the movements have mainly
been speaking about unification and reorganization.
They have not discussed, in depth, substantive issues
or negotiation teams. We hope that they will use the
coming weeks to do so. Mr. Salim and l are
appreciative of the initiative by the SPLM. to support
the movements' unification efforts, but it is important
to state again that the movements should stay focused
on preparing for the negotiations. The more ambitious
objective of reaching full unification may cause further
delays in the peace process.

In that respect, movements may need further
facilitation by the African Union and United Nations
Mediation. Should they request it, we would be
prepared, in contact with our regional partners, to host
a meeting for the movements as soon as possible. Such
an Arusha-style meeting - I am referring to the
meeting held in August in Arusha, Tanzania - could
provide them with an opportunity to crystallize their
positions, nominate their teams and finalize their
preparations for the talks to start soon thereafter.

We will also use the next few weeks to ensure
that the voices of the people of Darfur are channelled
into the political process. We are working closely with
civil society, traditional leaders and Arab and women's
groups to secure nominations to form an advisory
council. Such an advisory council could be a primary
channel of consultations between civil society and the
Mediation. Here, the internally displaced persons and
refugees are an important constituency which should
be included in any consultation process. Access to
them is, however, being obstructed by intimidation in
different forms, also from within one of the
movements. The IDPs and refugees were not present in
Sirte. We are working intensely to ensure that they are
informed of the developments in the political process.
07-61468
It is also important that the Arab population of Darfur
be represented as part of civil society and within
movement coalitions.

The Secretary-General warned in his statement to
the Council in October of the lack of preparedness and
cohesion inside the movements. I gave a similar
picture, as members may recall, of continuing
fragmentation when I briefed the Council in June. Most
movements remain sceptical about the Government's
claim of renouncing the military solution. Some
movements also continue to be engaged in hostilities.

Other movements have insisted that the
delegation of the Government of the Sudan be one of
national unity, with SPLM. and Minni Minnawi
represented. The tensions between SPLM. and NCP and
the stand-off between Minnawi and the NCP on the
issue of Minnawi's demand for separate representation
at the talks add to the difficulties now. All efforts must
be made to ensure that these issues are resolved and
that progress is achieved on implementing the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. It is also important
for the political process that UNAMID deployment
proceed on schedule.

Taking all those factors into account, Mr. Salim
and I believe that we have to allow reasonable time for
the composition of the Government delegation and for
the movements to finalize their preparations for the
talks. We should not risk the credibility of this process
by rushing to convene substantive talks if we do not
have a critical mass of participants ready for them. At
the same time, we must maintain the momentum
through continuous engagement with the movements
and with the Government of the Sudan and remind
them of their commitments to the African Union and
the United Nations and of their obligations to the
people of Darfur. Protracted delays in reaching internal
consensus on the part of the Government and the
movements may otherwise become serious
impediments to the start of substantive negotiations on
Darfur.

Over the next two weeks, Mr. Salim and I,
together with our chief mediators, will be in close
contact with the parties. We plan to meet with our
regional partners on 4 December in Egypt to determine
the course ahead: time frames for a possible Arusha-
style meeting, as I just mentioned, the workshops and
substantive talks. The role of the countries of the
region is critical, as was evident at the regional
07-61468

meeting that Mr. Salim and I convened in Eritrea on
14 November. After the meeting in Egypt, I am
planning to proceed to the Sudan to visit the
movements in the field and movement leaders and meet
with other stakeholders.

To conclude, I believe we should all remain
confident of the potential of this process to bring about
a peace agreement for Darfur. At the same time, we
have to recognize that the atmosphere now is less
positive than it was last summer at the time of the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1769 (2007)
and the successful Arusha consultations. Factors
beyond our control have, undoubtedly, impeded the
process.

Mr. Salim and I will continue to do our utmost to
facilitate the peace process. We will, however, only be
able to make progress if the parties show seriousness,
political will and a focused commitment to peace.
When the substantive talks begin, the parties should
come prepared to make the compromises necessary to
reach a just and lasting solution. The continued support
of the international community, in particular the
Security Council, for our efforts is critical, as
demonstrated by the impact of Council resolution 1769
(2007). While we now urge the parties to intensify their
preparations for the talks, we must not allow them to
derail the process. We - as much as they - must keep
the fate of the people of Darfur at the centre of our
attention.

