Mr. Corr (Ireland): First of all, I should like to
thank you, Mr. President, for arranging today's public
meeting of the Council on the annual report to the
General Assembly. Like others, I should also like to
pay warm tribute to Ambassador Mahbubani, to
Minister Lee and to everyone else in the Singapore
Mission for the commitment in preparing this report,
largely in response - as Ambassador Mahbubani
said- to the comments of Member States in the
general debate with regard to making it shorter, more
analytical and more reflective. Singapore has been a
good friend of the important process of making the
Council's work more transparent, more open and more
reflective. With this report, we have taken an important
step in that direction, which we very much appreciate.

I want to make a few general points, some of
which reflect comments already made, on the work of
the Council and on how the Council operates, as well
as on some specific issues on the Council's agenda, as
dealt with in the report for the past year.

The Security Council is, of course, at the very
centre of the multilateral system and of international
cooperation. It enjoys unique legitimacy and authority
in international law. It deals with a wide canvas of
issues; the monthly agenda - as has been said - can
often be fairly stretched. Inevitably, the tyranny of time
pressures and events does not always allow for the
reflection we would want to give to linkages between
issues, to thematic focus and to operational coherence
in what we do. The test, as Ambassador Greenstock
and others have pointed out, is not necessarily the
number of meetings we have, but the progress we make
in advancing the Council's objectives - especially
where it matters, which is the task of safeguarding and
advancing peace and preventing conflicts.

The fundamental point that we must always get
right, as Ambassador Strcmmen pointed out, is to
address the mandate given to us, which essentially is
that the Council has the primary - not sole, but
primary - responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Ambassador
Mahbubani made the point that in some ways, the
Council may be one of the more conservative
institutions in the world. But in safeguarding its
Charter responsibility and mandate, the Council is
surely right to be conservative. And, while accepting
the concept of British pragmatism, it is also important,
as one British philosopher said, that we not let too
much daylight into what at times must be a very
complex set of negotiations and assessments among all
Council members.

There is always an intersection between the world
of power and capitals and the instruments of
multilateral decision-making and responsibilities. That
is as it should be. The Council has 15 members, each
bringing to the table its own judgements and
perspectives. But in its work, what unites the Council
and is its central theme - which Ireland has certainly
found impressive during our period on the Council -
is the sense of Council members that they are also
servants of an ideal that, as Ambassador Levitte said,
retains its importance, even after nearly 60 years. The
cooperation among nations in safeguarding the peace,
preventing wars, reacting to crisis and rebuilding after
conflicts is indispensable to maintaining and advancing
international peace.

Isaiah Berlin titled one of his books "The
Crooked Timber of Humanity", and that is a
fundamental point. Life and politics are untidy; many
of the crises that the Council deals with are both
complex and difficult. They can be a cauldron of
forces; spirits summoned from the deep when conflicts
start are not easily put back into the deep. So the world
that the Council deals with in the issues on its agenda
are inherently untidy in many respects. They are
extremely complex, and there is rarely a straight line
from A to Z. So the Council must, using its best
judgement, take due stock of the situation, advance its
goals and give proper monitoring to that.

In terms of Council procedures, I should like to
make a few general observations. I think it is important
that the Council, while recognizing the interlinkages
between issues, not encroach on other United Nations
bodies or on their roles. That is a theme that has
emerged in the general debates on the Council report
over the past several years. The United Nations
machinery across the range of institutions and
committees must be respected, and at times there is a
sense that the Council, while rightly debating and
assessing thematic issues, needs to be careful that the
standing of other United Nations bodies is not
diminished and that their prerogatives are fully
respected.

At the intergovernmental level, it is clear that we
need to talk more to one another, as was pointed out in
last year's debate in the General Assembly. The United
Nations family of institutions also need to talk more to
one another about what is done in the Council, the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council,
the funds and programmes, and so on.

We also need more follow-up of Council
decisions and implementation of Council resolutions.
In my delegation's view, we should consider
establishing more Council committees. In the ad hoc
Working Group on Africa, chaired by Ambassador
Koonjul, we have a good example of a committee that
has done excellent work. It would be a valuable
innovation to look at whether committees in other areas
considering particular thematic or geographical issues
could perhaps follow up on them. That is certainly an
innovation that we would see as worth considering.

With regard to Council missions, we think they
are a very valuable instrument. There was the mission
to Ethiopia and Eritrea, led by Ambassador Kolby, and
the mission to the Great Lakes, chaired by Ambassador
Levitte. We would be open to and see merit in smaller
missions. But there will always be a tension as to the
numbers - how representative a smaller group would
be. So we would see value in the idea of, perhaps, one,
three or four Council members going on a particular
mission. It would also, I think, logistically make it
more possible to use this instrument more regularly and
in a more valuable way.

On the question of themes and of wrap-up
debates, we think that they are a very worthwhile
innovation in the Council's work over the recent
period. The wrap-up debate does not have to be held
every month, but we certainly favour the concept, as
during the Singapore presidency, of its being open to
non-Council members to speak - perhaps, as we
agreed, with a limitation for everyone, including
Council members, of three minutes each. But we
thought it worked extremely well, and we would like to
see this continued.

The eleventh of September, of course,
overshadowed the Council's work during the year. We
can take pride in the fact that the Council acted
resolutely and decisively. Resolution 1373 (2001)
provides a very valuable scaffolding across the board
in the fight against terrorism. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee works extremely well, and I join others in
paying tribute to Ambassador Greenstock for his work
in explaining and outlining goals and objectives to the
wider United Nations membership and to the
international community. It has worked extremely well
in a very sensitive area, and I think that much of that is
due to the openness that has been adopted.

On Afghanistan, there has been important
progress, with the Bonn agreements and the work of
Mr. Brahimi and of the United Nations Assistance
Mission to Afghanistan (UNAMA), and the role of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). What
is now important is to stand by the people of
Afghanistan in the reconstruction process, so that the
opportunity that is there for the people of Afghanistan
after many years of great suffering is fully seized.

This is not just a narrow point of emphasis. The
international community must be seen to be effective in
its engagement with Afghanistan, and over the coming
period it will be important, therefore, for the Council to
maintain that level of engagement.

On the Middle East, in terms of the Council's
work, we have made considerable progress over the
year, with resolution 1397 (2002), adopted in March,
affirming the Vision of two States, Israel and Palestine,
existing side by side within secure and recognized
borders. We know where we need to go. What is now
important is to redouble the efforts to get there.
We appreciate the fact that there is now a monthly
briefing of the Council on the Middle East. This has
been a very valuable and important contribution to the
work ofthe Council on the Middle East.

On Africa, it is clear that if the phrase "We are a
community", as has been said, has any meaning, it has
to find an expression in Africa. The Ad Hoc Group on
Africa has got off to a very good start. We have had a
serious level of engagement with issues related to the
Great Lakes, Ethiopia and Eritrea, Sierra Leone, the
Mano River Union region, Burundi, Somalia and
Angola.

The central point here is that with the African
Union and the development of the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD), there is now a real
prospect for advancing the interests of Africa and
supporting Africa. But this will require, as President
Mbeki and others said, an enormous level of
engagement by the international community in
supporting the efforts of Africa. This is something to
which the Council will need to pay due attention and
give much commitment in the period ahead.

Finally, let me thank the Secretariat, since this is
an appropriate moment to do so, for all of its
commitment to and support for the work of the Council
during the year, which my delegation much
appreciated.

