Mr. Lauber: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Council
on the latest activities of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). As usual, the
following statement was submitted to and approved
by the members of the configuration, including the
country concerned, Burundi.

From 10 to 13 July, I undertook my fifth visit to
Burundi as Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, concentrating this time
on socioeconomic cooperation. The main objectives
of my visit were, first, to pursue the dialogue on the
socioeconomic situation and international cooperation
with the Government and its partners in Burundi;
secondly, to insist on the relevance of the dialogue
process led by the East African Community (EAC)
and to refer to the large support it enjoys among the
States Members of the United Nations; and thirdly, to
have a first-hand impression of the developments in the
country.

I would like to start my briefing with a word of
thanks to the Government of Burundi for its hospitality
and confidence and to Ambassador Albert Shingiro,
the Permanent Representative of Burundi, for his
support in organizing the visit. During my visit of 10 to
13 July, I was received by the President of the Republic
of Burundi, the Minister for External Relations, the
Minister of Finance and the Secretary General of the
ruling party, the Conseil national pour la defense de
la democratic-Forces pour la defense de la democratie.
I also held numerous meetings with Burundi's
international partners, namely, with representatives of
the member States of the Configuration. Furthermore,
I met His Excellency Mr. Michel Kafando, the Special
Envoy of the United Nations Secretary-General; His
Excellency Mr. Francois Fall, the Special Representative
of the United Nations Secretary-General for Central
Africa; His Excellency Mr. Ibrahima Fall, the Special
Envoy of the African Union; and representatives of the
private sector and the United Nations country team. On
12 July, I participated in a retreat, which was organized
by the Minister for External Relations and dedicated to
the socioeconomic situation in Burundi.

All in all, the city of Bujumbura made a lively
impression when I was there, and the security situation
seemed calm. However, during my stay, some cases
of violence were reported. I also continued to hear
reports about the prevalence of a climate of fear and
repression. The importance of the EAC-led dialogue
and interaction among political parties was highlighted
by many interlocutors, including the Secretary General
of the ruling party. Most interlocutors also welcomed
the dialogue initiative with Burundi's political parties,
which had been launched earlier this year by Burundi's
ombudsman. Many interlocutors characterized the
economic situation as deteriorating and gave examples
on how that development affects them personally.

Burundi's international partners described the
broad range of their engagement with Burundi, which
reaches from humanitarian assistance to structural
support for the health service and investments in the
energy sector. At the same time, they are confronted
with certain obstacles to their cooperation, such as
accessibility to foreign currency, the lack of reliable
data and the restrictive law on non-governmental
organizations and others.

A key event during my visit was the socioeconomic
retreat I mentioned, which took place on 12 July. That
retreat was the latest stage in the ongoing socioeconomic
dialogue that the PBC Burundi Configuration
had launched in November 2016 near Geneva, in
cooperation with the then Resident Coordinator, with
consultations among Burundi's main multilateral
partners: the United Nations, the World Bank, the
European Union, the International Monetary Fund and
the African Development Bank. In March 2017, I had
participated in a meeting between the Government and
United Nations agencies in Bujumbura, which focused
on the socioeconomic challenges in the areas of
agriculture and food security, health and education. In
the context of that March meeting, the Government had
expressed its wish to organize a retreat with partners in
Bujumbura on the challenges in the same three sectors
in summer 2017.
Besides the Chair ofthe PBC Burundi configuration,
the Foreign Minister had invited Mr. Garry Conille,
the United Nations Resident Coordinator in Burundi,
representatives of several United Nations agencies,
the World Bank and the African Development Bank
in Burundi to the retreat on 12 July. Government
participation also included the Minister for Agriculture;
representatives of the Second Vice-Presidency; the
Ministry of Education; the Ministry of Public Health;
the Ministry of Finance; and the National Platform
for Risk Prevention and Disaster Management. The
main objective of the retreat was to specify the main
socioeconomic challenges in the three priority areas
of agriculture, education, and health and to discuss
possible responses.

In his opening remarks, the Foreign Minister
suggested that we focus on the most urgent needs of
the population and emphasized the readiness of the
Government to engage in a dialogue with its partners. In
my statement, I situated the socioeconomic dialogue in
the broader peacebuilding engagement of the PBC, and
underlined that sustainable peace is not possible if we
do not advance simultaneously within all three pillars
of United Nations engagement: peace and security,
socioeconomic development, and human rights.

Macroeconomic analysis was not the main focus
of the event, but the indicators cited during the retreat
showed that the situation remains concerning. For
instance, the Central Bank of the Republic of Burundi
rated headline inflation at 21.1 per cent for March,
driven mainly by a rise in food prices of 34 per cent.

Allow me to provide a few examples of the
socioeconomic and humanitarian challenges and of
the recommendations that were reflected in a joint
summary at the end of the retreat.

In the agricultural sector, the participants
identified low productivity, the impact of climate
change, insufficient infrastructure for stockpiling and
transportation for agricultural products, the lack of
mechanization in the sector, the lack of fertilizers, and
plant diseases among the main challenges. In response,
the participants recommended measures such as the
agro-industrial transformation of agricultural products,
additional investments and addressing the problem of
land scarcity.

The continuing malaria epidemic was a priority
subject among health experts. Other challenges include
the high mortality of mothers and small children, HIV/
AIDS, demographic growth and malnutrition. The
participants concluded that additional qualified staff
and financial resources, better access to health data
and a range of other measures could help to meet the
current challenges.

The educational sector is facing challenges such as
insufficient school infrastructure and a lack of school
material and teachers, and 46 per cent of school-age
children are currently not attending school. According
to the participants, additional resources would be
needed to train teachers, improve infrastructure, build
additional school canteens, produce textbooks and
strengthen the peacebuilding perspectives in school
education.

With regard to the macroeconomic sector, one of
the recommendations of the joint conclusions states:

"In order for the country to gradually achieve
a balanced payment, assistance to the budget
is needed, for which the Government and its
development partners are invited to enter into a
dialogue."

Apart from such specific elements, the participants
also formulated some general recommendations, such
as the need to obtain more reliable socioeconomic and
macroeconomic data, to align Burundi's socioeconomic
priorities with the Sustainable Development Goals,
and to involve Burundi's international partners in the
current elaboration of the National Development Plan.
One of the recommendations, which the Government
and the participating partners noted in their joint
summary and which is of particular relevance for the
Configuration, states that the socioeconomic dialogue
should continue and involve additional partners who
were not invited to attend the retreat of 12 July.

On 13 July, the President of the Republic received
me in Gitega, the second largest city of the country.
He reiterated his appreciation for the efforts of the
PBC Burundi Configuration. I thanked him for the
cooperation between his Government and the PBC,
and informed him about my current engagement
and the outcome of the socioeconomic retreat of the
previous day. I mentioned that the regional engagement
in follow-up to the East African Community (EAC)
summit of 20 May and the report by President
Mkapa had received very positive feedback from the
members of the Configuration, adding that the broadly
shared expectation among Member States is that the
Government of Burundi fully engages in this process.

The President outlined Burundi's national
development efforts, with a particular focus on
education, health, agriculture and energy supply,
mentioning both the progress achieved and challenges
remaining. He made clear that Burundi continues to
need international partners and expressed gratitude
for the current assistance. He also mentioned the
demographic challenges that the country is facing
and thanked the United Nations Population Fund in
particular for its support in this area.

Furthermore, the meeting with the President
was an opportunity for me to raise the questions of
national reconciliation, the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and the outstanding memorandums of
understanding with Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the African
Union in relation to the deployment and engagement of
human rights and military observers in Burundi.

Based on my latest observations and conversations
in Burundi, I have drawn the following conclusions
regarding peacebuilding in Burundi.

First, the international community should continue
to follow developments in Burundi carefully and take
all aspects of the current situation into account.

Secondly, the mediation efforts that President
Museveni and President Mkapa are undertaking
on behalf of the EAC deserve our full political and
technical support. The socioeconomic conversation
must complement those efforts and the work by the
Special Envoy of the United Nations Secretary-General,
Mr. Michel Kafando.

Thirdly, a frank and open discussion between
the Government and its international partners
on socioeconomic cooperation and a conducive
environment for effective assistance is necessary in
order to improve the economic situation and is thus
an essential element of peacebuilding in Burundi. I
therefore intend to pursue the socioeconomic dialogue
between the Government of Burundi and its partners.

Fourthly, it is important to pay increased attention
to the question of national reconciliation and dealing
with the past. I would suggest that the PBC and the
Peacebuilding Fund support efforts in this area.

Fifthly, I would like to underline the importance
of creating a good environment for the organization of
peaceful and democratic elections in 2020, including
through the full and equal participation of women.

I would like to conclude my statement by thanking
the Security Council for its continued interest and
support for the engagement of the PBC in Burundi.
