Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, Sir, to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2002/1126). I would also like to express our
gratitude to Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guehenno for his very useful and precise account on
the municipal elections just held in Kosovo.
My delegation naturally supports the statement to
be made by Denmark, the current chair of the European
Union, which fully expresses our position. I will
therefore limit myself to three remarks in my national
capacity.

With respect to the elections, we welcome the
fact that they were carried out in a peaceful
environment and with respect for democratic standards.
However, we regret, of course, the post-electoral
criminal act mentioned by Mr. Guehenno and we
condemn it. We note the excellent work done by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the Council of Europe on that occasion.
We welcome the mature approach taken by the local
electoral commissions. Naturally, we cannot hide a
certain disappointment at the level of participation in
the elections. On that point, we can only share fully the
judgement of Mr. Guehenno in his conclusions.
Electoral participation is today the surest way for the
Serb minority to advance its cause in Kosovo.

Decentralization is a useful tool for building a
modern, multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo. We
therefore welcome the call by Albanian and Serb
leaders in Kosovo following their 1 November meeting
with the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. We support Mr. Steiner's efforts in that
direction. We support his idea of drawing on the
European Council's expertise on decentralization.

We believe that the dialogue undertaken between
Pristina and Belgrade has allowed for progress in
several crucial areas. We particularly welcome the
discussions for an orderly return of refugees. That
progress encourages us to fully support the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the
strengthening of the dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade.

I will conclude my statement by welcoming the
determined effort of Mr. Steiner and by calling on all
elected officials to cooperate fully with him for the
construction of a modern, multi-ethnic and democratic
Kosovo.

