Mr. Al Jarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for his valuable briefing and his efforts in the
Syrian political process. I would also like to thank the
Director of Operations and Advocacy in the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), Mr. John Ging, for his briefing. I
take this opportunity to pay tribute to the efforts of all
humanitarian workers in Syria.

I deliver this statement on behalf of the
co-penholders on the humanitarian situation in Syria,
namely, the State of Kuwait and the Kingdom of Sweden.

Today's meeting of the Security Council is taking
place at a very critical time. Indications and reports
of a possible imminent military escalation in Idlib
province are increasing. The international community
is concerned, and international aid agencies are
preparing themselves hastily. The situation in Idlib is
different from those of Aleppo, eastern Ghouta and
Dara'a. Idlib is home to nearly 3 million people - half
of them internally displaced. Were military operations
to begin there, it would be disastrous. The humanitarian
consequences will be dire for the inhabitants if
no arrangements are reached between the parties
concerned. Were such an escalation to occur, where
would those innocent civilians go to avoid artillery and
air bombardments? We now know that there is no safe
place in which they could seek refuge.

We urge all the relevant parties to abide by the
de-escalation agreement in Idlib, in the hope that we
will not again a de-escalation zone turned into an
escalation area. We also echo the appeal of Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres to the Government of Syria
and all the parties concerned to exercise restraint, as
well as his call on the Astana guarantors to step up
efforts to find a peaceful solution to the situation in
Idlib. In that regard, we note today's summit of the
Astana guarantors; we expect them to respect their
own de-escalation agreement in Idlib and the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

We stress the importance of giving diplomatic
efforts more time and attention, including redoubling
of efforts by all to avoid further bloodshed. The images
of death and destruction from Aleppo and eastern
Ghouta remain in our memory. The Syrian people have
suffered enough over the past eight years, and have been
exposed to flagrant violations of humanitarian law and
international human rights law while the perpetrators
of those crimes have not been held accountable.

Military attacks against Council-designated
terrorist groups in no way absolve any party to the
conflict from its obligations under international law,
including complying with the principles of distinction,
proportionality, precaution and protection of civilians
and civilian targets. Even wars have rules that must
be observed. Let us remember that it is innocent
civilians - children, women and the elderly - who
make up the vast majority of the population in Idlib,
not terrorists.

We commend the efforts undertaken by OCHA
and its partners to stockpile humanitarian supplies in
preparation for the expected disaster in Idlib. We urge
donors to step up their contributions to the humanitarian
response and call on all parties to allow and facilitate
rapid, safe and sustained humanitarian access to those
in need. In that context, cross-border assistance is a vital
part of the humanitarian response in Syria. Millions of
Syrians depend upon such assistance, including nearly
2 million people in Idlib and the neighbouring areas.
There is no doubt that the number of those in need will
increase in the event of any comprehensive military
operation there.

The increasing indications and reports coming in
are a matter of concern, and we remind all parties of
their responsibilities under international humanitarian
law to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure.
The systematic attacks against civilian areas,
including schools, hospitals and medical facilities in
Idlib province and beyond, must cease immediately.
Humanitarian and medical personnel must be protected
in line with international humanitarian law. In that
regard, we reaffirm the need to respect Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2401 (2018), which
was submitted by the State of Kuwait and the Kingdom
of Sweden in February and which calls for a ceasefire
without delay, as well as the delivery of humanitarian
aid. We must also respect resolution 2286 (2016), on
the protection of hospitals and medical personnel, and
resolution 2427 (2018), on children and armed conflict.

Resolutions that are not implemented on the
ground have no value. We underscore the need
for accountability and no impunity. We renew our
support for the International Independent Commission
of Inquiry and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.

The Security Council has a humanitarian, moral
and legal responsibility to the population of Idlib,
and the Council must seek meaningful preventative
measures. The series of meetings of the Council on
Syria in general, and specifically on Idlib this week,
including our meeting today, are critical to that end.
We appreciate and support the efforts of Mr. Staffan
de Mistura in Idlib and throughout Syria. We reaffirm
that the best way to reach a sustainable solution to
the Syrian crisis and avoid humanitarian catastrophe,
particularly in Idlib, remains a political solution under
the auspices of the United Nations, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex).

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait and the Kingdom
of Sweden will do their utmost to push the Security
Council towards exploring all meaningful options
and to ensure that the Council closely follows the
developments in Idlib. As co-penholders and significant
donors to the humanitarian response in Syria, we will
continue to play our role to alleviate the suffering of the
Syrian people and to ensure that the Security Council
upholds its responsibilities in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

