Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
and Under-Secretary-General Malcorra for their
briefings on the situation in Somalia.

That situation continues to be unstable. The
recent increase in bloodshed in Mogadishu and the
continued attacks by radical Islamists against the
Somali army and police forces and the peacekeepers of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
constitute yet another alarming wake-up call regarding
the situation not only in Somalia, but throughout the
region.

Russia resolutely advocates achieving sustained
peace and national reconciliation in Somalia on the
basis of the Djibouti Agreement and in the interest of
strengthening regional stability. We support the efforts
of President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed and of the
Transitional Federal Government. Clearly, it is only
joint efforts on the part of all constructive political
forces in Somalia that will consolidate society and
restore State authority and lasting peace.

Intensifying international efforts and working to
achieve a Somali settlement, together with
humanitarian assistance, are crucial at this stage. In
that regard, we note the practical steps undertaken by
the United Nations, the African Union and the
European Union to build the capacities of the Somali
Government both in the area of security and in terms of
strengthening federal authority.

AMISOM. is playing an important role in
stabilizing the situation in the country, strengthening
the national security sector and advancing the political
process. The logistical support package and other
assistance to AMISOM. from the United Nations, in
accordance with resolution 1872 (2009), continue to be
important. We commend the contribution made to a
Somali settlement by Uganda and Burundi, which are
troop contributors to AMISOM. We call upon all
States, in particular the States of the region, to pursue
sound policies aimed at assisting the peace process in
Somalia.

We believe it is essential that States comply fully
with the established arms embargo. We advocate the
prompt launching of the sanctions regime against
individuals and entities, in accordance with resolution
1844 (2008).

Piracy off the coast of Somalia remains a serious
destabilizing factor in the subregion. There is also a
growing risk that it will spread to other vulnerable
areas off the African coast. We believe that we need to
continue to provide the Somali authorities with
comprehensive assistance to counter that scourge. The

key to overcoming the dangerous trends in the area is
to remedy the situation in Somalia itself. Of equal
importance are efforts to provide naval escorts for
vessels and to destroy the piracy infrastructure,
particularly its financial component. Russia is taking
an active part in that collective effort.

Military measures to prevent the piracy attacks
will not alone produce the desired results. There is also
a need for preventive efforts to bring perpetrators to
justice, and the Russian Federation sees this as key in
the anti-piracy strategy. Here, both short- and long-
term measures are required. We believe that, in
addition to building the criminal justice capacities of
the State and the subregion, we need to consider the
establishment of international mechanisms for
prosecuting persons involved in piracy and armed
robbery at sea.

