Mr. Misran (Malaysia): My delegation, too,
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, and the Secretary-
General for the upbeat briefing and update on the
situation between Eritrea and Ethiopia. We would also
like to congratulate you and your delegation most
sincerely for your personal engagement, as well as for
that of your Government, and for your positive
contribution to peace efforts in Africa, particularly as
concerns the situation between Ethiopia and Eritrea. I
am confident that your laudable efforts will encourage
other western Governments to do the same for Africa,
particularly with respect to those conflicts that are
raging in that continent.

We agree with you that Africa matters as a
continent of concern and a land of promise, and, I
would like to add, a land of prosperity.

The Council's continued engagement with the
subject is critical as the United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) begins its final phase of
deployment. In this regard, we welcome the recent
appointment of Ambassador Legwaila Joseph Legwaila
as the Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Ethiopia and Eritrea, as well as that of Major General
Patrick C. Cammaert, who is from your country, Mr.
President, as the Force Commander of UNMEE. We
believe that these appointments will further enhance
the efforts of UNMEE to fulfil its mandated tasks,
including that of verifying the cessation of hostilities.

Security Council resolution 1320 (2000), of 15
September 2000, authorized the deployment of up to
4,200 troops, including up to 220 military observers,
until 15 March 2001. We believe that UNMEE will
play a major role on the ground in helping to build
confidence in support of the peace process. In this
regard, we hope that all preparations are in their final
stages before the imminent arrival of thousands of
troops in the operations area. We trust that the parties
will give the Mission their full cooperation to ensure
UNMEE's access, safety and freedom of movement, as
called for in resolution 1320 (2000). It will be equally
important for the parties to ensure the safe and
unhindered access of humanitarian personnel to the
population in need, given the serious humanitarian
situation.

Before concluding, my delegation wishes to
express its satisfaction with the fact that the ceasefire is
holding. This demonstrates the parties' resolve to abide
by the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities. While
this is particularly welcome, we wish to reiterate that
the agreement links the termination of the United
Nations peacekeeping mission to the completion of the
process of delimitation and demarcation of the
common border. It is imperative, therefore, that the
parties continue negotiations, under the auspices of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), and conclude,
without delay, a comprehensive and final settlement to
the conflict.

