Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Permit me, first of all, to express our appreciation to Belgium, as President of the Council for this month, for arranging this important meeting and, of course, to welcome His Excellency Philippe Goffin, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of Belgium to the Chamber. I would like to pay tribute to my brother, Ambassador Moncef Baati, for his service, dedication and friendship and to wish him all the best in his future endeavours. We are honoured today by the presence of His Excellency President Mahmoud Abbas of the State of Palestine, the voice of the Palestinian people. Let me reassure him of the solidarity and full support of the Government and the people of Indonesia for the cause of the people of Palestine. I would also like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his remarks and Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. Furthermore, I welcome His Excellency Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General of the League of Arab States. We asked for this meeting today in response to recent developments in the region, including the announcement on 28 January of the plan on the Middle East, which may cause concern and affect the stability of the region and beyond. That new development has reminded us once again of the necessity of upholding the Charter of the United Nations and the spirit of multilateralism, which we hold near and dear to our hearts. Against that backdrop, allow me to make the following points. First, Indonesia's position has been loud, clear and consistent and is firmly rooted in our constitutional mandate. That mandate guided Indonesia at the Bandung Conference of 1955, which concluded with the adoption of the Bandung Principles as a guide to achieving the full independence of all nations under occupation and colonialization. The Bandung Conference expressed Asian and African countries' support for the independence of Palestine. The people of Palestine have long been denied their legal and inalienable right to create a sovereign independent State. It is indeed a deplorable fact that the Palestinians have lost their lands to illegal settlers and continuous annexation by Israel as the occupying Power, in violation of many international laws. The human rights of the people of Palestine have been violated, and many have been forced to become refugees. The Security Council owes a debt to the people of Palestine and mustfind solutions to the plight and dire humanitarian needs of the Palestinians. How long must we wait before we see an independent, sovereign State of Palestine? Secondly, we reaffirm the two-State solution in accordance with international law and internationally agreed parameters. We call on the international community to respect the various decisions and resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967) and 2334 (2016), bearing in mind the vision of a region where two sovereign States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side in peace within secured and recognized borders based on 4 June 1967 lines. Our objective must be to ensure respect for and the preservation of the integrity and contiguity of the Palestinian territory, with East Jerusalem as its capital. While we are of the view that we need to be realistic, the illegal actions and measures undertaken by the occupying Power, including changing the demographic character of the territories, will only imperil the viability of the two-State solution and jeopardize our pursuit of peace. Thirdly, there is a need for credible multilateral negotiations. Indonesia calls for the early resumption of credible multilateral negotiations on the question of Palestine and reaffirms the importance of dialogue among the relevant parties, under the multilateral framework and guided by the _ internationally agreed parameters. Any agreement on an issue of the magnitude of the Palestine-Israel conflict should be undertaken with the involvement of the two parties. Only then can we have a comprehensive and lasting peace, security and stability in the Middle East. As a firm supporter of multilateralism, Indonesia has always taken a stance on the importance of upholding international law, including in settling international disputes and conflicts. It is worth underlining that the need for practical solutions should not come at the expense of international law, including various United Nations resolutions. In closing, and in line with these reflections, Indonesia is pleased to observe that the Secretary- General affirmed the position of the United Nations on the matter, which is bound by the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council. We, the Security Council, have the authority, the duty and the moral obligation to ensure that all the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council are faithfully implemented. The Council and its members, at the very least, should create a conducive atmosphere so that peace can prevail. We, the Security Council, cannot afford to be seen as a spectator in the process of the maintenance of international peace and security, particularly in securing the independence of Palestine. This is a moral mission and a solemn duty that have slipped from our grasp over the past decades.
