Mr. Balzan (Malta): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the current month and to
express my appreciation to you for convening this
emergency meeting on an issue which has shocked and
saddened the international community.

The sight of the ongoing incidents in the Middle
East region cannot but highlight the importance of the
resumption of the peace talks, which unfortunately
have suffered a severe setback at a point in time when
all those of good will were full of hope that, ultimately,
the comprehensive and lasting peace that has eluded us
for so long could be achievable.

Malta shares the concerns already expressed by
the European Union regarding the ongoing incidents
and supports President Arafat's request for the creation
of an international commission entrusted with the
responsibility of objectively determining the root
causes and consequences of these incidents, which we
cannot fail to emphatically deplore.

Malta unreservedly condemns the irresponsible
provocations of those elements hostile to the peace
process, triggering the violent reactions of the past
days and resulting in the tragic loss of lives of civilians
and innocent victims, including children. May I express
our sincere and deepest condolences to the families of
those who fell victim in these tragic events. Indeed, the
shameful use of force perpetrated by those responsible
for the maintenance of order is in clear violation of the
Fourth Geneva Convention. We concur with the view
expressed by President Chirac that "one does not fight
against the emotion of a people with armour".

We should not allow these incidents, however, to
reverse or undermine the progress achieved so far in
the peace process and we sincerely hope that all
initiatives currently undertaken to put the peace
process back on track receive the support and backing
of all those who have the achievement of a lasting
peace at heart. The tragic consequences of these
unfortunate events should not discourage the
international community. It should certainly not
discourage the interested parties. These devastating
circumstances should strengthen our commitment to
the achievement of a comprehensive peace based on
the relevant Security Council resolutions and in full
respect of international law.

Let me end this brief intervention by appealing on
behalf of the Government of Malta for an end to the
current violent events and an immediate return to the
negotiating table. It is only through constructive
dialogue and political will that a lasting, just and
comprehensive peace can be attained - a peace that
would ensure that Palestinians and Israelis alike live
peacefully side by side. We should not give up hope,
nor should the parties involved. This is why it is so
necessary to ensure that any hostile actions that
undermine the achievement of such a noble objective
are stopped. We are convinced that the international
community continues to have faith in a negotiated,
peaceful settlement.

The stakes may be high, but the price of peace is
never too high.

