Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): Once again, the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories has brought us to the Security
Council. This is a real war in which an occupying
army, equipped with weapons of the latest technology,
is decimating a heroic and defenceless people. The root
cause of this situation is to be found in Israel's ongoing
challenge of and non-compliance with the numerous
resolutions of the General Assembly, this Council and
other United Nations bodies, aimed at achieving a
definitive, just and lasting solution to the Palestinian
question and, by extension, that of the entire Middle
East.

The reason why this disdain can be expressed
with absolute impunity lies in the active support of the
United States for Israel's policy. Without the United
States' financial support and provision of the aircraft,
helicopters and missiles with which Palestinian
civilians are being killed, this war would not be taking
place. Without the tragic paradox by which a
permanent member of the Council can, through its
veto, prevent the Security Council from acting to stop
this war, end the occupation that underlies it and
protect the Palestinian people through the deployment
of an international force, this meeting would not be
taking place. The recent history of the Middle East
would be different without the 23 public vetoes that
have been exercised by the United States, its numerous
threats to use the veto with which it has paralysed the
Council and the intense pressure it exerts in this area.

The war against Palestinian civilians and the
unbridled State terrorism carried out by Israel,
including extrajudicial executions, must cease
immediately. The flagrant, massive and systematic
violation of the human rights of the Palestinian people,
including their right to life, and of international
humanitarian law must be halted. Repression, torture
and the destruction of homes must stop. The illegal
occupation of the Palestinian territories must end.

Innocent Israeli civilians are also the unfortunate
victims of this spiral of violence and terror brought on
by the policies of their Government. Once again, we
energetically condemn the suicide bombings, as well as
any terrorist act in any form, wherever and by
whomever it may be committed. However, these acts
must not be used as a pretext to question the legitimacy
of the struggle of the Palestinian people against foreign
occupation.

Israel must comply with all Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions on the question of
Palestine and the situation in the Middle East,
including Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). Israel must forthwith shoulder its
obligations and responsibilities under the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War. Israel must
immediately resume negotiations with the Palestinian
Authority.

The Security Council must urgently deploy an
international observer force to protect Palestinian
civilians and the United Nations must assume a real
and effective role in ensuring impartiality in the
negotiations. The very least the Council can do tonight,
given the extreme gravity of the current circumstances,
is to adopt the draft resolution submitted by Tunisia
and Egypt. As has been said, veto number 24 will be
exercised this morning.

Cuba reaffirms its solidarity with Palestine in its
struggle to establish an independent and sovereign
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and for the
return of all occupied Arab territories.

