Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I am pleased to speak on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict, an informal network of 40 interested Member
States that represents all five regional groups at the
United Nations.

The Group of Friends wishes to reiterate its very
strong support for the Children and Armed Conflict
agenda, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, and the
United Nations institutions working to promote the
rights of children in armed conflict worldwide.

On this twentieth anniversary of the creation of
this mandate by the General Assembly, we welcome
the evolution of a stronger normative and institutional
framework on the issue of children and armed conflit.
Today we have robust norms against the recruitment
and use of children and armed conflict, as well as a
growing range of tools to monitor and address all grave
violations against children.

A key element of the success of the children and
armed conflict agenda has been the monitoring and
reporting mechanism established under landmark
resolution 1612 (2005). The mechanism is designed to
document grave violations against children, strengthen
accountability and ensure compliance with international
legal standards in cooperation with national
Governments. It is important that the mechanism be
able to document the existence of grave violations
against children impartially and objectively, based on
facts on the ground. Therefore, the United Nations must
deploy appropriate resources to implement its children
and armed conflict mandate and the mechanism. In that
regard, the Group of Friends calls for the maintenance
of dedicated resources, leadership and expertise in
order to support the child-protection work of United
Nations peace operations and the respective agencies
that are part of the mechanism.

The Group of Friends welcomes the signing of
action plans by all eight countries whose Government
forces have been listed by the Secretary-General as
having recruited and used children in armed conflict,
including, most recently, the Sudan. We also commend
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General's
efforts through the Children, Not Soldiers campaign.
We urge the full and timely implementation of action
plans by Governments and non-State actors alike to halt
and prevent violations against children.

Despite these successes, the Group of Friends
deplores the increase in the intensity of grave violations
against children recorded in several situations ofconflict
in 2015. In particular, we are deeply concerned about
the rise of armed groups employing extreme violence
and their recruitment and use of children. The impact
on children will be felt for generations to come. We
must better consider how to prevent the radicalization
and recruitment of children, how to separate children
from such groups and reintegrate them into their
societies and how to deal with the survivors' long-term
psychological and social implications. Throughout this
process, we must not lose sight of the fact that these
children should be treated as victims, not perpetrators.
Moreover, the prevalence of attacks on and the use of
schools and hospitals for military purposes remains
deeply worrying. The Group of Friends calls on all
parties to protect schools and hospitals by upholding
the provisions of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.

The Group of Friends expresses its profound
concern with regard to the impact of the unprecedented
wave of forced displacement on children. We encourage
Governments to take urgent action to respect the rights
of children forcibly displaced as a result of conflict
and to ensure, in cooperation with the international
community, their protection, access to health and
education and dignified livelihoods for their families.
Moreover, today's armed conflicts are resulting in new
physical and psychological disabilities among children,
which can make them become even more vulnerable
and face a higher risk of becoming victims of violence,
discrimination, abuse and neglect, which requires a
concerted response.

Lastly, the Group of Friends condemns in the

strongest terms ongoing incidents of sexual exploitation
and abuse against children, especially if they are
committed by United Nations forces and staff. We call
on the international community to redouble its efforts
to combat this scourge and welcome recent efforts
undertaken by the United Nations and its States Member
to prevent these grave violations and to provide support
to victims.

(spoke in French)

I would now like to make an additional five points
in my capacity as the representative of Canada.
First is a statement of fact. We are especially
horrified by the emergence of armed groups that employ
extreme violence and recruitment and use children.

Second, we call on Member States to be steadfast
in their support for the children and armed conflict
agenda implemented by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Zerrougui. Ms. Zerrougui has been a
tireless and effective champion. She needs our political
and financial support.

Thirdly, as we have heard many times today,
children represent over half of the 60 million displaced
persons worldwide, and over half of the 23 million
refugees. If we wish to help these children, one of the
simplest ways to do so is to offer them a welcoming land
as soon as possible. That is why Canada is so proud to
have resettled nearly 30,000 Syrian refugees over the
past year. It is also why we feel obligated to welcome
even more. The Obama Summit in September will be
an excellent opportunity for countries to come forward
with commitments to welcoming more refugees and
thereby help a greater number of children.

Fourthly, the United Nations must do more in its
peace operations to help children in situations of armed
conflict. The United Nations must redouble its efforts to
address the scourge of the sexual exploitation and abuse
of children. In that regard, we support the Secretary-
General's commitment to prohibiting Government
armed forces listed in the annexes to his reports on
children and armed conflict from contributing troops
to peacekeeping operations.

(spoke in English)

Fifthly, Member States should strengthen their
promotion of the children and armed conflict agenda.
Building on the success of the Group of Friends of
Children and Armed Conflict in New York, Canada
is supporting the establishment of local branches of
the Group of Friends in Afghanistan, the Philippines,
the Sudan and Geneva. It is our hope that such groups
will raise awareness, exchange views and coordinate
assistance on children and armed conflict issues at the
national and regional levels.

In sum, much work needs to be done. Yet, it is not
enough to deplore the abuses being committed. It is
incumbent upon all Member States to do what they can
to support children in armed conflict, both at home and
abroad. Canada stands ready to play its part in support
of this vital cause.
