Mr. Ipo (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO),
for the quality of her briefing.

We also thank Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi,
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for his excellent work at the head
of that body, and Ms. Justine Masika Bihamba, head
of the the non-governmental organization Synergy of
Women for Victims of Sexual Violence, whose briefing
painted a comprehensive picture of this issue.

Five months ahead of the presidential, legislative
and provincial elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, my delegation welcomes the progress made
by the Independent National Electoral Commission in
the implementation of the electoral process, including
the finalization of the electoral lists and their audit
by the experts of the International Organization
of la Francophonie; the enactment of law on the
distribution of seats in the future Parliament and the
electoral law; the end of the regisatrion period for
provincial elections candidacies; and the opening of the
registration period for candidacies to the presidential
and legislative elections.

My country urges all Congolese political actors to
be part of this positive dynamic by creating conditions
conducive to the holding of peaceful elections, in
accordance with the recommendation of the joint
communique issued at the meeting of the United
Nations Security Council and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, held on 19 July in New
York. Cote d'Ivoire also notes the commitment of the
Congolese authorities to organizing the elections in due
time and to ensure their financing. It encourages them
to take appropriate measures with a view to ensuring the
availability of the necessary resources in order to avoid
delays likely to jeopardize the proper implementation
of the electoral calendar.

Despite the positive momentum that has been
observedintheimplementation ofthe electoraltimetable,
my delegation remains alarmed by the socio-political
and security situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. On the socio-political front, given the opening
of the registration period for presidential election
candidacies, a key stage in the electoral process, my
delegation encourages the Congolese authorities to lift
the prohibition on public demonstrations and to create
political conditions conducive to the expression of
fundamental individual and collective freedoms. This
recommendation is justified by the fact that no incidents
were reported during the public demonstrations
organized by political groups.

C6te d'Ivoire notes also a persistent divergence of
views among the Congolese stakeholders, specifically
rejection of the use of voting machines and the
conclusions of the voter register audit by certain
political parties and civil-society organizations. In this
regard, Cote d'Ivoire strongly encourages the Congolese
authorities, all political actors and the relevant civil-
society organizations jointly to seek satisfactory
compromises so as to ensure the holding of credible and
peaceful elections on 23 December, as planned.

At the security level, the deterioration of the
situation as a consequence of the activities of armed
groups in North and South Kivu and their nefarious
effects on the civilian population, specifically the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation, remain a
source of concern to my delegation. In this context, we
welcome the efforts undertaken by the Congolese armed
forces and MONUSCO to tackle the threat posed by
armed groups. We encourage its forces to further shore
up their joint operations to stabilize those provinces
experiencing insecurity. My delegation further notes
with satisfaction the commitment undertaken by
donors during the 13 April international humanitarian
conference held in Geneva to earmark $528 million in
support of humanitarian operations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
My delegation welcomes the commitment of
MONUSCO, which, in cooperation with the country's
authorities, has been lending technical support to the
Independent National Electoral Commission and has
contributed, thanks to its good offices, to a reduction
in intercommunal tensions in violence-plagued areas.

To conclude, Cote d'Ivoire calls on subregional,
regional and international organizations, specifically
the Southern African Development Community, the
Economic Community of Central African States,
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, the African Union, the European Union, the
International Organization of la Francophonie and the
United Nations to synergize their actions in support of
their support for the implementation of the 31 Decmber
2016 agreement.

