Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): Once again China would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of Belgium, Mr. Philippe Goffin, and is pleased to see you presiding over this meeting. I also thank His Majesty King Philippe of Belgium for his statement. I wish also to thank Secretary-General Guterres, Commissioner Chergui and Ms. Becker for their respective briefings. China welcomes the presidential statement just adopted by the Security Council (S/PRST/2020/3) and appreciates the efforts made by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Childrenand Armed Conflict to promote the development of the practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict. Children represent the future and the hope of our world. They deserve the maximum protection and also happen to be the most vulnerable group. In 1999, the Security Council adopted its first resolution on children and armed conflict (resolution 1261 (1999), which strongly condemned the targeting of children in armed conflict and called on all parties concerned to put an end to such practices. For more than 20 years, the United Nations and the international community have made unremitting efforts to protect children in armed conflict, and this issue has received increasing attention. However, reality indicates that what we have done is still far from enough. Armed conflicts and terrorist activities continue to spread and, as a result, many children have been denied carefree childhoods, and others are struggling in difficult situations of violence, fear, hunger, disease and displacement. The fundamental approach to protecting children from the harm of armed conflict is to stop and resolve armed conflicts. Disputes should be resolved through dialogue and negotiation on an equal footing, and the use or threat of force must be avoided. Greater attention should be paid to conflict prevention and the promotion of peace processes. In this regard, the special needs of children should be fully taken into account so as to ensure that children are free from the harm of conflicts and that their rights, including the right to education, are safeguarded. The Security Council should in full earnest discharge its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security and remain committed to facilitating the political settlement of conflicts through mediation. China firmly supports the Security Council in the fulfilment of its mandate under the Charter of the United Nations and continues to play an active role in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, so as to allow children around the world to grow up ina peaceful, secure and stable environment. The priority now is that countries in conflict should assume primary responsibility for protecting children in armed conflict. All parties to a conflict should prohibit the recruitment and use of child soldiers. The United Nations and the international community should fully respect the leadership of the countries concerned, maintain close communication and _ coordination with them, support their capacity-building, mobilize international resources to address their practical difficulties, such as funding and technology, and promote their effective implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions. Since 2018, within the Framework of the South- South Cooperation Assistance Fund, the Chinese Government has provided financial and _ technical assistance to countries including Somalia, South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to train officials and improve capacity-building in the area of child protection. Those efforts have produced positive results. Going forward, a comprehensive strategy is needed to make the return of children to their families, schools and society a priority in post-conflict reconstruction. Even if children survive conflict, many of them may relapse into tragic situations owing to physical or mental-health issues and lack of education. China calls on the international community and the relevant United Nations agencies to work closely to support post- conflict countries in peaceful reconstruction, economic and social development, as well as the resettlement, demobilization, repatriation and reintegration of former child soldiers, in order to ensure that children have access to basic social services and can enjoy their rights to health and education. Since 2000 China has helped Africa build more than 200 schools. Chinese medical teams have been saving lives and treating children in many parts of Africa, and many touching stories have been told of their devotion. It is worth mentioning in particular that the Chinese peacekeeping contingent deployed to the Democratic Republic of the Congo has been participating in the construction of the SOS Children's Village in the city of Bukavu since 2005. Despite the contingent's rotations over the years, its assistance to local children in the form of providing supplies and medical service has continued uninterrupted. We hope that all countries will provide concrete support and continue to work to help the children of the affected communities and address the practical difficulties that they are facing in their daily lives. China stands ready to work with the international community in the maintenance of international peace and security, improve the situation of children in armed conflict andprovide all children worldwide with a shared future of peace, stability and happiness.
