Mr. Nl'lfiez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We consider this meeting to be very timely, given the
deplorable situation that continues to prevail in the
Middle East. The deterioration of the situation since
the last time that the Security Council met to consider
this topic (see S/PV.6706) is evident. The Middle East
remains marked by instability and insecurity.

Israel's illegal occupation of Palestinian and other
Arab territories remains the main obstacle to achieving
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution for the
region. Israel must immediately end its illegal presence
in the Palestinian territories that it occupies, ignoring

l2-30747
the calls of the international community. It must cease
building settlements in occupied Palestine. It must put
an end to its attacks and the indiscriminate use of
military force against the civilian Palestinian
population, and unconditionally and fully lift the cruel
and illegal blockade of Gaza.

Cuba reiterates its support for Palestine's bid for
full membership of the United Nations. The Security
Council must pronounce itself without further delay in
favour of this matter, as it is the clear desire of the
overwhelming majority of the States Members of this
Organization. If this bid has been unsuccessful to date,
that is because of the threat of veto by one of the
permanent members of the Security Council, despite
the fact that the State of Palestine has already been
formally recognized by over 130 countries from all the
regions of the world.

The situation and humiliations of the more than
4,000 Palestinian political prisoners are unacceptable.
What is the Security Council going to do about this
situation? Why has this body not condemned the
situation immediately and clearly?

Cuba reiterates its rejection of the illegal building
and expansion of Israeli settlements in the Syrian
Golan since 1967, which are violations of international
law, the Charter and United Nations resolutions. We
reiterate our unconditional support for the just demands
and the right of Syria to reinstate its full sovereignty
over the occupied Syrian Golan.

Cuba rejects the policies of interference and
destabilization in the Syrian Arab Republic, which are
aimed at imposing regime change. The Security
Council was not designed to be - nor can it act as -
an instrument to foment regime changes in any
country. The mandate of the Security Council is to
promote peace, not violence. It is to prevent
destabilization and to protect the innocent, not to use
or manipulate them for geopolitical purposes. These
are also the responsibilities of the United Nations as a
whole.

We support the efforts being made to achieve a
peaceful solution to the situation in that country, in full
respect for its sovereign rights. Cuba shares the
concerns regarding the loss of innocent lives in Syria,
as anywhere in the world.

At the same time, we reiterate our categorical
rejection of any form of direct or indirect foreign
intervention, including the provision of logistical
support to irregular armed groups. An intervention by
foreign forces in Syria would have serious
consequences for international peace and security, in
particular in the Middle East. Taking into account recent
experiences and the precedents set as a result - in
which we witnessed the manipulation of the Charter of
the United Nations, the application of double standards
and the flagrant violation of international law - we
reiterate our rejection of any attempt to undermine the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic.

The responsibility of the international community
towards a Member State in these difficult times is to
provide aid in order to uphold peace and stability in
that country. We reaffirm our confidence in the
capacity of the Syrian people and Government to
resolve their internal problems free from foreign
interference. We call for full respect for the
self-determination and sovereignty of that Arab
country.

