The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

The United Kingdom associates itself with the
statement to be made later by the Netherlands on
behalf of the European Union.

I wish to echo the welcome given by other
speakers to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2004/616). I certainly hope that we can use its
recommendations to give momentum to our efforts to
improve the international contribution to building
justice and the rule of law. I believe the report reflects
a concerted effort within the Secretariat to bring
together a broad spectrum of expertise to produce, for
the first time, a single, coherent strategy on justice and
the rule of law. That analysis, I think, is excellent. But,
more important, the recommendations are practical and
achievable.

We, as Security Council members, should be
actively looking for appropriate opportunities to take
forward the recommendations which apply to the
Council. In particular, I believe we need to give due
attention to the restoration of and respect for the rule of
law in the support we give to peace agreements and in
the mandate for peace support operations. There is
already much work being done in that area, and we
welcome the initiatives already under way, some of
which have been described today by other speakers, for
example the ideas from Germany, Canada and Sweden
on spreading the norms and standards of international
law. But we hope that the Secretariat can focus on
bringing these together into a complementary and
cohesive effort.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2004/616)
rightly focuses on the establishment of transitional
justice - that is to say, a framework for a society that
needs to reconcile crimes from the recent past as well
as to build an enduring framework for the future. That,
I think, is one of the most important challenges we
face.

Transitional justice is a necessary part of re-
establishing normal social frameworks. The
international tribunals have been an important learning
curve in that context. We certainly hope that future
initiatives will provide more effective, and less costly,
means of accountability for crimes. And, of course, we
share the Secretary-General's view that the
International Criminal Court offers new hope for a
permanent reduction in the phenomenon of impunity.

In contrast, the rule of law is part of looking
forward and building a stable peace. That is an
essential part of reconstructing post-conflict societies.
But we should also recognize the value of upholding
and strengthening law and order in preventing conflict
and in wider peace support operations. That is a
question not only for the Security Council, but for
other parts of the United Nations system, regional
organizations, individual donors and, of course, non-
governmental organizations and civil society.

I would like to highlight two broad ways in which
the United Nations can take forward the work on the
rule of law.

The first way is to promote international
standards. The United Nations is, critically, in a
position to take an overview of what has worked and
what has not worked in efforts to build the rule of law
in various systems around the world. It can develop
common standards in its own work and, indeed, spread
best practice.

A specific rule-of-law element may not always be
necessary in every United Nations peace support
operation. But it would certainly encourage good
practice to have in place a checklist of the main factors
necessary to build effective judicial and legal
frameworks to be taken into account in each case. The
factors to be considered in United Nations missions
could include, for example, providing advice on
international norms and laws, building frameworks and
regulations for legal institutions, opening accessible
and fair channels of appeal and providing appropriate
training and, critically, the important technical
expertise.

The United Nations itself needs to uphold those
standards too, not just in the programmes and missions
it runs, but also in the management of operations and
the actions of its staff. The responsibility to promote a
fair, free and just society lies with everyone engaged in
the process.

While the United Nations can take a lead in
promoting international standards, the emphasis must
be on building local frameworks, tools and
mechanisms to support justice, law and order. An
internationally imposed solution is not a durable one.
Capacity needs to be built up through the communities
and States that we aim to support. And that -
capacity-building - is the second area on which I
believe the United Nations needs to focus. Importantly,
we need to strengthen civil society's capacity to uphold
the rule of law and to protect individual and group
access to a fair judicial system. The relevant United
Nations bodies should consider how best to support
civil society in that area through consensus-building,
outreach and legal assistance.

I want to highlight in particular the role of
women in that respect and to stress the importance of
ensuring that action to restore human rights and the
rule of law in post-conflict situations is undertaken in a
gender-sensitive way. As the Secretary-General's
report rightly notes, in a post-conflict situation, one of
the major human rights abuses that the international
community will have to face up to is likely to be
gender- and sexual-based violence. That is an issue that
the Council will also consider in the open debate we
will hold on 28 October.

In that context, the United Kingdom was pleased
to participate recently in a conference on gender justice
held by the United Nations Development Fund for
Women in conjunction with the International Legal
Assistance Consortium. The conference produced a
range of interesting recommendations for improved
international action, which I hope all Member States
will consider carefully.

Capacity-building needs to be worked into United
Nations programmes at all stages. At the higher level,
that requires, first and foremost, the political will to
contribute resources and expertise. It also entails
structures within the Secretariat and elsewhere which
are capable both of carrying out planning and
coordination within the United Nations and of building
on the efforts of national donors, regional actors and
non-governmental organizations.

In the field, we need to make sure that there is
coherent and effective integration of justice and rule-
of-law elements within United Nations missions. We
also need to develop our understanding of when and
how these can have the most impact. That means
developing adequate technical expertise and
monitoring mechanisms that can be implemented and
compared across various missions.

In his report, the Secretary-General made several
useful and practical recommendations which we would
encourage the Secretariat to take forward rapidly. In
particular, we would like to see implementation of the
very practical "toolbox" ideas. These include the
following.

The first idea is to convene technical-level
workshops on the rule of law and on transitional justice
experiences from around the world. We would suggest
expanding that idea to ensure that we look at how
supporting legal systems can also play a role in conflict
prevention.

The second idea is to establish arrangements for
creating and maintaining an up-to-date roster of
experts. We might consider whether, in time, such a
database could be developed into an interactive
electronic forum where experts and stakeholders could
discuss particular concepts or problems.

And the third, very important, idea is to organize
staff training programmes on the rule of law and on
transitional justice. We would envisage such training
taking a very broad approach, encompassing, for
example, judges and magistrates, judicial
administration, civil police forces, legal aid workers
and so on.

Many of today's speakers have highlighted other
practical suggestions for taking this work forward. I
believe that, together, we now need to work up policies
which will provide real structures for societies that
currently exist in a fragile framework of law and order
or even exist in the absence of anything that could
meaningfully be called justice. It is clearly important
that we return to this subject to ensure that we are
implementing the proposals on which we have, I
believe, genuinely found broad consensus.

I would therefore propose that the Council might
return to this subject in approximately six months' time
to assess progress and, if necessary, to give renewed

impetus to this agenda. But, for now, I would strongly
urge members of the Security Council and all those
who are participating in today's debate to consider how
they can contribute to taking forward these
recommendations. I believe that we have a developing
consensus and that we need to take this agenda
forward.

I new resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

My game plan was to have all members of the
Security Council make their statements by one o'clock,
and I must say we have accomplished that goal with
one minute to spare. Therefore, I intend, with the
concurrence of members, to suspend the meeting until
3 p.m.

The meeting was suspended at 1pm.
