Mr. Eitel (Germany): Over the past six weeks, the
Security Council has been seized with the serious matter
of the attempted assassination of the President of Egypt,
Hosni Mubarak, on 26 June last year during the Summit
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in Addis
Ababa. My Government has strongly condemned this
terrorist act. It fully supports any measure to apprehend
and bring to justice those who are responsible for the
crime.

As a result of its investigation, the Government of
Ethiopia has sought the extradition of three suspects by
the Government of Sudan. Having sought to settle the
problem first at the bilateral and then at the regional
levels, the Government of Ethiopia finally turned to the
Security Council for support.

The Central Organ of the OAU Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, in its
statement of 19 December 1995, expressed very clearly

 

its conclusion that the Government of Sudan had not
cooperated sufficiently in this matter. As we have seen in
our discussions, this impression is widely shared by
members of the Security Council. We therefore listened
with great interest to the statement that has just been read
out by the representative of Sudan, and we welcome his
remarks regarding the cooperative attitude of his
Government. We shall attentively monitor the actions that
are to implement the promises made.

The action taken by the OAU, and today by the
United Nations Security Council, is a reaction to a terrorist
attack that is Viewed not only by Ethiopia and the
Organization of African Unity, but by many other
Governments, including that of Germany, as an attempt to
disturb peace and security in the region. This criminal act
must not remain unpunished.

The Council's action is complementary to the work
and initiatives already undertaken by the OAU in this
respect. The Council fully supports the role of the regional
organization in this matter. In the text of the draft
resolution before us today, the Council has therefore made
numerous references to the actions and decisions of the
OAU - in particular, by explicitly mentioning in operative
paragraph 4 the requests submitted by the OAU to the
Government of Sudan. This is a position that has been
advocated by Germany throughout our consultations.

We are confident that the intention of this draft
resolution is quite clear to all the parties concerned. Its
purpose is to bring to justice those responsible for a
criminal act which flagrantly violated national and
international law and could have had most serious effects
for the stability of the entire region. We therefore appeal to
the Government of Sudan to fully comply with this
resolution.

Germany will vote in favour of the adoption of the
draft resolution.

