Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia): Allow me to express
the gratitude of the delegation of Indonesia to you,
Mr. President, and to the delegation of China, for
convening this open meeting on the Situation in Timor-
Leste. We acknowledge the presence in our midst today
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor, Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma. We
welcome him back to New York; my Government
certainly has had the privilege of working closely with
him. We thank him for his thoughtful statement to the
Council, which he made earlier. My delegation is also
grateful to the Secretary-General for his report.

As is well known, Indonesia had, even before
Timor-Leste became an independent State last May,
developed a warm and special relationship with the one
hundred and ninety-first Member of our Organization.

It is in this connection that we are pleased to
applaud the progress that Timor-Leste has made since
its independence. As we declared in this Chamber last
May, the Government of Indonesia has supported
UNMISET in the execution of its mandate, and it will
continue to do so. It is our firm belief that progress in
Timor-Leste will require the cooperation of the
members of the international community.

The first meeting, in Jakarta last month, of the
Joint Ministerial Commission for Bilateral
Cooperation, set up by Indonesia and Timor-Leste in
July 2002 to facilitate consultation and cooperation,
marked a further step on the path towards improved
bilateral relations between the Governments of Timor-
Leste and of Indonesia. The Commission established
five working groups to deal with border issues, trade
and finance, legal matters, educational and cultural
affairs and transport and communications.

With particular reference to the complex border
question, both sides agreed to adapt the former Joint
Border Committee of Indonesia and the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
That body's first meeting was originally scheduled for
18 and 19 November 2002, but, because of Ramadan, it
has been rescheduled for 18 and 19 December. The
Committee has been charged with finalizing an
agreement by 30 June 2003. In this connection, it may
be recalled that in April and May 2002, Indonesia and
UNTAET undertook a joint reconnaissance survey
aimed at working towards the delimitation of the land
border between Indonesia and Timor-Leste, including
the enclave. Both nations have also arranged to
commence formal discussions on maritime border
issues by the first half of 2003.

At the regional level, it is also my pleasure to
point out that early last month, Indonesia's South-West
Pacific Dialogue initiative was realized; Timor-Leste is
a founding participant in that process. Its attendance at
Association of South-East Asian Nations meetings
bodes well for the further integration of Timor-Leste
into longer-term relationships with the region.
Indonesia is proud of the modest strides made in its
relationship with Timor-Leste, symbolized by the
creation of the Joint Commission and the holding of the
South-West Pacific Dialogue. To us, such meetings are
a reflection of the mature cooperation between two
sovereign States. I believe such cooperation deserves
the wholehearted support of the Council and the
international community.

I should like now to touch on the issue of
refugees, which has been on the table for some time.
Indonesia expects a comprehensive solution by the end
of this year. Towards that end, my Government will
provide additional incentives for those who opt to
return to Timor-Leste by the end of this year. President
Xanana Gusmao's Visit to East Nusa Tenggara early
this month is also part of the redoubled efforts being
made by Indonesia and Timor-Leste to encourage the
remaining refugees to return.

We take note of the Secretary-General's remarks
concerning the low rate of returns in the past two
months. One of the major impediments is the lack of
the financial support envisaged when the Joint Appeal
by Indonesia and the United Nations was launched last
November. We therefore reiterate the need for the
international community to contribute generously and
fulfil its financial commitments to the Joint Appeal.
Only through concerted efforts by Indonesia, Timor-
Leste and the international community can this
problem be solved expeditiously and comprehensively.

In the area of external security and border
control, we support the assertion in the report that the
overall situation has continued to improve since the
previous report of the Secretary-General was issued.
Efforts by the Governments of Timor-Leste and of
Indonesia in this regard are clearly having the desired
effect, and Indonesia is determined to ensure that
progress does not stop. To this end, the cooperation and
consultation between the Indonesian military in West
Timor and their counterparts in UNMISET will be
maintained. In order to encourage progress on this Vital
issue, however, it is our view that in preparing the
reports of the Secretary-General, efforts must be made
to avoid using terminology or making references that
do not reflect the situation in the field. If there are
criminal elements in the border area, for instance, they
should be characterized as such. Of course, criminal
activities are common problems and need common
efforts.

While Indonesia pursues these avenues of
bilateral and multilateral cooperation in support of the
young State, there is tremendous room for the
international community at large to support these
efforts. In this connection, we draw attention to the
appeal of the Secretary-General to the Security Council
and the donor community to remain engaged in Timor-
Leste, to build upon their outstanding contribution to
date and to fully realize this promise. Not only will
such a commitment enable UNMISET to adhere to the
timetable that has been set, but it will enable the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste to make the
kind of steady progress that they badly need.
Meanwhile, Indonesia will continue to stand by them
and to provide its assistance and encouragement.

Finally, we would like once again to reiterate that
the relationship between the two countries has been
flourishing extremely well at all levels, and therefore
we urge the members of the international community,
as well as the United Nations, to support this.

