Baroness Amos (United Kingdom): May I first
express my appreciation to the presidency of the
Government of Mauritius and in particular to you, Sir,
for the initiative and effort which has been put into
organizing this Security Council debate on conflict in
Africa.

We need such debates in order to maintain the
focus of the world's attention on African conflicts,
even amid other fast-moving events, and to keep
pressing for better solutions to a very grave problem.
This is the second consecutive African presidency of
the Council, and we welcome the hard work that both
Mali and Mauritius have done in keeping the issue of
conflict in Africa high on the international agenda,
where, unfortunately, it needs to be.

I say "unfortunately" because violent conflict in
Africa is bad for Africa and bad for the world. Not only
is it one of the main obstacles to reducing poverty,
upholding human rights and achieving sustainable
development in Africa; it is also a threat to global
security. Why? Because armed conflict in Africa has
led to large-scale displacement of people and
environmental degradation and provides opportunities
for international criminal and terrorist activities.
Conflict in Africa has the potential to affect all of us. It
is therefore one of the major challenges of international
relations in our time and a special challenge for the
Security Council.

The scope of political violence in Africa is
breathtaking. Armed conflicts in Angola, the Sudan
and Somalia, where numerous peacekeeping and
peacemaking efforts have failed, are now all but
ignored. In those war-ravaged nations millions have
been condemned to despair and misery. In the Great
Lakes region, a dozen African nations have in one way
or another been sucked into a series of interlocking
conflicts since the mid-1990s. And there are many
other countries affected by or at risk of violent conflict.

But there are some positive signs. Thanks in large
measure to the work of the Security Council and the
United Nations Secretariat, progress has been made in
the past 18 months in restoring peace and security to
Sierra Leone, where the United Kingdom has also
played a major role. Hostilities between Ethiopia and
Eritrea, which claimed the lives of many thousands,
have also been brought to a close. And there are
serious efforts under way, involving regional States and
the United Nations, to tackle the biggest challenge of
all - the conflicts in the Great Lakes region.

The United Kingdom welcomes this progress and
salutes the men and women who have made it possible,
particularly those United Nations peacekeepers who
have made the ultimate sacrifice in the pursuit of peace
and security in Africa. Much of this progress has been
made possible by the willingness of the Security
Council to learn from the failures of earlier
peacekeeping efforts.

The report of the United Nations Panel on Peace
Operations - the Brahimi report - is a valuable
synthesis of those lessons learned. Its far-reaching
recommendations are a road map for reform of the way
the United Nations goes about the complex task of
tackling conflict in Africa and elsewhere. We welcome
and support the current programme of implementation
of the Brahimi report recommendations.

We do indeed need new approaches in order to
deal with the changing and diverse nature of violent
conflict in Africa. Classic peacekeeping doctrine and
conflict diplomacy have been shown to be ineffective
tools in dealing with the asymmetric and increasingly
regional conflicts that have emerged around collapsed
and failed States, where distinctions between State and
non-State actors have become blurred.

In many African societies, national and regional
conflict has become the "normal" state of affairs.
Complex and abusive political economies, which often
hide behind the outward symbols of statehood and
national sovereignty, have grown up around conflict,
feeding off it and fuelling it. Regional and international
rivalries have tended to exacerbate and prolong
violence.

The challenge therefore for the Security Council
and the wider international system is not just to prevent
or end hostilities in conflict zones. It is far greater than
that. We need to help transform regional and national
political economies that are conditioned by violent
conflict into healthy systems based on political
participation, social and economic inclusion, respect
for human rights and the rule of law.

The task is a big one. It requires political
commitment to provide the necessary human and
financial resources to do the job. It requires refinement
and adaptation of the instruments and mechanisms at
our disposal. It requires precise coordination of the
work of the many different actors and organizations
involved, African and non-African, within and outside
of the United Nations system.

One area where we feel more progress could be
made in this respect is in increasing the conflict
prevention capacity of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), or African Union, and of African
subregional organizations, like the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). This is
partly a question of strengthening these organizations'
ability to engage effectively in conflict analysis and
early warning, conflict mediation, monitoring and
verification of ceasefires and, in some cases, regional
peace support operations. But it is also a question of
deepening effective cooperation on conflict issues
between these organizations and the United Nations
through more regular consultations, information-
sharing and joint projects. For this reason, we welcome
the Mauritian proposal to establish a working group to
look at new ways of improving relations between the
United Nations and the OAU.

A Security Council working group tasked with
finding imaginative solutions to the problem of conflict
in Africa could have real added value. As we see it,
such a group would have a special emphasis on
improving and deepening the Security Council's
relations with the OAU, ECOWAS, SADC and perhaps
other subregional organizations. But it needs to have a
clear mandate designed to produce concrete and
deliverable outcomes within a specific time frame. In
the first instance, we would like to see such a working
group work with the OAU and Africa's subregional
bodies to strengthen their conflict prevention capacity
and enhance cooperation between them and the United
Nations. I know that Mr. Amara Essy, the OAU
Secretary-General, will have these points very much in
mind as part of the current restructuring of the
organization.

Involvement of African regional organizations is
one way of encouraging African ownership of conflict
solutions, a concept that underlies the recently
launched New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD).

In response to NEPAD, G-8 leaders last year
commissioned a G-8 Africa action plan. They also
nominated special representatives - I am the
representative for the United Kingdom - to draw up
the plan in time for the next G-8 Summit in Canada,
later this year.

How can we use the G-8 Africa dialogue to
promote conflict prevention and resolution in Africa?
We see the dialogue as an opportunity to underline that
both the richer nations of the world and Africans have
important responsibilities.

On the one hand, we hope to use the dialogue to
encourage African nations to tackle the indigenous
causes of conflict in Africa, such as political, economic
and social exclusion, poor governance, corruption, and
so on.

On the other hand, the G-8 can help Africa
achieve these goals by tackling some of the causes and
drivers of conflict that lie in the international sphere,
such as the unfavourable terms of economic exchange
between Africa and the West, the export of small arms
and light weapons to conflict-prone regions and the
exploitation of economic resources by external actors.
We also need to use the dialogue to mobilize resources
and commitment to improving United Nations conflict
management systems.

As I said earlier, it is very useful that the Council
has had an opportunity over the last two months to take
a sustained look at its work on Africa, both the
individual conflicts and the generic issues. The next
African presidency of the Council will not be for some
time, but I would like to announce that the United
Kingdom will use its presidency in July to give a
further African focus to the Council's work. One
possibility is a meeting devoted to African issues as a
whole, which could include a review of the work we
are starting today.

Violent conflict in Africa is our joint failure.
Africa is already living with the consequences of this
failure. Violent conflict not only breeds suffering and
misery, it also breeds further violent conflict. The
cycle, once entrenched, is hard to break.

However, I believe that Africans, their
international partners and the United Nations have it in
their power to build strong African nations and regions
by resolving political differences and conflicts through
peaceful and inclusive processes. That requires that
political leaders and international diplomats recognize
that conflict prevention is ultimately about the
establishment of tolerant, democratic and inclusive
political systems. We have learned the lessons of
conflict in Africa; let us now apply them with courage
and determination.

