Mr. Pahad (South Africa): We thank Brazil,
which holds the presidency of the Security Council, for
having convened this important meeting to consider the
situation in Cote d'Ivoire.

We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his fourth progress report on the United
Nations Operation in cote d'Ivoire. The report
identifies progress, as well as some concerns. The
concerns expressed are inevitable in any conflict
situation and must be looked at in the context of the
overall efforts and progress made.

We should recall that the current crisis in C6te
d'Ivoire began a decade ago when the leader of one of
the Ivorian political parties, former Prime Minister
Alassane Ouattara of the Rally of the Republicans
(RDR), was prohibited from standing as a candidate
during the 1995 presidential elections. As a result, the
current President of C6te d'Ivoire and leader of the
Front populaire ivoirien (FPI) decided not to contest
those presidential elections. That combination of
circumstances meant that a significant section of the
Ivorian population had reservations about the
legitimacy of the Government formed after the 1995
elections.

That initiated a political crisis that led to the
25 December 1999 coup d'etat - the first in that
country's history as an independent country. The
presidential and parliamentary elections of 2000 did
not resolve the crisis but, arguably, served to further
entrench it. That was because, among other things, the
elections excluded Alassane Ouattara and former
President Henri Bedie, leader of the Democratic Party
of cote d'Ivoire-African Democratic Rally (PDCI- RDA), from the presidential elections. That resulted in
the boycott of the parliamentary elections by the RDR.
Furthermore, they were characterized by low voter
participation.

The situation worsened radically when a coup
d'etat was attempted in September 2002, which
resulted in the division of the country into two parts,
with the south being controlled by the Government and
the north by the rebel forces, the Forces nouvelles.

In January 2003, the various political forces of
Cote d'Ivoire, including the Government, concluded an
agreement at Linas-Marcoussis, France, which spelled
out various steps intended to end the Ivorian crisis.

Prior to that, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) had also been involved in
sustained efforts to help resolve the problems of Cote
d'Ivoire, a State member of that Economic Community.
The United Nations subsequently joined ECOWAS in
that process, after the Security Council set up the
United Nations Mission in Cote d'Ivoire (MINUCI) in
May 2003, which was subsequently replaced by
UNOCI as from 4 April 2004.

Concerned that by July 2004 none of these
various interventions had produced any satisfactory
result, the Secretary-General, Mr. Annan, acting in
cooperation with the then Chairperson of ECOWAS,
President Kufuor, convened a meeting in Accra at the
end of that month.

On 19 October 2004, two and a half months after
Accra III, the Secretary-General expressed serious
concern about the failure of the Ivorian parties to meet
the deadlines contained in the Accra III Agreement.
ECOWAS echoed this statement a few days later,
stating that it "fully shares the views expressed by the
UN Secretary-General, Kofi Annan".

Following the expression of those legitimate
concerns, the situation in Cote d'Ivoire seemed to
move even further away from a resolution of the crisis
addressed during the Accra meeting and the
implementation of the Accra III Agreement.

This was caused by the unacceptable attacks
carried out by the Ivorian Air Force against the Forces
nouvelles from 4 to 6 November 2004, which included
the apparently accidental bombing of the positions of
Licorne and the death of a number of French soldiers.
French soldiers, in turn, destroyed some military planes
belonging to the Ivorian forces.

We were faced with a situation in which "young
patriots" were out in the streets in their thousands, and
foreigners were being evacuated from Cote d'Ivoire.
The airport in Abidjan was closed down. Business
premises were destroyed and some houses were
attacked. There was shooting outside the Hotel Ivoire.

It was in the light of all of those developments
immediately preceding and following the November
events, and of the fact that the peace process in cote
d'Ivoire seemed to have reached a cul-de-sac, that the
Chairperson of the African Union (AU), President
Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria, asked President Mbeki
of South Africa to act as the mediator of the AU to
expedite the Ivorian peace process within the context
of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.

Understanding the urgency of the matter,
President Mbeki acted immediately in response to the
request of the AU Chairperson. Accordingly, he visited
Abidjan on 9 November 2004, even as the city was in
the grip of a serious security crisis following the events
of 4 to 6 November.

That sense of urgency continues to inform the
activities of the AU mediation, especially given the
need to hold the next presidential elections as planned
in October this year, and the fact of the deteriorating
socio-economic situation in Cote d'Ivoire.

After considering the interventions that had been
made since 2002 to resolve the Ivorian crisis, and
having engaged the entire spectrum of the Ivorian
political leadership in discussion, the AU mediation
arrived at the following conclusions. It concluded,
first, that, as mandated, it should seek a solution of the
Ivorian crisis within the framework of the Linas-
Marcoussis and the Accra II and III Agreements;
secondly, that it should work out a road map with
specific time frames, indicating a variety of steps that
would have to be taken to put the Ivorian peace process
back on course; and thirdly, that all the Ivorian parties
should agree to those propositions and thus commit
themselves to a peaceful and negotiated resolution of
the Ivorian crisis.

It is our View - and we wish to confirm this to
the Security Council - that the continuing efforts of
the mediation are based on the acceptance of these
fundamental propositions by all the Ivorian parties.

As the Security Council knows - and as is
normal in any situation of protracted conflict, such as
that in Cote d'Ivoire - deep-seated mistrust among the
Ivorian leaders continues to hamper the advance
towards the resolution of the Ivorian crisis.

We therefore consider it of cardinal importance
that, despite the differences among them, Ivorian
leaders are at least united behind the three fundamental
propositions we have mentioned, without which it
would be impossible to arrive at a peaceful and
negotiated solution of the Ivorian crisis.

We would also like to emphasize this point
because it is clear that the peace settlement in Cote
d'Ivoire requires the cooperation and involvement of
all the Ivorian leaders. It is therefore vitally important
that we operate on the basis of the principle and
practice of inclusion rather than that of exclusion.

This is especially important given that the
ideology and practice of exclusion lie at the very heart
of the Ivorian crisis. Accordingly, that crisis cannot be
solved on the basis of the exclusion or marginalization
of any of the players that Cote d'Ivoire needs to arrive
at a lasting settlement.

Needless to say, that does not mean that any of
those players has a right wilfully to obstruct or block
progress towards such a settlement. It is therefore
centrally important that the Security Council and the
African Union have the possibility of imposing
effective sanctions against any of those players who
might act wilfully to deny the people of Cote d'Ivoire
their right to peace, democracy and development.

We appreciate the fact that the Security Council
is fully conscious of the factors that led to the Ivorian
crisis, including factors we have not mentioned.
Nevertheless, we must emphasize the distinguishing
feature of contemporary C6te d'Ivoire - that it is
home to many African national groups, some of which
originate from neighbouring countries.

Pervasive poverty makes it inevitable that the
struggle for access to economic resources and
opportunities must be a distinct feature of African
politics. The liberal policies implemented by C6te
d'Ivoire since independence, combined with regional
developments during the colonial period, resulted in
the emergence of a cosmopolitan population in Cote
d'Ivoire.

Consequently, a significant proportion of that
population, of different generations, originates from
neighbouring countries. As has happened in many
other countries elsewhere in the world, in conditions of
relative economic hardship, xenophobic tensions arise.
In Cote d'lvoire, this has found expression in the

,,,

concept of "ivoirite .

As the Security Council knows, arriving at a
fundamental and long-term solution of the Ivorian
crisis requires that Cote d'Ivoire successfully address a
whole range of matters, including issues that bear on
nationality, political rights, the land question and
coexistence in a multicultural, multi-ethnic and multi-
religious society.

All of this means that the understandable concern
to address immediate issues, which might be symptoms
of more fundamental problems, should not lead to
short-term solutions that would then make it more
difficult to arrive at solutions addressing the more
long-term, and therefore more fundamental, problems
of Ivorian society.

Both the African Union and the United Nations
have an obligation to pursue efforts to resolve the
Ivorian crisis with sober minds and to resist the
temptation to arrive at short-term solutions that
disguise the real problems and therefore create the
basis for an even more intractable crisis in future.

The African Union mediation is preoccupied with
all these considerations and is working on the basis of
the interconnection between the short- and long-term
interests of the Ivorian people. In that regard, we
sincerely hope that the United Nations and all those
interested in the future of Cote d'Ivoire will not allow
for an unbalanced approach to the short-, medium- and
long-term interests of the Ivorian people.

We believe that the Security Council is in
possession of the reports that the AU mediation has
submitted to the Chairperson of the AU, especially the
third report of 9 December 2004, which goes into
greater detail about some of the points I have been
making.

Our road map is attached to the report. We
continue to pursue that road map with the Ivorian
parties as the only available route towards the
settlement of the Ivorian crisis.

We would also like to take advantage of this
opportunity to thank all those who contributed to the
elaboration of the road map. As the Security Council is
aware, President Mbeki asked representatives of
various institutions to join his delegation when he
visited Cote d'Ivoire last December. Accordingly, his
delegation included representatives of the Secretary-
General, the AU, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the European Union, the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. The
road map to which we have referred was drawn up by
that delegation jointly, rather than by the AU mediation
on its own.

The AU mediation was pleased that the important
institutions we have just mentioned were able to take
joint ownership of the programme of action that
emerged from a five-day process of detailed
consultations with the Ivorian parties.

Apart from anything else, all of this confirmed
the importance of the follow-up mechanisms provided
for in the Linas-Marcoussis and Accra III Agreements,
and the obvious need for the AU mediation to work
together with those mechanisms.

With the Council's permission, we will now
proceed to speak of the progress and problems we have
experienced with regard to the implementation of the
road map - copies of which we believe have been
distributed to each member of the Security Council.
But, first, we would like to draw the attention of the
Security Council to some principled conclusions.

In general, the AU mediation believes that
significant progress has been made with regard to the
adoption of the legislation prescribed by the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement. We will report further on this
issue.

The constitutional text of article 35 agreed at
Linas-Marcoussis, relating to the matter of eligibility
for the presidency, has been adopted by the National
Assembly by a majority than is even larger than that
prescribed by the Constitution of Cote d'Ivoire.
However, the process of amending the Ivorian
Constitution in that regard has not been finalized.

In that respect, we must make the observation
that the Ivorian Constitution requires that all
amendments on matters affecting the election of the
President of the Republic be approved by referendum.
No provision exists in the Ivorian Constitution that
would exclude article 35 from this stricture.

As indicated in the Accra III Agreement, it is
possible to override the constitutional provisions with
regard to article 35, provided that exceptional
circumstances in cote d'Ivoire make it physically
impossible to hold a referendum.

The AU mediation believes that it is necessary to
get the collective View of the Ivorian political
leadership to arrive at an optimal position for the
finalization of the article 35 matter, in both the
immediate and the long-term interests of Cote d'Ivoire.
The AU mediation is therefore taking the necessary
steps in this regard.

We believe also that the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process should
start as soon as the regroupment or assembly sites have
been prepared, to enable them to receive members of
the National Armed Forces of Cote d'Ivoire (FANCI)
and the Forces nouvelles. Some concern has been
expressed about the commitment to start the DDR
process, especially on the part of the Forces nouvelles.
The mediation position on this matter is that we should
accept the expressed willingness of the Forces
nouvelles to go into regroupment sites. Our task is to
ensure that the DDR sites in the north are ready, and
later we will indicate the progress that has been made
in that regard.

We believe that the Government of National
Reconciliation - the principal State institution
responsible for the implementation of the various
transitional measures leading up to the presidential and
parliamentary elections later this year - is still not
functioning effectively. This is due in part to the
continuing non-participation in that Government of the
ministers of the Forces nouvelles. They have cited
security reasons, which we will deal with later.

Various problems persist with regard to the
general political situation, which undermine the peace
process in Cote d'Ivoire. For example, this was
manifested in the recent unacceptable events in the
western part of the country, when an armed group from
the south crossed the zone of confidence, in violation
of the ceasefire, which resulted in a number of people
being killed. The western part of cote d'Ivoire has a
long history of conflict that could be exploited. Close
attention will have to be paid to some of the underlying
causes of conflict. The Forces nouvelles informed the
mediation about possible new attacks on its positions,
and the mediation immediately communicated that
information to UNOCI.

As we have already indicated, the AU mediation
and the Ivorian parties are committed to the holding of
the presidential elections in October, as scheduled,
notwithstanding some technical matters that have to be
dealt with. The mediation is therefore ready to engage
the electoral calendar that the Prime Minister has
drawn up, which is targeted at ensuring that the
elections this year are held as scheduled.

The Forces nouvelles and the G-7 opposition
parties have called for the United Nations to play a
bigger role in the conduct of the elections. The
mediator raised that matter with President Gbagbo
during the December 2004 visit, and the President
indicated that he would welcome such assistance. What
remains is for the United Nations to indicate how such
a role may be defined. The Ivorian parties need
assistance with ideas and proposals regarding what is
possible; they are not themselves able to make specific
proposals. The mediator has communicated that request
to the United Nations Secretariat and awaits its urgent
response.

The AU mediation is also concerned that the
necessary steps should be taken to ensure the unity,
peace and stability of Cote d'Ivoire after the
completion of the stage of the transitional period that
will conclude with the presidential and parliamentary
elections this year. However, the mediation is fully
aware of the reality that, in order to get to the situation
when, after the elections, practical steps can be taken
in that regard, it is vitally important that the road map
be implemented in a manner - and within time
frames - that will ensure that credible elections are
held later this year, as planned.

To resolve the outstanding challenges with regard
to the implementation of the road map and to ensure
further movement towards a lasting peace in Cote
d'Ivoire, a critical meeting between President Mbeki
and the principal political leaders of Cote d'Ivoire will
take place in South Africa in six days' time, on 3 April
2005. The AU mediation will be honoured to report to
the AU, to the Security Council and to the Ivorian
people about the outcome of that immensely important
meeting.

Let me now briefly address some of the matters
on which I said I would brief the Council at this stage.

With regard to the legislative report, the parties
agreed that the mediation should constitute a legal
team that would make a determination about the
compliance of adopted legislation with the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement. The mediation constituted a
team of lawyers from Burundi, Rwanda and South
Africa. That team travelled to Cote d'Ivoire and had
extensive interaction with the Ivorian parties. The team
then submitted its determination to the mediator, who
accepted its findings. A copy of the legal report is
attached to the text of my presentation for the
information of Security Council members.

Generally, the findings of the legal team confirm
that significant progress has been made in relation to
that part of the Agreements. Although there were
differences among the parties on the appropriate
legislative texts, such differences related mainly to the
interpretation of Linas-Marcoussis rather than to a
reluctance to implement the Agreements. There are
areas in which the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement is not
totally in line with prevailing international practice,
such as with respect to the composition of a human
rights commission. The legal team's mandate, however,
was not to improve Linas-Marcoussis or to bring it in
line with current international practice, but to interpret
it strictly.

The findings of the legal team have been
presented to the Ivorian parties and have largely been
well received. Some of the parties have indicated that
they still wish to raise some political issues arising out
of the legal report.

On disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR), there has been little progress. One
complaint from the Forces nouvelles is that the
Government of National Reconciliation has no
comprehensive plan for the restructuring of the new
defence force in cote d'Ivoire. The mediation has
urged the Prime Minister to ensure that such a
comprehensive plan is adopted by the Government.
The Prime Minister has initiated a programme leading
to such adoption.

The Forces nouvelles have also raised the
concern that they fear being attacked once they move
their forces into the DDR sites. To assist in that regard,
the mediation has proposed that an African country be
approached to supply additional forces to UNOCI with
a view to securing Forces nouvelles DDR sites. Such a
force would be under the control of UNOCI but would
be deployed to ensure security around Forces nouvelles
sites. The Forces nouvelles have assured the mediation
that they are ready to start the DDR process. They have
indicated that they have initiated a month-long
sensitization process to prepare their forces for DDR.
The Secretary-General of the Forces nouvelles has
stated that he has issued an instruction to that effect.

The main challenge related to DDR is that the
regroupment areas in the north are not ready. The
mediation has been part of a team of experts from
UNOCI and the National Commission for
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration that
has been conducting inspection of such areas with a
view to determining how best to expedite the
rehabilitation of sites in the north. The National Armed
Forces of Cote d'Ivoire have also indicated that they
are ready to start DDR once the preparations can be
completed.

With regard to the functioning of the Government
of National Reconciliation, we stress once again that
the Government is not functioning properly. The main
problem in that regard, as I have indicated, is that
ministers from the Forces nouvelles have raised
concerns about their security in Abidjan. Some South
African security experts Visited Cote d'Ivoire recently
to assist in resolving that matter. The experts have now
prepared a comprehensive security plan, which will be
presented to the Ivorian parties at the meeting
scheduled for 3 April.

The AU mediation would like to take advantage
of this meeting of the Security Council to sincerely
thank the Council and the United Nations as a whole
for their sustained interest in the speedy resolution of
the Ivorian crisis. We request that the Council remain
seized of this question. We also request that the
Security Council be prepared expeditiously to take
such decisions as may be necessary to empower
UNOCI and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to help secure a peaceful resolution
of the Ivorian crisis. We welcome the Secretary-
General's recommendation regarding the emergency
deployment of an additional 1,226 troops.

In that context, we are privileged to make the
solemn commitment that the AU and its mediation will
cooperate fully with the Security Council, the
Secretary-General and other United Nations
institutions and personnel to bring lasting peace to
Cote d'Ivoire as a matter of urgency. We also trust that,
in their conduct, the United Nations and all its
institutions and agencies will respect and support the
peoples of Africa, represented by the African Union, as
they strive to find an African solution to the eminently
African problem of the Ivorian crisis.

We therefore appeal to the Security Council
sincerely to coordinate its future actions on Cote
d'Ivoire with the African Union in the interest of
genuine peace, stability and development in a united
Cote d'Ivoire. The African Union understands, respects
and supports the global responsibilities of the United
Nations and of the Security Council on various matters,
including the central matter of international peace and
security. The Union is also firmly committed to its own
responsibilities with regard to the future of Africa and
therefore to the elimination of all threats to
international peace and security that emanate from our
continent.

We believe that those considerations provide a
firm basis for a properly structured relationship
between the United Nations Security Council and the
AU Peace and Security Council, which would further
reinforce global progress towards world peace and
lasting universal stability. The African Union is ready
to do everything it can to ensure that Africa contributes
to such outcomes.

We would also like to assure the members of the
Security Council, both singly and collectively, that the
African Union is unreservedly determined to help
resolve the Ivorian crisis within the context of the
parameters we have indicated in this Statement. We
look forward to effective cooperation between the
United Nations and the AU in that regard.

We thank you, Mr. President, the other members
of the Security Council and the Secretary-General for
the opportunity you have given to the AU mediation on
Cote d'lvoire to address this body. We fully understand
that there are many problems that we must overcome.
But, if we deal with the broader, major, overall
challenges, then the other problems can be dealt with
more effectively. We therefore look forward to working
together with the Council much more closely in the
coming period.

