Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank the United Kingdom for taking the
initiative to convene this open debate on the situation
in Somalia. I also wish to welcome Mr. Bellingham,
Under Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, for
chairing today's meeting. I wish to thank the Secretary-
General Ban Ki-Moon and his Special Representative
for Somalia, Mr. Mahiga, for their briefings.

At present, the peace process in Somalia has
shown positive momentum. The implementation of the
road map to end the transition has made progress. The
second Somali National Consultative Constitutional
Conference was successfully convened. Relevant
military actions are constantly making progress. The
humanitarian situation in Somalia has significantly
improved. China welcomes those developments.

In the meantime, we note that the peace process
in Somalia remains an uphill battle. Some key tasks for
the transitional period have yet to be completed. The
tendency of some factions towards extremism and
terrorism has grown. The humanitarian situation in
Somalia remains fragile and calls for greater efforts on
the part of the relevant parties in Somalia and the
international community as a whole.

The achievement of national reconciliation is the
ultimate means to the restoration of peace and stability
in Somalia. We hope that the relevant parties in
Somalia can seize the current favourable conditions,
further strengthen unity and reconciliation, and
actively promote and implement the Transitional
Federal Charter, the Djibouti Agreement, the Kampala
Accord and the Garowe Principles. We hope that they
can comprehensively implement the road map and end
the transitional period on time. We hope that the
Transitional Federal Institutions of Somalia can further
build their capacities and undertake, as soon as
possible, effective governance over the entire country.
We hope that the relevant factions in Somalia can
forsake violence and terrorism and join the peace
process.

Recently, the international community has been
increasing its attention to and investment in the issue
of Somalia. International regional organizations, such
as the United Nations, the African Union (AU) and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
have stepped up their mediation efforts. The Security
Council adopted resolution 2036 (2012), which raised
the authorized troop level of and the support for the
African Union Mission in Somalia. Troop-contributing
countries such as Uganda, Burundi and Kenya have
made important contributions to and sacrifices for the
maintenance of stability in Somalia. Recently, the
London conference on Somalia was successfully
convened. We welcome its success.

China calls on the international community to
continue its efforts in the following areas in order to
promote the Somali peace process. It must, first,
strengthen the political process and support the
mediation efforts of the United Nations, AU and
IGAD, and encourage relevant parties in Somalia to

substantially implement the road map; secondly,
reinforce logistical support to improve the governance
of the Transitional Federal Government and implement
resolution 2036 (2012) in a timely and comprehensive
manner; and thirdly, enhance humanitarian relief and
continue to help Somalia improve its humanitarian
situation. We hope that the international community
can further enhance coordination and honour its
commitments in order to make due contributions to the
realization of lasting peace in Somalia.

