Mr. Davide (Philippines): The Philippines
welcomes this open debate on the important issue of
children and armed conflict and congratulates and
commends you, Mr. President, and the members of the
Council for organizing it. Through it we may find
lasting solutions and establish effective and durable
measures that will prevent and eliminate the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflicts. The
full text of my statement will be circulated; I shall
deliver an abbreviated version.

Each of us was a child. If we had not been loved,
cared for and protected at that time, we would not have
been here today. No one may successfully argue
against the proposition that children are the best and
most valuable treasure of every nation of the world.
The Philippines' greatest national hero, Dr. Jose Rizal,
enthrones children as the hope of the nation. It follows
without saying that the abuse of children or denial of
their rights is the destruction of the nation's hope and

future and the dissolution of any promise for its
progress.

Thus, the Philippines places utmost importance
on children. The Constitution of the Philippines makes
the child the core of the Filipino family. It recognizes
the vital role of young people in nation-building and
directs the State to promote and protect their physical,
moral, spiritual, intellectual and social well-being and
to defend the right of children to assistance and
provide them special protection from all forms of
neglect, abuse, cruelty, exploitation and other
conditions prejudicial to their development.

The Philippines has a vast arsenal of statutes on
the rights of or concerning the protection of children,
such as the Family Code, the Child and Youth Welfare
Code and, more important, Republic Act No. 7610,
otherwise known as An Act Providing for Stronger
Deterrence and Special Protection Against Child
Abuse, Exploitation and Discrimination. Apropos the
issue at hand, that act includes provisions prohibiting
the use of children in armed combat and protecting
them from armed conflict. It establishes children as
"zones of peace" and provides for the evacuation of
children during armed conflict. In that regard, pursuant
to Executive Order No. 56, which was issued in 2001
by President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, the Philippines
has established a comprehensive programme
framework for children involved in armed conflict,
which is implemented by 18 Government agencies with
the active participation of civil society.

The Philippines is a State party to international
agreements for the protection of the rights of children.
More relevantly, it has ratified the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict. At the
regional level, in 2001 the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations adopted a declaration of commitment on
children.

The adverse effects of conflict on children are
immeasurable and will affect them throughout their
lives. Often, those effects lead to the destruction of
their frail and still developing psyches, cause
unspeakable mental anguish and, in the worst cases,
bring about their untimely and undeserved deaths. The
Philippines is fully aware of the need to rectify that
situation as soon as possible, as well as to stop the
torment of child soldiers and to reintegrate and
rehabilitate the unfortunate children thus affected.

The Philippines has exerted vigorous efforts in
that regard and is continuing to take the most effective
action in cooperation with all stakeholders. Our
positive efforts have been recognized by the
international community, with the United Nations
having cited and commended the very high standard of
the legal framework in the Philippines, which
effectively protects children. The Organization has also
cited the Philippines' positive and constructive
cooperation with the United Nations on the issue of
children and armed conflict, in particular as regards the
establishment of a monitoring and reporting
mechanism.

The Philippines would once again like to
underscore its avowed policy to consider children as
zones of peace, as I mentioned earlier. Moreover, the
Government is doing all it can to prevent and eliminate
the recruitment and exploitation of Filipino children in
armed conflicts. Furthermore, many children involved
in armed conflicts because of non-State actors have
been rescued, rehabilitated and reintegrated into their
families and communities by the Department of Social
Welfare and Development.

A recent development worthy of note is the
review being conducted by the Philippine Government
to include provisions relating to children in armed
conflict in the ongoing peace negotiations with the
Communist Party of the Philippines-New People's
Army and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front. That is
consistent with moves to mainstream the issue vis-a-vis
those two non-State actors, in particular in the context
of the peace process. It must be stressed, however, that
the Philippines reserves the exclusive right to deal with
non-State actors in the Philippines.

Another development in the Philippines is the
continuing work being done by the Inter-Agency
Committee on Children Involved in Armed Conflict
pursuant to the comprehensive programme framework
to which I referred earlier. The Committee has
organized dialogue workshops with frontline service
providers. The project hinges on the three priority areas
of the Committee, namely, first, improving monitoring
and reporting of the Committee's cases; secondly,
improving institutional coordination; and, thirdly,
effectively rehabilitating and reintegrating into the
community children affected by armed conflict.

The strength of the legal protection afforded to
children in the Philippines, the comprehensive and
coordinated activities of the Government to protect,
rehabilitate and reintegrate children affected by armed
conflict and our excellent cooperation with the United
Nations, which has brought about positive changes on
the ground and resulted in increased protection and
safety for children, constitute key indicators of
progress. In the light of those measures, the Philippines
recommends that the Security Council seriously
consider ways of evaluating progress in the protection
of children affected by conflict. In doing so, the
Council would conclude that the Philippines can be
dropped from the list of countries included in annex II
of the reports of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005). Due
process now supports such a course of action.

The removal of the Philippines from the list
would be a signal triumph vis-a-vis my country's
commitment to doing justice to the children caught up
in armed conflict, and to their loved ones. It would
equally be a victory for the United Nations and would
further encourage the Security Council to focus on
other countries in dire need of help. It does not take a
leap of the imagination to realize that there are more
children in other places who are at risk or who are
being deprived their rights, their futures and even their
lives due to more serious causes than armed conflicts.

In conclusion, the Philippines wishes to reiterate
its appreciation for the importance that the Security
Council attaches to the issue of children and armed
conflict. We assure the Council of our continuing
cooperation on this issue. The Philippines would again
like to place on the record that it looks forward to the
visit of Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, in order that she can see for
herself the relative calm and peace that prevail in my
country and can see that it is not in a dire situation of
armed conflict.

