Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Madam
President, like other colleagues, I would like to warmly
congratulate you, on behalf of my delegation, on the
way you have conducted the business of the Council
during the month of November. Re-reading the
programme of work that you so perfectly executed
shows that you have achieved the objectives that you
spelled out at the beginning of the month, as related in
the document that you kindly made available to us. We
congratulate you once again on this.

The Council held consultation meetings, as well
as open meetings, on various items on its agenda. Open
debates were held on the topics of "Children and armed
conflict" and "Protection of civilians in armed
conflict", and this reinforces the vision of our
delegation that, when it is a question of dealing with a
crisis or a conflict - or even a situation of intra- or
inter-State tension - we must duly take into account
the related consequences of the conflict and the
decisions of the Council regarding the social,
humanitarian, regional and subregional aspects of the
situation under consideration.

We agree with you, Madam President, that the
issues of children and civilians in conflict should be
given complete attention by the Council both in
specific cases and during the decision-making process.

Turning to the items on the Council's agenda, we
deem relevant the practice of holding regular briefing
sessions, particularly on situations that could be called
"hot", as is currently the case of Afghanistan. We
wonder why this practice has not been applied to the
situation prevailing in the occupied Palestinian
territories. As I hardly need recall, it is the longest
conflict in recent times, yet it receives the least
attention from the Security Council. Initiatives are
being taken here and there to try to resolve the conflict,
and the tension in the region is high. But that should
not prevent Council members from being informed
about or discussing such steps as are being taken, or
from considering the facts on the ground, which are
very often distorted by certain media. I agree with the
comment that members of the Council receive most of
their information about certain initiatives through the
media. My delegation believes that the media certainly
play an important role, but that is not enough to enable
the Council duly to discharge its mandate.

We also agree that the Council should do all that
it can to listen to Member States through, inter alia, the
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), which are doing outstanding work,
particularly in managing conflicts in West Africa.

With regard to Africa, my delegation is pleased to
see the continent and its concerns occupying an
important place in the activities of the Council. I
cannot pretend that I would not be equally pleased if
there were no conflicts in Africa with which the
Council had to deal. We welcome the fact that the
Council is involving to a greater extent the States and
parties concerned in considering these items on its
agenda.

We are pleased in particular that the Council has
forged partnerships in the past two years with the
Political Committee for the Implementation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, the Regional Peace
Initiative on Burundi, and ECOWAS. The meetings that
were held in the framework of those partnerships,
including those held under your presidency, Madam,
have proved their usefulness. We support the
continuation of that tradition.

We believe that ministerial meetings of the
Council are useful, particularly when very important
issues for international peace and security are at stake.
It has almost become a tradition for members of the
Council to meet at least at ministerial level during the
general debate in the General Assembly. But we
believe that one or two meetings at that level
throughout the year, especially on major topics, would
be a positive contribution.

Those were just a few points that I wanted to
transmit to you, Madam, as you presidency comes to an
end. Once again, I would like to emphasize that, thanks
to your diplomatic skill and wisdom, and the
professionalism of your entire delegation, it has been
an outstanding presidency.

