The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Bulgaria for the kind words he
addressed to the Spanish delegation, which I am
honoured to lead.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Spain.

It is - and believe me, this is no mere rhetoric -
an honour for me to preside over this meeting of the
Security Council, because today is an important day for
Iraq, for the international community and for the
United Nations system.

We are committed to a future Iraq - to use the
Secretary-General's words - that is stable, united,
prosperous and democratic, in peace both internally
and with its neighbours: an Iraq able to leave behind 35
years of bloodthirsty dictatorship and 35 years of bad
administration. The magnitude of the situation that
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello indicated - hundreds of
thousands of dead and hundreds of thousands of
victims of repression - and the moving statement by
Mr. Adnan Pachachi on the deprivation of freedom and
the degradation of the dignity of the Iraqi people spoke
revealingly of the recent past.

It is a true that there are difficulties. The
Secretary-General's report (S/2003/715) and the
statements of the Special Representative and of the
spokesman of the Governing Council of Iraq have
described them to us; I myself witnessed them during
my recent trip to Baghdad. However, today we are
beginning to glimpse clearly this new democratic Iraq,
fully integrated into the international community,
respectful of rights and freedoms, and which makes
efficient use of its immense natural resources for the
benefit of all Iraqis and provides a conducive
framework for the enhanced development for that great
people, whose potential has been demonstrated
throughout one of the richest histories in human culture
and civilization, as Sergio Vieira de Mello has recalled.

Yes, the assessment that emerges from the
statements we have heard today, and particularly from
those of the Secretary-General, Mr. Vieira de Mello
and Mr. Pachachi, is hopeful, despite the complex
situation still prevailing in Iraq. Indeed, the fall of the
Saddam Hussain regime awakened great expectations
marked by the natural impatience of those who had
lived under submission and deprivation. After decades
of bad administration, Iraqis expect an improvement in
their living conditions, and they expect it now. After
decades of repression and a dictatorial regime, the Iraqi
people yearn to take the reins of their own destiny
without delay.

The fact is that, on a daily basis, life is not easy
in Iraq. Each loss of human life, of civilians or
coalition military personnel, can only be described as a
tragedy, because, although they are not strategic in
nature, there are risks and threats arising in particular
out of the combination of resistance and criminality. As
Mr. Vieira de Mello noted in connection with the latter
component, at the end of 2002 Saddam Hussain freed
most of the criminals who had been sentenced for
common crimes.

Given that perspective, it should be recalled, as
many speakers have, that until the new Iraqi police
force is effectively deployed and the new Iraqi army is
formed, the task of maintaining the security of
individuals and property falls to the forces of the
Coalition Provisional Authority. Also, resolution 1483
(2003) appeals to the members of the international
community to contribute to carrying out that task.

At the same time, there is a shortfall in basic
services such as electricity, running water and fuel;
those shortages are attributable in large part to the cited
security problems. But we had expected a food crisis
and, fortunately, it has not occurred. The food
distribution system is working reasonably well in most
parts of the country. Hospital services are improving
and students have been able to finish the school year.
Banks in Baghdad are beginning to provide services -
and I have see that for myself.

However, above all, it is hard to exaggerate the
significance of the formation of the Governing Council
of Iraq, whose spokesman we were honoured to hear
today. That institution embodies the core of the interim
Iraqi administration, for whose formation the Security
Council unanimously called in paragraph 9 of
resolution 1483 (2003). The Governing Council
incorporates Iraqi men and women of renown and great
courage. It includes in a balanced way representatives
of the various political, ethnic and religious
components that make up the Iraqi mosaic. Thus, it
symbolizes Iraq's unity, which we wish to preserve. Its
establishment is a decisive step towards the objectives
of self-government and of normalizing the political life
of the Iraqi people. To echo what Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello has said, the Governing Council of Iraq has
credible executive power and is broadly representative.
For that reason, it deserves the full support of the
international community.

Yes, the international community, represented by
the Security Council, through the participation of the
Governing Council's spokesman, is today giving
recognition to that Council. The Governing Council,
which possesses authority under resolution 1483
(2003), will gain legitimacy before the Iraqi people by
effectively contributing to improving the basic living
conditions of Iraqis, thus paving the way towards free
elections and towards the drafting of a constitution.

Mr. Pachachi has vividly described the
tremendous task facing the Governing Council. The
urgent priorities that it faces cover all areas of
government functions, from the appointment of
ministers to the running of embassies and the building
of schools - 1,500 schools, we were told - and
hospitals. With realism, he has recognized the
tremendous responsibility that his institution bears. It is
an honourable mission that should receive the
unreserved support of the international community
represented by the Security Council.

The Governing Council of Iraq can, of course,
rely on the firm commitment of Spain in that
endeavour. The fact is that the Governing Council has
an historic mission, including in particular the drafting
of the constitution and the creation of conditions that
will make it possible to hold free elections. Those tasks
will lay the foundation for a political edifice of peace,
prosperity and coexistence in democracy, which the
Iraqi people must build with the guidance of the
Governing Council and to which we must all be
committed.

Allow me to recall what a number of speakers
have said about the characteristics of that constitutional
process. The process of drafting the constitution must
be, more than anything else, inclusive of the country's
democratic, political, ethnic and religious groups and
also of the varied social groups, particularly women.
No significant sector should feel marginalized. A
timetable needs to be set that is specific and, at the
same time, is sufficiently flexible to adapt to a task that
will be complex - as are all constituent processes.
Iraqis must perceive clearly that this is the beginning of
a process with a specific final destination, and with real
political prospects for understanding among all and
respect by all. As the report of the Secretary-General
notes, and as indeed most statements today have
underscored - and with these I agree - there needs to
be an ambitious and realistic programme that is
adaptable in terms of time, in which consensus is the
genuine basic rule for action, guiding the decision-
making process, allowing all opinions to be expressed
freely and without hindrance, including also the life-
giving wisdom of the thinking of civil society.

Finally, this process of drafting a constitution for
Iraq needs to be led by a distinguished individual of
prestige and experience, of recognized moral authority
and with a sense of statesmanship. Members may feel
that some of these features are familiar to some of us
who are members of the European Union, because, as
some members have undoubtedly noted, these points
faithfully describe the method whereby we Europeans
came together to endow ourselves with a constitution.
These are the distinctive features of the recently
concluded Convention for the Future of Europe, which
just presented the preliminary draft of a European
constitution.

But plainly it is not sufficient to draft a
constitution. As I said earlier, the holding of free
elections is vital. Of course, the draft constitution will
be subject to ratification by the Iraqi people through a
popular consultation.

The United Nations plays an irreplaceable role in
all these tasks because of its lengthy experience in
democratization and institution-building processes, and
because of its unparalleled capacity to undertake, with
guaranteed impartiality, key tasks such as, for example,
advising in the preparation of an electoral register; in
the convening, holding and monitoring of elections;
and in the identification and fostering of the necessary
conditions to enable pluralism to flourish - from the
communications media to programmes promoting the
involvement of women.

I wish here to take up several points made by Mr.
Vieira de Mello and stressed by Ambassador
Greenstock. The political transition to democracy and
economic reconstruction is not enough in and of itself
if it does not take place in a legal framework that
enshrines respect for human rights.

I therefore associate myself with those who have
expressed appreciation for the report submitted
pursuant to paragraph 24 of resolution 1483 (2003), as
well as for the commendable work being done by
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and his team and the
dedication with which they are undertaking their work
in very difficult circumstances.

In particular I would highlight our great
confidence in the work of the Special Representative,
who is also the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.

Lastly, I wish to join with others in supporting the
proposals made in the report of the Secretary-General.

Allow me to conclude by reaffirming, on behalf
of the Government of Spain, our commitment to Iraq as
a participant in the coalition; our humanitarian
commitment to the Iraqi people; our commitment to
rebuilding Iraq and to its stability and security; and our
commitment to the United Nations and to its agencies,
and especially to the Special Representative
ultimately, a commitment of support and of fullest
cooperation with the Iraqi Governing Council.

 

Spain commits itself fully to the efforts of the
Iraqi people to achieve democracy, which is also an
undertaking for the whole of the international
community.

Having concluded my statement on behalf of the
Spanish delegation, I now resume my functions as
President of the Security Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 2.05 p.m.
