When the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) was established in 2007, it was the largest peacekeeping operation of its kind. It was also the only peacekeeping operation led jointly by the African Union and United Nations. Over 10 years later, today we mark the end of UNAMID as well as the end of an era. The United States recognizes the contributions and leadership of the United Nations and the African Union, as well as of the many troop- and police- contributing countries that helped protect civilians and advance peace in Darfur. We also recognize the 288 UNAMID personnel who have paid the ultimate price in advancing peace and security for the region and the world. We will always honour their sacrifices and those of their families. While UNAMID experienced many challenges, we have no doubt it is leaving behind a safer and more peaceful Darfur. UNAMID's contributions to strengthening the Sudanese police and providing a voice for Darfuris in peace negotiations will continue to yield benefits over the long term. UNAMID?'s State laison functions, which worked to transfer rule-of-law and peacebuilding activities from the mission to the United Nations country team, now serve as a model for peace and conflict transitions around the world. We look forward to the United Nations Secretariat's assessment of the lessons learned from UNAMID to further guide United Nations peacekeeping mission transitions moving forward. Despite UNAMID's achievements, the United States recognizes that the conflict in Darfur is not over. The Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan is a key pillar in building a more inclusive governance structure in the Sudan, yet it does not include the Sudanese Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid faction, which continues to hold territory in Darfur. Fighting also continues in the Jebel Marra region, and over 1.8 million people remain displaced across Darfur. Many of these displaced persons live in camps where Sudanese authorities provide little or no security or support services. A generation has been born and raised in these camps, and these people deserve a better future. We strongly urge the Government of the Sudan to cooperate with UNAMID as the mission draws down. Even though UNAMID will cease all operations effective 31 December, the mission needs time and the continued ability to move freely throughout its current operational area in Darfur in order to remove its equipment and personnel from the 18 remaining team sites. UNAMID and the Sudanese authorities must also take the time needed to ensure that UNAMID team sites are handed over responsibly and that proper precautions are in place to avoid the problems with looting seen previously. Once they are handed over, the sites should be used for civilian purposes only, such as universities or training centres. All efforts should be made to ensure the security of these sites and their associated property and equipment. As conflicts continue in Darfur, the Sudanese authorities are now fully responsible for protecting civilians and preventing violent incidents from beginning in the first place. While we welcome the Government of the Sudan's national plan for civilian protection (see S/2020/429), we strongly urge the Sudanese authorities to step up the Plan's implementation, particularly with regard to developing community policing initiatives for displaced persons in Darfur. We also call on the Sudanese leaders to be fully transparent about the proposed members of the new joint security force to enable vetting and ensure exclusion of individuals responsible for human rights violations or abuses, or violations of international humanitarian law. The Sudanese leaders must also ensure that all such abuses or violations are investigated whether they date back to the early days of the conflict or are more recent, and that those responsible are brought to justice. For true lasting peace, there must be accountability. We look forward to learning how the United Nations Interim Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan - the new special political mission - can and will support the Sudan in protecting civilians and building trust between Darfuris and the new joint force. Since 2007, our Governments and many others contributed significantly to UNAMID. Our combined contributions require continued vigilance and monitoring to ensure that the Sudan upholds its responsibilities as UNAMID draws down, most notably in terms of its responsibility to protect civilians. The United States stands with the people of Darfur and the Sudan at this momentous time. We remain a steadfast partner in support of peace and security in the region.
