Mr. Radomski (Poland): As we commemorate
today the anniversary ofthe 11 September 2001 terrorist
attacks, I would like to join others in conveying our
deepest condolences to the families of the victims of
those attacks and our solidarity with the American
people. The vivid memories of this day 17 years ago,
which was especially important in this city, New York,
should unify all of us in the fight against terrorism.
I thank you, Madam President, for convening this
meeting, and I thank Russia for its important briefing.

Poland is deeply concerned about the current
developments in Syria, in particular with regard to
the escalation of hostilities in Idlib province, resulting
in new displacement during the past few days of over
30,000 women, children and men and scores of civilian
deaths. That region is one of the de-escalation zones in
Syria, established and overseen by the guarantors of the
Astana process with a view to assuring a ceasefire and
humanitarian access, in accordance with international
law, including international humanitarian law.

The most recent escalation is again impacting

civilians in a dramatic way. Poland shares the fears that
the worst may be ahead ofus. The safety and protection
of approximately 2.9 million civilians residing in Idlib
and the surrounding areas is at risk. That includes about
1.4 million internally displaced persons, the majority of
whom are women and children who came to the region
from other areas

We are deeply alarmed by the fact that the
ceasefire-related commitments and obligations are not
respected by the Astana guarantors. We are disappointed
that the meeting of the guarantors in Tehran ended
without tangible conclusions. We call on Russia, Iran
and Turkey, as well as on other actors with influence on
the ground, to redouble their efforts in order to protect
the civilian population of Idlib. In that context, the
reported attacks on targets in Idlib that were carried
out this past weekend are highly disquieting.

Any use of force, even against pockets ofterrorists,
cannot justify indiscriminate attacks on innocent
civilians and civilian infrastructure, including medical
and educational facilities. It will be civilians - innocent
men, women and children - who will bear the brunt
of hostilities if the scenario of an extensive military
operation plays out in Idlib governorate. All sides
must fully respect and comply with the principles of
international humanitarian law, particularly with
respect to the protection of civilians.

Let me stress the responsibility of the Council to
prevent this potential tragedy. We cannot lose time
and must act now in order to avoid mass casualties
and yet another wave of displacement. The parties
involved in Syria must take all the necessary steps to
ensure the cessation of fighting, adequate protection
for the Syrian people and, finally, urgent humanitarian
access to Idlib and the necessary medical evacuations.
We would also like to reiterate that refugees need to
be provided with an opportunity affording them a
safe, free and dignified return to their homes. A major
military operation in Idlib governorate may hinder that
goal, and consequently create a new wave of refugees.
Furthermore, civilians who feel that their lives are at
risk during the conflict must be able to leave freely at
any time. Such movement must always be based on the
free choice of each and every individual.

In conclusion, let me stress once again that there
is no military solution to the conflict. Any attempt
to bring peace by force will be counterproductive to
achieving an inclusive and credible political process
under the auspices of the United Nations.

