Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Edmond Mulet for his briefing. I also listened carefully
to the statements of Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic' of
Serbia and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj of Kosovo.

In recent times, various parties have made efforts
to ease the tension in northern Kosovo. However, the
root causes of the tension in the region endure, the
situation in northern Kosovo remains fragile, and the
risk of further escalation persists. We hope that the
parties concerned will fully grasp the sensitivity and
complexity of the situation, act with caution, settle
their differences through dialogue and avoid any
unilateral action that might further exacerbate the
situation.

On the question of Kosovo, it is the consistent
View of China that mutually acceptable solutions
should be sought within the framework of resolution
1244 (1999) and on the basis of a dialogue among the
various parties. A series of talks was held recently in
Serbia and Kosovo, and some progress was made on
some issues. We hope the parties concerned will
increase their efforts and maintain and intensify their
dialogue. This is not only in the interests of the parties
themselves and the well-being of their people, but will
also contribute to peace and stability of the Balkan
region and all of Europe.

China expresses grave concern about allegations
of human organ trafficking in Kosovo. No act in
violation of international law and international
humanitarian norms should be condoned. The Serbian
concern about these allegations is legitimate. We are in
favour of investigation by the United Nations into
these allegations.

The United Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
has made tireless efforts, with positive results, to
facilitate the stability and development of Kosovo and
to coordinate the work of various international entities
in Kosovo. China appreciates the efforts of UNMIK
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Farid Zarif, in this connection. China will
continue to support their work.

We hope that UNMIK will play a greater role in
facilitating communication and dialogue among the
parties. We also hope that EULEX, KFOR and other
international entities will strictly implement their
mandates pursuant to the resolutions of the Security
Council, and play a constructive role in stabilizing the
situation in Kosovo.

