The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Misie' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) and Mr. Nobilo (Croatia) took
places at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/1995/707, which contains the text of a letter dated
17 August 1995 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document 5/1995/710, which contains the
text of a letter dated 18 August 1995 from the Charge
d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is deeply concerned by
the contents of the Secretary-General's letter of

17 August 1995 (S/l995/707) regarding the

continued impediments to the functioning and
deployment of the Rapid Reaction Force (RRF)
established by resolution 998 (1995) of
16 June 1995.

"The Council reaffirms in this regard that the
RRF is an integral part of UNPF/UNPROFOR and
that its deployment is crucial for the strengthening of
UNPROFOR's capacity to carry out its mandate in
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It shares
the Secretary-General's View that the existing status
of forces agreements constitute an appropriate and
sufficient basis for the presence of
UNPF/UNPROFOR, including the RRF.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned at
the implications of the continued impediments to the
functioning of the RRF for the effectiveness of the
United Nations mission in the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It calls upon the Government of
the Republic of Croatia and the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina immediately to remove all
impediments and to give clear undertakings
concerning the freedom of movement and provision
of facilities for the RRF, in order that it may
perform its tasks without further delay. It further
calls upon them to resolve forthwith within the
framework of the existing SOFAs any outstanding
difficulties with the relevant United Nations
authorities.

"The Security Council supports fully the efforts
of the Secretary-General in this matter and will
return to this question in the light of a further report
which the Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to submit no later than 24 August
1995."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/40.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at I] am.

