Mr. Henze (Germany): Since this is the first time I
have spoken at a formal meeting of the Security Council,
I should like to start my remarks by congratulating you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council.
Your experience and your abilities are widely recognized,
and you have already demonstrated that you intend to use
them in the interests of our work.

 

At the same time, I should like to thank Ambassador
Li for his work as President of the Council in March. He
guided our deliberations with his well-known skill and
intimate knowledge of the procedures of this body, to the
benefit of our common efforts.

Germany welcomed the offer by the five nuclear-
weapon States to extend negative as well as positive
security assurances to non-nuclear-weapon States parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT), and particularly their intention to submit a draft
resolution to the Security Council to this end. Such an
undertaking meets the legitimate security concerns of non-
nuclear-weapon States and sends a positive political signal
with a View to extending the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty indefinitely and unconditionally at the forthcoming
Conference of the States parties to the NPT - an objective
that Germany, itself a non-nuclear-weapon State, has
persistently pursued for a long time.

So far, the commitments of the nuclear-weapon States
regarding security assurances have been of a heterogeneous
character: different with regard to the number of declaring
States, different in scope, different as to the group of States
to which they apply, different in timing and context. We
therefore consider the draft resolution that has been
submitted to be an important step towards a common
position of all nuclear-weapon States, as well as a
reinforcement of their already existing commitments.

In our view, progress consists mainly in the fact that
now, for the first time, all nuclear-weapons States are
sponsoring a formal commitment to non-nuclear-weapon
States parties to the NPT, and that both negative and
positive security assurances are addressed in one and the
same draft resolution of the Security Council. With regard
to positive security assurances, we note that, also for the
first time, options for action to be taken by the Security
Council are specified in detail. This is important in the light
of the fact that since the end of the cold war the emphasis
of the debate has shifted from negative to positive security
assurances.

Germany is of the opinion that even after a new draft
resolution of the Security Council - the one on which we
are about to vote - has been adopted, the question of
security assurances for non-nuclear-weapon States must
remain on the international disarmament and arms control
agenda. It therefore supports the reinstitution at the Geneva
Conference on Disarmament, while this year's session is
still going on, of the Ad Hoc Committee on security
assurances. The aim of a multilateral agreement on
security assurances must not be abandoned.

For all those reasons, Germany supports the draft
resolution that has been submitted and will therefore vote
in favour of it.

