Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I welcome you, Sir, and
salute the fact that you are presiding over this meeting
personally. The fact that you have come to chair the
meeting shows the significance which the presidency
attaches to this very meeting. My delegation thanks
Mr. De Mistura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq and head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for his
encouraging briefing and Mr. Al Bayati, the Permanent
Representative of Iraq, for his statement.

Uganda welcomes the overall progress and
improvement in the political and security situation in
Iraq. We commend the reconciliation efforts
spearheaded by Prime Minister al-Maliki, aimed at
bringing together all Iraqis, including former Baath
Party members. We are convinced that the durable
peace and stability that we all seek will come only
through the leadership of the Iraqi people, supported by
the international community. We therefore welcome the
agreements reached on the selection of the new
Speaker of Parliament, and encourage different
sections of the Iraqi society to build on this and other
achievements to create a more stable and peaceful Iraq.

We congratulate the people of Iraq for holding
successful and largely peaceful provincial elections,
which also enabled the selection of governors and their
deputies. We commend the Independent High Electoral
Commission for the work done in organizing the
elections.

As Iraq prepares for Kurdistan regional
government elections in July 2009 and national
parliamentary elections in 2010, we call upon the
Electoral Commission to build on the achievements
gained in organizing successful provincial elections.
We commend UNAMI's continued assistance to the
Iraqi people and the Iraqi Government in that regard.

My delegation appreciates UNAMI's continued
work in support of the Government of Iraq to help
create conducive conditions for the safe return of Iraqi
refugees and the resettlement of internally displaced
persons. We welcome the important regional
developments characterized by high-level visits
between Iraq and other countries of the region during
the reporting period. The security, stability and
development of Iraq are inextricably linked to the
peace, stability and development of the region.

There are still challenges to be addressed in order
to consolidate the gains so far made. We note that the
resolution of the disputed internal boundaries remains
among the indispensable elements for lasting peace in
Iraq. We encourage Iraqi leaders to work more closely
together in a spirit of national unity and to adopt
political, constitutional and legislative measures to
address the challenges.

Finally, Uganda extends its appreciation to Mr. De
Mistura for his work and good leadership of UNAMI. We
commend all of the United Nations staff in Iraq for their
contributions towards the stability and security of Iraq.
Uganda supports the draft presidential statement that has
been prepared by the United States and Turkey to convey
the Security Council's position on the situation in Iraq.

