Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): As this is
my first statement to the Council this year, I would like
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency and to extend my congratulations to the
representatives of the new members of the Council:
Bulgaria, Cameroon, Guinea, Mexico and the Syrian
Arab Republic. While mentioning a great country,
Mexico, I would also like to mention a great
ambassador, Ambassador Jorge Navarrete, to whom I
send my warmest greetings. His professional qualities,
tact and gentlemanliness will be recalled with feelings
of respect and fondness by us all.

I have the honour of speaking on behalf of the
European Union. The following countries also support
this statement: Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Cyprus and Malta.

The attack carried out against the United States
on 11 September last and the events of these past
months demonstrate that the capacity of terrorist
groups to act on the international scene is growing. But
the international community has reacted by making the
prevention and the elimination of terrorism one of its
priorities.

The United Nations has acted quickly and
effectively against this new threat. It could not have
been otherwise. Terrorism respects no borders, and
States cannot react in an isolated manner to this
phenomenon, which is one of the main threats to peace
in the twenty-first century.

Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) is of
historic significance. It establishes for the first time a
series of binding measures to be applied by all States in
combating terrorism, setting a deadline for each of
them to provide information about provisions adopted
in compliance with that resolution.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee provides the
Security Council with a follow-up mechanism for the
implementation of the resolution, thus ensuring
effectiveness and continuity in international action in
this field. Its task is of crucial importance. In order to
facilitate it, all Member States of the United Nations
should give their unqualified support to the Committee.
The European Union wishes to congratulate the
Committee on the quality, firmness and transparency
displayed so far in carrying out its work and offers its
full cooperation as it continues to do so in the future.

The European Union welcomes the fact that a
significant number of countries have already sent their
country reports to the Committee and encourages those
that have not yet responded to do so immediately. It is
important that these reports provide clear answers to
the questions outlined in the guidelines provided by the
Committee for the preparation of the reports.

Some Member States may need technical
assistance in order to fulfil all their obligations under
resolution 1373 (2001). The need for such assistance
was underscored in Security Council resolution 1377
(2001). The European Union is already providing such
assistance to a large number of countries in areas such
as capacity-building for law enforcement,
strengthening the judiciary, border management and
combating economic crimes and money-laundering. We
look forward to identifying other countries and other
specific areas where assistance may be needed. It is
important in this regard for interested countries and
regions to be able to identify their needs. The European
Union is also prepared to cooperate with the
Committee in order to provide assistance to those
countries. The Committee could be extremely useful in
identifying the needs of individual countries, given its
role as a clearing house for technical assistance
information.

The European Union is committed to making the
struggle against terrorism a key feature of its external
relations. The European Union cannot remain
indifferent if some States do not comply with the
obligations established by resolution 1373 (2001). The
importance that the Union attaches to combating
terrorism will naturally be reflected in its relations with
those States, including in the context of current
agreements with them.

The adoption of that resolution was possible
thanks to a strong spirit of consensus. This spirit must
be maintained and strengthened in order to ensure its
full implementation. The international coalition against
terrorism must include us all, since the enemy is also
common to us all. Relevant international organisations,
including especially the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and the Financial Action Task Force,
should also be involved in the struggle against
terrorism and should coordinate their efforts with those
of the United Nations as a whole. And, while it is
essential that each country make the necessary effort to
abide by the resolution, it is also indispensable that a
similar effort be made in the framework of regional
cooperation.

In the case of the European Union, this has led to
very intensive activity in all aspects of the fight against
terrorism. The Union and its member States have
moved decisively to take specific measures against the
terrorist threat. In fact, the impact of the 11 September
crisis has been a catalyst for improving the efficiency
of the struggle against terrorism within the framework
of a European Union area of freedom, security and
justice.

The Union and its member States acted swiftly to
implement resolution 1373 (2001). In addition to the
reports submitted by member States, the Union has
submitted its own report to the Committee. The
measures adopted in compliance with the resolution are
set out in detail. However, even before the adoption of
resolution 1371 (2001), an extraordinary meeting of the
European Council had adopted an Action Plan
comprising 68 measures, structured as a road map.
A complete listing of the specific actions carried
out by the Union would be too extensive. However, it
is necessary to mention the European arrest warrant,
the purpose of which is to ensure that arrest warrants
issued by a judge in a member State are valid in the
entire territory of the Union, thus replacing the present
extradition system; and the Framework Decision on
combating terrorism, which includes a common
definition of several types of terrorist acts and provides
for the imposition of severe punishments for the
perpetrators. We should also mention the creation of
joint investigation task forces, the adoption of a
regulatory framework that for the first time provides a
legal basis for a European Union-wide sanctions
system to freeze assets of terrorist individuals and
entities, including the drawing up of a common list of
terrorist organizations, the use to the greatest extent
possible of the potential in this field of EUROJUST
and EUROPOL and the approval of a protocol to the
Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters,
which will have special importance in fighting money
laundering and financial crimes.

As far as police cooperation is concerned, apart
from the development of EUROPOL, several other
measures are being considered. These include the
creation of a European border police, mechanisms that
offer greater security in the granting of visas, more
efficient control of the external borders and an increase
in automatic mechanisms for the exchange of
information.

A review of European Union instruments in the
field of asylum is also being conducted. Moreover,
existing sanctions instruments have been revised to
target the Al Qaeda network in particular.

The European Council of Laecken, held last
December, noted that the Action Plan is being
implemented according to schedule. Achieving its
goals is one of the priorities of the current presidency.
In that same European Council, the European Union
heads of State and Government reaffirmed their
solidarity with the people of the United States and the
international community in the fight against terrorism.
This fight has to be conducted within full respect for
individual rights and freedoms, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
The Union has already adopted legislation containing
this type of safeguards.

Discussions in the Sixth Committee on the draft
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
have gained great momentum in the General Assembly.
Many obstacles that seemed insurmountable have now
been overcome, and the issues that remain to be agreed
are very few. The European Union is ready to accept
the last proposal submitted by the Australian
coordinator. In line with the spirit of consensus that
made the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) possible,
the Union expects this convention to be adopted soon.
We strongly believe that only a text that would not be
paralysed by endless discussions of a more political
and legal nature could serve as an operational, effective
instrument against terrorism.

Negotiations on the international convention for
the suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism could be
concluded as soon as agreement is reached on the
comprehensive convention, because the obstacles are
of the same nature. It is absolutely necessary that all
States ratify, without delay, all international and
regional conventions related to the fight against
terrorism and implement all their provisions.

To this end, the European Union has requested
the Vienna-based International Centre for the
Prevention of Crime, mandated with providing
technical assistance in the field of terrorism prevention,
to develop a project on ways and means of assisting
United Nations member States with the implementation
of the 12 anti-terrorism Conventions negotiated within
the framework of the United Nations. The issue of
technical assistance in the implementation process of
the existing legal instruments against terrorism has also
been dealt with by the Vienna Action Plan. The
activities of the Vienna-based United Nations
institutions mandated with anti-terrorism activities
should complement United Nations system-wide efforts
and explore possible synergies.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the
European Union is, first and foremost, a Union based
on shared values. By adopting common measures
against terrorism, the Union has reaffirmed its
commitment to fundamental freedoms and the rule of
law.

