Ms. Simonyan (Armenia): Armenia expresses its
appreciation to the Council presidency, the Dominican
Republic, for initiating this open debate. Today's
meeting provides a good opportunity to discuss the
wide-ranging negative consequences of climate change
and related disasters, as well as their immediate
impact on human societies in terms of peace and
security considerations. The meteorological records
and climate projections provide abundant evidence of
the vulnerability of ecosystems and populations and
highlight the need to step up international, regional and
subregional cooperation efforts for effective adaptation
to climate change and disaster risk reduction.

As the world continues to experience the risk of
natural disasters, including those related to the impacts
of climate change, understanding vulnerability,
developing capacity for effective early warning,
formulating coordinated disaster response plans and
ensuring the availability of the necessary infrastructure
and services will be fundamental to mitigating the risk
to human lives, peace and security. The recognition
of mutual dependency, a strong political will and the
genuine commitment of States to cooperation are
critical prerequisites for successful risk mitigation.

Located in one of the most seismically active
regions of the world, Armenia is very familiar with
the risk of natural disasters and their potential to cause
grave destruction. Last December marked the thirtieth
anniversary of the devastating earthquake that struck
the northern region of Armenia in 1988, claiming
the lives of more than 25,000 people, leaving tens of
thousands injured and hundreds of thousands without
shelter. Armenia is still suffering the aftermath of the
devastation, as many families were left fragmented,
communities destroyed and industries crippled, and the
haunting memories remain.

Our experience has shed light on the significance
of regional and global cooperation for disaster response
and risk mitigation and has led our country to prioritize
building resilience and strengthening national capacity
for disaster preparedness. Given the vulnerabilities of
its mountainous terrain and the ecosystems, Armenia's
standing as a middle-income country and a landlocked
developing country necessitates the prioritization of
climate change and disaster risk reduction strategies.
In defining our policies on climate change adaptation
and mitigation, we have been guided by the ecosystem
approach, in line with the principles of the green
economy and with a special focus on the sectors of
public life that are most vulnerable to climate change.

Last June, Armenia hosted the subregional
platform on disaster risk reduction in Central Asia and
the Caucasus, which brought together representatives
of the Central Asian and South Caucasus countries
and various stakeholders involved in development and
humanitarian affairs. Three years after the adoption
of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015-2030 and the Paris Agreement, participants
reviewed progress, shared insights and reaffirmed their
commitment to effective multilateral cooperation for
better disaster preparedness. We underline the potential
of such cooperation in the broader context of promoting
regional peace and security, as well as economic
growth. Armenia stands ready to provide a platform
for regional dialogue and to contribute to exchange and
cooperation towards better integration of disaster risk
reduction into sustainable development policies.

