Mr. Awaad (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): The
delegation of Egypt congratulates you, Madam, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. We are confident that your well-known
diplomatic skills will enable you to discharge your
responsibilities with full success. We wish also to convey
our appreciation to your predecessor, Sir John Weston, and
to the delegation of the United Kingdom for the
distinguished way in which they conducted the business of
the Security Council last month.

The Security Council's consideration today of the
situation in Angola reflects the great attention the
international community is devoting to the crisis in our
brother country of Africa. Over the past 20 years, the
international community has supported efforts to restore
peace to Angola with a View to putting an end to the
longest of African civil wars and to replacing the suspicion
and lack of cooperation that have marked relations between
the parties concerned with coexistence, reconciliation and
a readiness to make sacrifices for the sake of a single,
unified homeland. Over the years, the aspirations of the
international community in this regard have been confronted
with many obstacles resulting from the persistence of the
conflict, yet its political, economic and humanitarian
support for Angola has never ceased.

My delegation has carefully read the report of the
Secretary-General (S/1996/75) on the situation in Angola.
We appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative and the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), especially because
they are carrying out their tasks in unstable and
unfavourable conditions. The delegation of Egypt wishes to
express its ongoing concern about the continuing tension
and mistrust that are mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General; these have impeded the
implementation of commitments undertaken by the two
parties under the Lusaka Protocol, including the definitive
cessation of all hostilities, the release of all prisoners, an
end to hostile propaganda, the resumption of the
quartering of troops of the Uniao Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA), and the
withdrawal of Government forces to the nearest barracks.

Here, we note in particular our heightened concern
over the failure of UNITA to take the steps necessary to
press the reconciliation process forward, sometimes on the
pretext of threats to its forces in some regions, and
sometimes on the pretext that UNAVEM. III is not yet
ready to continue its assistance in the quartering of
troops.

The 12 January 1996 agreement, in which the two
parties accepted a new timetable for the implementation
of their earlier understandings, was an encouraging sign.
Yet we take this opportunity to underline the importance
of full compliance by both parties with all their
commitments so that the efforts of the international
community to establish peace and stability in Angola can
continue in the same manner and with the same intensity.

We salute the Government of Angola for its decision
as a good-will gesture to release all prisoners and to
terminate its contracts with foreign experts working with
the army. We call upon the Government to make
arrangements for an independent United Nations radio
station to begin broadcasting. We urge it to provide all
necessary security guarantees for humanitarian assistance
agencies and their personnel in order to ensure the
continued and effective flow of assistance.

To UNITA and its leader, Mr. Savimbi, we say that
the eyes of the world are on the UNITA leadership. We
expect it to honour all its commitments, foremost among
them the quartering and disarmament of combatants in
accordance with the agreed timetables. Further, we call
upon UNITA to accelerate the release of all prisoners,
and to provide real security guarantees for the personnel
of humanitarian assistance agencies, including by
removing all restrictions on their freedom of movement
in the areas under UNITA control. Finally, we call upon
it to halt divisive radio broadcasts, which serve only to
deepen the differences within the country.

Paragraph 17 of the report of the Secretary-General
notes that demining and road and bridge rehabilitation are
 

among the daunting tasks which affect many aspects of the
peace process in Angola. There is no doubt that the civil
war in Angola resulted in the indiscriminate laying of mines
in many parts of the country. This problem is not confined
to Angola; many third world States, including Egypt, face
similar problems. All Angolans must cooperate with
UNAVEM. III in minimizing the consequences of this
problem. In this connection, we pay tribute to UNAVEM
III for establishing the Central Mine Action Training
School and for training a number of instructors.

We hope that we shall soon see genuine progress,
proving to the international community that the
establishment of peace in Angola is no remote hope and
constituting a new beginning for the reconstruction of the
country and for the start of long-overdue economic
development.

The delegation of Egypt supports the extension of the
mandate of UNAVEM. III in a manner that would enable it
to discharge its tasks completely. It is our hope that we will
receive periodic information and reports from the Secretary-
General on developments in the situation in our brother
African State.

