Mr. Stefanile (Italy): We welcome this debate. We thank the Belgian presidency for organizing it and all the briefers for their interventions. Italy also aligns itself with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the European Union on this subject. Italy strongly believes in transitional justice as an effective means to address the after-effects of violent and divisive conflicts and to achieve sustainable peace and social harmony. As exemplified by the Colombianpeace process, the transformational drive required for inclusive and long-lasting peace flows primarily from a peace agreement that contemplates transitional justice as an inherent part of a comprehensive and interdependent architecture. In that framework, accountability for gross human rights violations and serious crimes under international law are key elements for the foundation of a just and peaceful society. International tribunals, including the International Criminal Court and fact-finding and investigative international mechanisms, are fundamental tools in the fight against impunity. Italy has been a staunch supporter of the development of international criminal justice as a building block to support societies' march towards truth and reconciliation. We have regularly provided funding to the Special Tribunal for Lebanon and the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. We have also provided political, technical and financial support for the work of hybrid criminal courts in Timor-Leste, Kosovo and Sierra Leone. In those and other contexts, we have vigorously promoted the strengthening of law enforcement, the building of technical capacities for vetting processes and for the implementation of justice reform, and the reinforcement of the independence, efficiency, accountability and transparency of judicial systems. We believe that the success of transitional justice mechanisms also depends on the implementation of security-sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) processes. We _ therefore support stronger United Nations standing capacities on security-sector reform, DDR, justice and correction and police - which are all hosted in the United Nations Global Service Centre in Brindisi - as effective tools to foster complementarity between transitional justice and these processes. Striking a balance between victims' right to justice and the need for reconciliation and peaceful coexistence is a very delicate exercise. The search for historical truth on violence and abuses and the public acknowledgement of the responsibilities of each party are often a precondition for reconciliation and peaceful coexistence. In that light, truth and reconciliation commissions could serve the interests of truth without replacing criminal prosecution and should disseminate their findings to society for the education of present and future generations. Based on our experience, we would like to highlight three main points. First, each transitional process should be nationally owned and inclusive. It should contemplate a careful consultation with civil society, including vulnerable individuals and groups, to assess the impact of conflict, meet the widespread expectation for justice and shape a common vision of the future. Women's participation is crucial to guaranteeing such inclusivity. Through the participation of women in reconciliation and mediation efforts, we can have more effective transitional justice processes. Women mediators networks such as the Mediterranean Women Mediators Network, which we actively promoted, have indeed bolstered a gender- sensitive approach to transitional justice. Secondly, profound institutional reforms are often needed to affirm the rule of law, enhance human rights protection and reorganize the State in keeping with democratic values. However, constitutional transition and legal reforms cannot be effective without the dissemination of a culture of lawfulness among civil servants, citizens and local communities. Finally, the importance of civil justice is often underestimated. It plays a crucial role in the daily lives of families, enterprises and individuals. In the aftermath of a conflict, efficient and independent civil courts should be able to grant redress for the damages suffered and to re-establish economic, social and cultural rights, which are often gravely violated.
