Mr. Kolga (Estonia): At the outset, I should like to
join others in thanking the presidency for organizing this
open debate. I see it as a sign of the Security Council's
continued commitment to addressing the impact and
consequences of armed conflict on civilians.

Estonia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union, but I
should like to make some additional remarks. The full
version of our statement will be distributed.

Unfortunately, despite the Security Council's focus
and recurring debates on this issue, the reality remains
bleak. Civilians continue to account for the vast majority
of casualties in armed conflict, parties to conflict
frequently fail to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law to protect civilians, and
accountability for those crimes is, to a large degree,
missing. Estonia reiterates its concern that women and
children are the ones often most severely affected by
conflict and that rape is continuously used as a method
of war.

Humanitarian access is a prerequisite for
humanitarian actors so that they can reach people in
need. Regrettably, access is frequently delayed, impeded
or denied. Estonia joins the Secretary-General in his
call for consistent engagement with non-State armed
groups as well, so as to achieve improved compliance
with international human rights and humanitarian
law and gain safe humanitarian access. For example,
in Syria, access to people in conflict-affected areas
remains severely hindered by the Government as well
as by the armed opposition. Estonia urges all parties to
the conflict in Syria to support humanitarian workers so
as to enable them to reach all people in need, wherever
they are in their country.

Not only do States bear the primary responsibility
for ensuring the protection of civilians, it is States
that are principally responsible for investigating and
prosecuting those suspected of having committed
serious crimes of international concern. But national
investigations and prosecutions of atrocity crimes
remain rare. It is therefore of the utmost importance
that States encourage parties to comply with
international humanitarian law, support and assist
those in need and investigate and prosecute crimes
against international humanitarian law. Such support
can be provided by helping States adopt the necessary
national legislation for such prosecutions. Where
States fail to take the necessary steps, the international
community, collectively, is responsible for ensuring
accountability through international criminal justice
mechanisms. Therefore, in addition to strengthening
domestic legislation, States that have not done so yet
should ratify the Rome Statute and cooperate with the
International Criminal Court (ICC).

Estonia encourages the Security Council to play
a more proactive role in ensuring an appropriate
international response, including continued use of its
ability to refer situations to the ICC. The Council has
already - twice - referred situations to the Court
with a view to ensuring accountability for serious
crimes, thus extending the reach of the Court. However,
a referral alone is not enough to ensure accountability.
The Court lacks its own enforcement mechanisms and
in that regard is fully dependent upon State cooperation.
Continued engagement, support and follow-up by the
Security Council in an efficient and vigorous manner
are therefore indispensable.

A prime example of where the Security Council
can put its words into action is Syria, where war
crimes, crimes against humanity and gross violations
of human rights have for too long been a daily reality.
No convincing domestic efforts have been made to
investigate those crimes or bring those responsible
to justice. Therefore, a referral to justice at the
international level is necessary.

International commissions of inquiry and fact-
finding missions are additional valuable mechanisms for
verifying and investigating allegations. It is important
to link fact-finding bodies with judicial processes in
order to ensure accountability.

Before concluding, allow me to stress that a sharper
focus is needed on supporting the victims of serious
crimes. The protection of civilians is a measure aimed
at ensuring that innocent people are not subjected to
harm, but, where such protections fail, we must at
the very least ensure that ample support is provided.
The Rome Statute's expansive victim participation
and reparations framework constitute a milestone
in international criminal justice. The reparations
envisioned in the Statute, including through the Trust
Fund for Victims, seek to provide reparations to as
wide a group of affected people and communities as
possible. Successful investigations and prosecutions
assist in restoring dignity to victims by acknowledging
their suffering and help to create a historical record
that protects against those who will seek to deny that
atrocities occurred.

