Mr. Zehnder (spoke in French): Switzerland
thanks the Chinese presidency for having convened this
open debate. We would like to take this opportunity
to emphasize two elements: first, the importance
of prevention in countering terrorism and violent
extremism, and secondly, the recent Geneva Conference
on Preventing Violent Extremism, which was organized
by Switzerland and the United Nations.

Terrorism continues to spread around the globe. It
constitutes one of the gravest threats to international
peace and security, aggravated still further by the
emergence of terrorist groups like Da'esh, which control
vast swathes of territory, the people who live there
and their resources. In our battle against terrorism,
we must make use of preventive as well as punitive
measures. Preventing terrorism and violent extremism
means stepping up efforts to promote the rule of law,
human rights and, in situations of armed conflicts,
international humanitarian law.

Fighting against terrorism through the prevention
of violent extremism is a priority for Switzerland, a fact
that is given concrete expression in the Swiss framework
of commitments to peace, security, development and
human rights. We are convinced that national security
is inextricably interwoven with human security and
human rights, and secondly, that preventing violent
extremism is the most effective way of countering
terrorism. In order to underline our commitment to
prevention, Switzerland has developed a foreign policy
plan of action for the prevention of violent extremism.

We welcome the Secretary-General's Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, which gives
renewed energy to United Nations prevention activities
and to pillars I and IV of the 2006 United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. On 7 and 8 April,
Switzerland, with the United Nations, organized the
Geneva Conference on Preventing Violent Extremism.
The Conference, attended by 125 Member States, gave
participants the opportunity to present their views on
the Secretary-General's Plan of Action.

The Conference helped to highlight the need for a
more comprehensive and balanced approach to tackling
terrorism, which includes systematic measures to

prevent violent extremism. The participants recalled
that security solutions alone cannot solve the problem of
terrorism and reiterated that violent extremism cannot,
and should not, be linked to any particular religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group. Moreover,
the Conference offered an opportunity to stress the
importance of the first and fourth pillars of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, ahead of
its review to be held in June in New York. Other results
of the discussion at the Conference can be found in the
Co-Chairs' conclusions, which were circulated at the
end of the Conference. We hope that the Conference is
able to provide a valuable contribution following these
discussions in the Council.

