Ms. Samson (Netherlands): My delegation would
like to congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month,
and to assure you and your team of our support. We
would also like to thank Sweden for its excellent
steering of the Council's work in July. I would like to
express our sincere thanks to both briefers, Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and John Ging, Director of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA). As the fighting in Yemen continues, their
briefings instil in us a strong sense of urgency.

My statement will focus on three aspects: first,
the political process, including the situation in
Al-Hudaydah; secondly, the humanitarian consequences
of the conflict; and thirdly, our concerns about the lack
of respect for international humanitarian law in Yemen.

First, with regard to the political process, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands remains very concerned
about the ongoing hostilities in and around the port and
city of Al-Hudaydah and the impact of that escalation
on the prospects for negotiations. We fully support the
Special Envoy's efforts to come to a peaceful solution
for Al-Hudaydah, as well as the broader Yemeni
conflict, and we support his calls to the parties. We
urge all the parties to engage constructively with the
Special Envoy without preconditions, and we expect
all of them to fully commit to the United Nations-
facilitated process by participating in consultations
in Geneva in early September, as Mr. Griffiths just
mentioned. We also support his call for all the parties
to create an environment conducive to such a meeting
and to de-escalation in Al-Hudaydah.

No political agreement is likely to last if local
grievances and regional divisions are not addressed.
The political process must therefore be an inclusive
one, and we welcome the commitment to that end that
the Special Envoyjust expressed. An inclusive political
process should encompass a broad range of Yemeni
groups, with the meaningful participation of women,
young people and civil society. We encourage the
United Nations to further engage with them and look
forward to more information on that in future briefings.

Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
we echo the concerns raised by Mr. Ging of OCHA in
his briefing about the effects of a protracted fight for
the city and port of Al-Hudaydah. The humanitarian
consequences for the inhabitants of Al-Hudaydah city
are expected to be severe, and the same is true for the
population of northern Yemen, which is so dependent
for its very existence on humanitarian and commercial
imports through Al-Hudaydah port.

In line with the Security Council's March
presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/5), we call for the
full and sustained opening of the ports of Al-Hudaydah
and Saleef, as well as the unimpeded distribution of
supplies throughout the country, which includes access
for ships carrying containers and fuel, as facilitated
by the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism. The use of sea mines around the port and
attacks on commercial vessels by the Houthis further
contribute to the risks for commercial and humanitarian
shipping, and we condemn such practices. The longer
the future of Al-Hudaydah remains unclear, the less
willing will commercial shippers be to deliver to Yemen.
And there is no viable plan B should Al-Hudaydah port
be further compromised.

That brings me to my third point, the importance
of respect for international humanitarian law. In
recent weeks we have seen the number of civilian
casualties rise, mostly as a result of the fighting around
Al-Hudaydah, but also in Aden, Taiz and Sa'dah.
The obligations of all parties under international
humanitarian law are clear and, as the Security Council
has repeatedly done, we once again call on them to fully
respect those obligations. In this regard, we condemn
the Houthis' continued firing of ballistic missiles at
civilian targets. The recent strikes on health and water-
sanitation facilities, and today's reports of strikes on a
fish market and Al-Thawra Hospital in Al-Hudaydah,
are equally worrying. Damage to the vulnerable water-
sanitation system in Al-Hudaydah could immediately
trigger a new cholera outbreak, as the United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator underlined in her statement
on Sunday. All parties have an obligation to protect
civilian infrastructure and humanitarian workers. The
humanitarian community continues to work under
increasingly difficult circumstances, and for that it
deserves our praise, support and protection.

The Group of Eminent Experts on Yemen was
mandated by the Human Rights Council to carry out a
comprehensive examination of all alleged violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights and
to identify those responsible. We reiterate our call on
all parties to continue to engage with the Group and
provide it with unfettered access. Its work remains ever
more crucial as the conflict rages on.

In conclusion, we call on all the parties to take
responsibility and engage constructively with the
Special Envoy in order to come to an agreement. We
stand ready to support the United Nations-facilitated
political process, which remains the only way to a
sustainable peaceful solution to the crisis in Yemen.

