Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing. We also
welcome Ambassador Khalilzad's briefing on behalf of
the Multinational Force in Iraq.

Since the war in Iraq began five years ago in
March 2003, the political process, reconstruction and
national reconciliation in Iraq have passed one
important milestone after another. As a nation and as a
society, Iraq has undergone significant changes, as
have its relations with other countries in the region and
with the international community. Iraq's progress in
various fields deserves our full recognition, but we
cannot overlook the formidable challenges that it
continues to face in the political process and in the
spheres of security, reconstruction, human rights and
national reconciliation. Bombings and violent conflicts
continue to occur with great frequency. Economic
recovery and reconstruction are not yet on the right
track, while progress in the key legislative and
constitutional reform processes is slow. The national
administrative, executive and security institutions
remain weak. Large numbers of refugees and internally
displaced persons are unable to return to their homes.
No effective guarantees are in place for civilian rights,
including the rights of women and children.

08-3196]
An old Chinese proverb says that, in rowing a
boat upstream, the only alternative to moving forward
is to move backward. However, there is no question of
going backward in the face of the various formidable
challenges in Iraq. Iraq's only option is to join hands
with the countries of the region and the international
community in a concerted effort to adopt more
effective measures, while its Government and people
assume the primary responsibility for their own future.
The possibility of a bright future for Iraq will hinge on
the ability of all its political leaders to put the
country's national interests above all else, to seek
reconciliation and to establish consensus and
cooperation.

We support the efforts of the Government of Iraq
to adopt effective measures to ensure the national
stability and unity that will foster the country's
development. We hope that the Government of Iraq can
join forces with other sectors to accelerate dialogue,
reform legislation, strengthen accountability and
intensify reconstruction and the protection of human
rights in order to ensure further progress.

We are pleased that relations between Iraq and
the other countries of the region continue to improve
and strengthen, and that institutional cooperation on
the issues of energy, refugees and border control has
been established. We also welcome the successful
conclusion of the third expanded meeting of foreign
ministers of Iraq's neighbours, held last week in
Kuwait. Such meetings instil confidence that
cooperation in that area has a promising future. The
improvement of relations between Iraq and its
neighbours is of great benefit not only to Iraq itself, but
to the region as a whole. The international community
should recognize this and encourage and support such
improvement.

The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), under the leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Staffan de
Mistura, is an interface between the Security Council
and the international community on the one hand and
the Government of Iraq and its people on the other.
China agrees that UNAMI should continue to carry out
various operations in accordance with resolution 1770
(2007) in a step-by-step and focused manner. We
recognize the accomplishments already achieved by
UNAMI, and we hope that UNAMI will put forward
rational and feasible proposals for the political process
in Iraq so as to push forward Iraqi national
reconciliation.

We expect UNAMI to continue to play a role in
coordinating humanitarian relief activities in Iraq in a
way that benefits the Iraqi people in general. Given the
rapid rise in world food prices, UNAMI should
cooperate with the Government of Iraq in the task of
ensuring that the most basic humanitarian needs of the
Iraqi people will be met. We also hope that UNAMI
will become more proactive in protecting and
promoting the human rights of the Iraqi people,
including paying more attention to improving the
conditions of refugees, internally displaced persons and
detainees.

In the very long history of Iraq, five years is only
a moment. However, to the 23 million Iraqi people, this
moment is filled with tremendous difficulties. The
international community should continue to focus
attention on Iraq and to extend its hand to the Iraqi
people in order to help Iraq find the road of stability
and development as soon as possible.

