Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today's open debate. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her
valuable briefing. I am also grateful to all delegations
for expressing their thoughtful condolences on the
passing of Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency. Their words are
truly appreciated.

Japan remains committed to supporting a two-State
solution. We continue to believe that the most realistic
solution to this long-standing conflict is a two-State
solution, based on the 1967 lines, with mutually agreed
swaps, which will bring about the peaceful coexistence
between a viable Palestinian State and the State ofIsrael,
with secure and internationally recognized borders.

We remain deeply concerned about the continued
violence both in Gaza and in the West Bank, including
indiscriminate rocket launches from Gaza into Israel.
We strongly condemn violence and acts of terrorism
against innocent citizens, and we call on the parties
to take immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence,
provocations and incitement. In addition, the final status
of Jerusalem is part of a range of issues that should
be resolved through negotiations based on relevant
Security Council resolutions and known parameters.
Continued settlement activities and the demolition
of Palestinian-owned structures, including the most
recent case in Sur Baher, undermine the viability of
a two-State solution. Japan once again urges Israel to
cease those activities.

Japan is also worried about the continued issue
of the Palestinian Authority's withheld tax revenues.
That has exacerbated the Palestinians' deteriorating
financial situation, which we fear could negatively
affect stability and security. We call on the parties to
find a mutually agreeable solution to this issue as soon
as possible.

While the future prospects of the political process
are dim at present, Japan believes that every country
can contribute to creating an environment conducive
to peace efforts. In that regard, I wish to highlight
the Conference on Cooperation among East Asian
Countries for Palestinian Development (CEAPAD).
Japan, together with regional partners, initiated the
Conference in 2013 to assist Palestine in its economic
development by utilizing the resources and experiences
of East Asian countries. The latest meeting, which we
co-hosted in Ramallah earlier this month, emphasized
the importance of involving the private sector in the
development of Palestine.

At a business-matching event held on the sidelines
of the meeting, a memorandum of understanding on
cooperation was signed between the Chambers of
Commerce of Palestine and Indonesia, in the presence
of the Special Envoy of the Government of Japan for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Kono, and the Prime
Minister of the Palestinian Authority, Mr. Shtayeh,
as witnesses. Conference participants also reaffirmed
their unchanged stance to support a two-State solution
and expressed their determination to continue to
support the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, responding
to the call of the Agency's Commissioner-General,
Mr. Kr'ahenbiihl, who was present at the meeting.

Behind Japan's efforts through CEAPAD is our
belief that in order to achieve a two-State solution, we
need to assist Palestinians in achieving sustainable
economic development. Nevertheless, development
projects alone cannot achieve peace. Lasting peace
and security can be reached only through negotiations
between the parties. We must continue to encourage the
parties to make difficult but necessary decisions. Japan
will remain engaged with both sides and will continue
to promote confidence-building measures.

Let me conclude by briefly addressing the situation
in the Strait of Hormuz, Securing the safety of
navigation in the area is extremely important for the
peace and prosperity of the international community,
including Japan. We sincerely hope for an easing
of tensions and a stabilizing of the situation in the
region, and we will continue our diplomatic efforts to
that end, in coordination with relevant countries and
international organizations.

