Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
Special Envoy Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for the
information they have shared with us today. Allow me
also to convey my best wishes to the Special Envoy and
offer him Poland's full support.

I would like to focus my statement on two
issues - the current situation in the Abyei Area and the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA).

We take note of the relatively stable security
situation in Abyei, but at the same time we recognize
that many challenges still remain on the political,
humanitarian and economic fronts. We note with regret
that no progress has been made in the implementation
of the 2011 Agreement on Temporary Arrangements
for the Administration and Security of the Abyei
Area. We are concerned that the lack of a genuine
political process between the Sudan and South Sudan
is solidifying the administrative vacuum that exists
in Abyei. The absence of effective formal authorities
in Abyei has resulted in limited law enforcement and
a lack of good governance and the rule of law. It also
hinders the delivery of basic services to the population.

We encourage Sudanese and South Sudanese
authorities to build on the rapprochement between the
two countries that we have witnessed over the past
months and work together to achieve a lasting solution
to the status of Abyei. At the same time, we call on all
parties to refrain from any activities that put at risk the
fragile peace achieved in Abyei.

Turning to the work of UNISFA and the renewal
of its mandate, Poland believes that the relatively calm
situation in Abyei is to a large extent a result of the
stabilizing role played by UNISFA. We are convinced
that every peacekeeping mission should adapt to the
changing realities on the ground. Therefore, UNISFA
also has to be able to adjust its tasks to the current
situation in Abyei.

Last year we voted in favour of UNISFA's new
mandate, which reinforced the police component within
the mission in response to the weak rule of law in the
Abyei Area. Today, however, we note with regret that the
increase in police personnel has yet to be implemented,
and we call on the Sudan's authorities to facilitate
the mission's reconfiguration. At the same time, we
commend the progress achieved by the Sudan and
South Sudan in the implementation of the benchmarks
set out by the Security Council with regard to the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.

When it comes to UNISFA'S mandate, we support
its renewal for another six months. We agree with
the Secretary-General that UNISFA should be able
to engage in achieving a political solution in Abyei,
in collaboration with the African Union Commission
and the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel. We therefore support the Secretary-General's
recommendation to strengthen the political posture
of the mission and enhance its capacity to support a
political process in the Abyei Area.

I would like to conclude by stressing that there
can be no other way for the Sudan and South Sudan to
resolve the question of Abyei than through dialogue,
including intercommunal dialogue and reconciliation,
and a genuine and inclusive political process that
involves women and young people.

UNISFA's presence remains crucial for the stability
of Abyei, but it cannot substitute the role of the State.
Poland believes that the Security Council should remain
unified on that issue and support all efforts to achieve a
lasting solution to the status of Abyei.

