Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I would
like to thank the Assistant Secretary-General for her
sobering but necessary update on the humanitarian
crisis in Syria.

First, let me commend the organizations and
individuals that are providing life-saving assistance
to millions of Syrians. Their work is heroic, and the
United States proudly supports them. At the same time,
I regret the fact that the Security Council is yet again
hearing reports of medical facilities being targeted by
the Al-Assad regime and its allies, civilians being killed
and humanitarians being denied access to desperate
populations. Business as usual cannot continue to
define these monthly meetings. The Council must hold
the regime and its allies accountable for the atrocities
it has committed, and we must ensure access for
humanitarians wherever aid is needed in Syria.

As we have heard, the toll in Idlib over the past
four months has been gruesome - more than 1,000
people killed, including at least 304 children, 164
women and 30 humanitarian workers, and roughly
2,000 people wounded. Nearly all ofthe 1,089 civilians
killed between April and August were attributed to
Syrian regime forces and their allies, according to the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Michelle Bachelet.

The Al-Assad regime unilaterally announced a
ceasefire on 30 August, but that so-called ceasefire,
like others before it, merely offered cover for the
regime to regroup, reorganize and rest before its next
attack. The regime's despicable, if familiar, practice of
launching attacks that damage health-care facilities has
likewise resumed. On 13 September, a regime artillery
strike hit the Kiwan Hospital in Idlib. That marks the
fifty-second medical facility struck in the past five
months. In the short term, these effects are horrific,
but the lasting effects are catastrophic and will persist
for generations.

Meanwhile, in Sufuhan, a White Helmet centre was
destroyed on 12 September. We welcome the Secretary-
General's decision to establish a Board of Inquiry to
investigate attacks that damaged humanitarian facilities
in north-west Syria and that the United Nations has
selected the Board's members to manage that important
accountability effort. We stand ready to support the
Board's work and encourage all Member States to do
the same.

Additionally, we call for the Secretary-General to
make the Board's final report public. The intentional
targeting of civilians and civilian objects is a violation of
international humanitarian law, especially when those
persons and objects reside in formally de-conflicted
zones. Issuing a public report will greatly aid in holding
responsible parties to account. The Al-Assad regime
and Russia must cease bombardments that would wound
and kill civilians and devastate civilian infrastructure.
As the United States has reiterated time and time again,
there is no military solution to this conflict.

With respect to the Rukban settlement, we commend
the United Nations and its partners for completing their
assessment mission and delivering critical supplies to
nearly 15,000 displaced Syrians. We urge the Al-Assad
regime and Russia to allow sustained deliveries of
humanitarian assistance to Rukban from Damascus and
to keep commercial routes to the encampment open as
long as the civilians choose to remain in the settlement.

The return of internally displaced persons and
refugees in Syria must be informed, safe, voluntary
and dignified. We strongly urge all parties to work with
the United Nations to ensure that proposals for return
align with the United Nations guiding principles on
internal displacement, and that the displaced persons
receive all relevant information so that they may
make informed decisions about their movement and
safety. We were alarmed by reports that the Al-Assad
regime has detained thousands of returning Syrians
and continues to arrest and torture civilians, including
those who signed reconciliation agreements with the
regime. We call for an end to the Al-Assad regime's
cruel detention practices.

We welcome the efforts by the members of this organ
to stop the unfolding of this humanitarian catastrophe
in Idlib. To meet that goal, we strongly support the draft
resolution submitted by Kuwait, Belgium and Germany,
which includes a meaningful ceasefire to the ongoing
hostilities in Idlib and will protect civilians and provide
needed accountability measures. All Council members
should support the draft resolution.

Finally, efforts by other members of the Council
to promote a separate draft resolution that denies the
people of Syria a full ceasefire will not halt the suffering
of Syrians and should not receive the support of any
Council member. I would certainly like to believe that
the entire Council will join me in standing with the
people of Syria by supporting the sole draft resolution
that will bring an end to the ongoing regime strikes.

