Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): I would like
to join others in thanking Mr. Arnault for his excellent
briefing on the current situation in Afghanistan.

After more than 20 years of conflict, the Afghan
people have a strong wish for peace, democracy,
security and improved living conditions. Against them
stand frustrated warlords, drug barons, Al-Qaida and
the Taliban, for whom constant instability and a weak
State would be the ideal. We must not allow those
negative forces to succeed. Afghanistan has travelled a
long way since the end of Taliban rule. Denmark
believes that, with continued military, political and
development assistance from the international
community, the overall positive trend will continue,
despite the numerous challenges ahead.

Denmark is pleased to note that preparations for
the elections to the Wolesi Jirga and the provincial
councils, to be held on 18 September, are on track. A
high voter turnout will be crucial, and Denmark hopes
in particular that the high turnout of woman at last
year's presidential elections can be repeated or even
surpassed at the upcoming elections. Denmark further
welcomes the positive role played by the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission and the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in monitoring political rights up to the
elections.

In order for the preparations for the elections to
proceed as scheduled, the remaining funding gap of
some $29 million must urgently be closed. Denmark
has recently decided to increase its financial
contribution for the elections and hopes that others will
do the same.

Efforts to provide security will be crucial to
minimize the potential for intimidation of candidates
and voters during the forthcoming elections.

Denmark is concerned about the deteriorating
security situation in the south and east of Afghanistan
and the increasing number of assaults on the Afghan
and international security forces. In that regard we
extend our sincere condolences to the Spanish
Government and the families for the recent tragic loss
of personnel. The growing influence of non-Afghan,
including Al-Qaida, elements, the growing
sophistication of Taliban and Al-Qaida weaponry and
the increased targeting of local communities and their
leaders are particularly worrying.

We welcome the successful conclusion of the
formal process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and strongly support the ongoing
programme to disband illegal armed groups.

Another key priority in improving the security
situation in Afghanistan must remain combating the
cultivation, sale and trafficking of illegal drugs,
which- as the Secretary-General's latest report on
Afghanistan (S/2005/525) points out - is used to fund
crime, corruption, illegal armed groups and extremist
elements. Assistance to developing alternative
livelihoods should continue to play a central role in
those endeavours.

Denmark hopes that the elections can be a
stepping-stone to the development of a new framework
for international engagement beyond the Bonn process.
Afghanistan is still facing daunting challenges with
regional and global ramifications that demand our full
attention. Afghan leadership and inclusiveness, as well
as sustained international support, will be crucial to
ensure the success of the Kabul-based process.

In order to clarify the priorities of the Kabul
compact it is my hope that the discussions initiated
between the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the Afghan Government can be extended
in near future to include both a broad dialogue within
the country and a dialogue between Afghanistan and
the international community. Denmark would like to
see the Kabul compact address a prioritized range of
nation-building issues and further the momentum by
setting out clear targets, deadlines and demands to
Afghanistan as well as to the international community.
It is for the international community to support
and help implement the goals and priorities set by the
Afghan Government. Denmark has decided to extend
its development and humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan until 2009 and encourages other
development partners to enter into similar long-term
commitments.

Finally, Denmark attaches great importance to
institution-building and civil administration reform,
particularly in the justice sector. This would include
strengthening the rule of law, rooting out corruption
and ensuring the protection of human rights, including
women's rights. In the field of transitional justice, the
action plan developed jointly by the Government of
Afghanistan, the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission and UNAMA is encouraging and must be
brought forward so that steps can soon be taken
towards its implementation.

In conclusion, Denmark would like to thank
Mr. Arnault and his staff in UNAMA for their hard
work and dedication in helping to bring about a better
future for the people of Afghanistan. In light of the
positive results achieved so far, Denmark supports a
continued strong role for UNAMA. We agree that an
increasingly Afghan-led process requires enhanced
coordination of the international actors, and we look
forward to engaging constructively with the
Government of Afghanistan, UNAMA and other
partners both through the Kabul process and in the
coming consultation processes on the future role of
UNAMA.

Finally, Sir, we support the presidential statement
to be adopted on the issue of Afghanistan subsequent
to this meeting.

