Mr. Shah (India): Let me at the very outset convey
my appreciation to you, Sir, for scheduling this open debate
of the Security Council on the question of protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations. I am also deeply appreciative of the fact that you
have chosen to send a discussion paper for this meeting to
the President of the General Assembly, who in turn has
shared it with the entire membership of the United Nations.
It is gratifying to note this effort at collaboration between
the General Assembly and the Security Council on an issue
that is topical and provocative and has serious ramifications
for the structure and nature of the United Nations.

It is clear to all interested observers that the
motivation behind this debate - the questions that it raises
and the answers that are sought - is a direct outcome of
recent tragic events in and around the Great Lakes region
of Africa. There have been other instances, but none that
has, in recent times, manifested itself so clearly and with
such little and inadequate response from the United
Nations.

India attaches the highest importance to the provision
of humanitarian assistance to refugees. As a country that
has and continues to provide succour and shelter to a very
large number of refugees without outside assistance, we are
aware of the complexities and difficulties that are involved
in the provision of humanitarian assistance to refugees and
the burden that a receiving country has to bear. Merely
providing assistance to refugees is not adequate. What is
necessary is to investigate the reasons that have forced men,
women and children to become refugees and to find ways
to ensure that this does not happen.

Today's discussion raises some pertinent questions, the
most critical of which seems to be the way the issue is
approached: what can the Council do politically to support
international humanitarian operations in conflict situations?
My delegation was most struck by the emphasis on the
word "politically". While political action and political will
are undoubtedly of importance in resolving most situations
involving humanitarian crises, experience in dealing with
crisis situations has demonstrated that they are not enough.
There are clearly a number of fundamental causes leading
to refugee crises which must be addressed in order to
prevent such situations from arising.

Nevertheless, we understand the concern of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and others to have their courageous
humanitarian workers protected, by force if necessary. It
is not unnatural that they should turn to the Security
Council for solutions.

The United Nations has some experience in
providing protection for humanitarian assistance to
refugees and others in conflict situations. The experience
so far has demonstrated that neither resort to multinational
forces nor robust United Nations peacekeeping forces
with Chapter VII mandates have been sufficient. Their
utility has been found to be limited. Hence, the need for
this debate. The relationship between peacekeeping
operations and protection of humanitarian assistance is a
complex one. There are, no doubt, commonalities. But, as
clearly enunciated by the Foreign Ministers of the Non-
Aligned Movement at their recent meeting in Delhi, there
is a need to differentiate between peacekeeping operations
and humanitarian assistance. This has also been
underscored by many non-govemmental organizations that
are providing humanitarian assistance on the ground.
Situations in which peacekeeping operations can assist
humanitarian-assistance operations can certainly occur
where the peacekeeping operation has been established
with the consent of the parties concerned, where there is
a peace to keep and/or a peace agreement between parties
to a conflict is in place. Assignment of United Nations
peacekeeping troops to shoulder responsibilities relating
to protection for humanitarian assistance would, in
situations that do not meet these conditions,
fundamentally change the scope of peacekeeping.

The question has been raised about what else the
Council can do to help assist in protecting refugees, by,
for instance, applying so-called political pressure through
the imposition of targeted sanctions. This in turn gives
rise to a host of further questions. For example, who
should apply the "political pressure" - the Security
Council or its individual members? What if they are
themselves involved in the problem that has given rise to
the refugee issue? The suggestion that targeted sanctions
could be a way out is open to question. For example, at
whom should sanctions be targeted - those whose
actions have given rise to the most recent flow of
refugees or those whose actions were the cause of the
conflict in the first instance? Should the sanctions be
targeted at those who support them today, or those who

 

supported them in the past and have now found it
convenient to drop that support? Much work has already
been done on this subject by the General Assembly's
Informal Open-ended Working Group on an Agenda for
Peace, and we have a consensus document ready on this
difficult subject. It would be prudent to adhere to the
agreements already arrived at in that document.

My presentation so far might appear to some to
suggest that the issues involved are so complex that the
international community is helpless and cannot effectively
meet the challenge of protection for humanitarian assistance
to refugees and others in all conflict situations. That is
neither our intention nor our objective. My delegation
wishes to emphasize that the focus of United Nations
efforts should shift to the prevention of crises which create
humanitarian situations and attendant problems, rather than
remain on finding military solutions or enforcement
measures. The concerned agencies of the United Nations
and others have provided and continue to provide much-
needed humanitarian assistance. They do a fine job; but as
long as we do not address the fundamental issues, they will
be placed in increasingly difficult situations.

For the United Nations to address effectively the
problem of humanitarian assistance to refugees and others
in conflict situations, it must address itself to the root
causes that give rise to refugee flows and conflict situations
in the first place. Most, if not all, conflicts, have their
origin in poverty, lack of economic and social development
and the absence of tolerance. Unless these issues are
addressed sincerely and with the political commitment of
the United Nations and its major players, we will
regrettably continue to face conflicts and humanitarian
crises.

Unfortunately, the recent history of the United Nations
has been to by-pass the fight against poverty, except
through platitudes and the issuance of voluminous
declarations. The focus of United Nations activities and
priorities must be on addressing the development needs of
the majority of its members and on alleviating poverty. If
the United Nations were to provide more resources for
development at the right time, it would save the large
expenditure it incurs on fire-fighting operations after the
event. Its preventive diplomacy must find innovative ways
of promoting development and social cohesion and not get
stymied in looking for political-military solutions. The
United Nations must promote pluralism and tolerance.
Finally, all necessary assistance should be provided to those
refugee-receiving States which bear this great burden.

I would wish to convey my delegation's deep
appreciation and admiration for the dedication and
commitment with which the many relief and refugee
organizations and personnel, both United Nations and
non-United Nations, are functioning under the most
difficult and trying conditions to bring relief to those in
need. They often work under daily threat to their own
personal safety and security.

There can be no excuse or justification whatsoever
for any threat or attack or injury or death of a
humanitarian relief worker. Those who commit such
outrages must be resisted and punished. But, at the same
time, the United Nations has to be careful not to take any
step that may in any way affect the perception of
impartiality or neutrality of relief workers and their
agencies. The United Nations will need to tread a careful
path to ensure that the safety and security of relief
workers is not undermined by precipitate military
involvement.

The emphasis on prevention which we are
advocating also requires that the Security Council, the
General Assembly and international financial institutions
must have close coordination and must work together in
tackling potential humanitarian crisis situations before
they occur. The inability of the Security Council to act in
the face of massive humanitarian crises makes it
imperative that the approach adopted is broader and
addresses the economic and social imperatives.

