I welcome you, Sir, in chairing this meeting. I also thank Mr. Maurer, Mr. Thiaw and Ms. Modja for their briefings. Climate change and environmental degradation are common challenges for all countries. According to the United in Science 2020 climate report, the warming of our planet has not stopped despite the coronavirus disease pandemic; in fact, greenhouse-gas concentrations have reached record highs in 2020. In the world today, we see places where climate change and environmental degradation endanger people's livelihoods, exacerbate the scarcity of resources and even aggravate existing tensions and conflicts. In Africa and the Middle East, tensions and instability, which are being compounded by environmental crises, have led to serious humanitarian consequences. Millions of people are being displaced by natural disasters, famine and conflicts. No country is immune from the impact of global challenges, including climate change. The international community must unite to address these challenges holistically and ina coordinated manner. In this regard, I wish to highlight four points. First, we must prevent conflicts and promote the peaceful settlement of disputes. There is no direct link between environmental issues and peace and security. The security implications of environmental degradation differ from country to country and from region to region. We need to discuss and handle them in country-specific ways. The first step is to identify the root causes of a conflict, evaluate the environmental aspects of the security situation and work towards a targeted and specific solution. Policies and mechanisms that can balance and reconcile conflicting interests must be put in place. For its part, the Security Council should effectively implement its primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security, promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes and paving the way for reconstruction. Secondly, we must prioritize development and earnestly implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Climate change is, in essence, a development issue and can be addressed only through sustainable development. As we kick off the Decade of Action to deliver on the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030, the international community should prioritize development and put people first. Countries need to enhance macroeconomic policy coordination with development at the centre, promote green and low-carbon transformation and enhance climate resilience. Efforts should be made to alleviate the humanitarian consequences of environmental degradation and help the vulnerable, making sure that no one is left behind. Thirdly, we must honour commitments taken by multilateral consensus and faithfully fulfil international obligations. If climate change has security implications, then the implementation of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and other aspects of the international consensus on climate change matters not only to the environment, but also to international peace and security. All countries, but especially a certain major Power, should reinvigorate multilateralism instead of putting itself first. It should fulfil the obligations it once took under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris Agreement. It is important to follow the principles of common but differentiated responsibilities and of equity and respective capabilities, and work towards an equitable climate-governance regime. Developed countries should honour their commitment to mobilizing $100 billion a year in climate financing by 2020, set a new collective quantified goal and help developing countries build preparedness. Fourthly, we must attach great importance to Africa and support its effort to achieve peace and security. Africa is the home to one-fifth of the world's population, and African affairs make up two-thirds of the matters on the agenda of the Security Council. Silencing the guns in Africa is not only the aspiration of the people of Africa, but also the top priority of our work. The international community should let the initiative of African countries to resolve their own issues play out fully. Efforts should also be made to strengthen African countries' capacity to address the potential security risks of climate change and environmental issues. Given the special challenges facing developing countries, more resources should be pooled to support their mitigation and adaptation efforts, including through funding, technology and capacity-building. China stands firm in pursuing green, low-carbon and sustainable development. We faithfully fulfil our obligations under the UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement and have met our climate target for 2020 two years early. China accounts for 25 per cent of the global net increase in leaf area since 2000. We are willing to make greater contributions and are considering a mid-century long-term vision for climate change. China is advancing the development of a green Silk Road. We jointly initiated the Belt and Road Initiative International Green Development Coalition with the United Nations Environment Programme, helping relevant countries develop renewable energy projects, boosting energy transition and green development. China is an active champion of South-South cooperation on climate change. We have allocated over ¥1 billion in recent years to support developing countries, especially African countries and small island States, in confronting the challenge of climate change, including through developing low-carbon demonstration zones, carrying out mitigation and adaptation projects and providing assistance for capacity-building. As we commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Organization, it is high time that States Members of the United Nations uphold solidarity and unity, champion multilateralism, safeguard the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter, join efforts to address climate change and strive for peace and the development of our world.
