Mr. Moussa (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the
outset to express our deep condolences in the wake of
the tragedy in Haiti. We send our condolences to the
families of all victims. We also wish to praise the work
of the United Nations in that country and commend
those who have been killed performing humanitarian
work.

Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
accession to the presidency of the Security Council this
month. We are certain that, with your Chinese wisdom
and expertise, you will ensure the success of the
Council's work. One demonstration of that is your
having convened this meeting and so judiciously
chosen the topic of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security.

I should also like to express my deep gratitude to
the Secretary-General, who led a high-level meeting on
ll and 12 January on multilateral cooperation in
addressing the crises that threaten peace and security
around the world.

I turn now to the issue that brings us here today.
First, the United Nations works with regional and
subregional organizations under Chapter VIII of the
Charter, but their cooperation is also determined by the
state of international and regional affairs and by huge
problems therein, requiring more effective cooperation
among the Organization's organs, programmes, funds
and specialized agencies and the regional organizations
that make up the multilateral architecture.

Secondly, Chapter VIII, which governs this
cooperation, could benefit from more in-depth
interpretation based on experience in and lessons
learned from the cooperation that has already been
undertaken between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. Such interpretation
should assist us in remedying shortfalls, because
certain provisions of Chapter VIII foresee just such
cooperation and because the role of regional
organizations has grown to unprecedented proportions.

The important point that I wish to stress is that
any decision to enhance the efficacy of cooperation
must allow regional and subregional organizations to
commit themselves, under Chapter VIII, to following
certain specific and agreed rules and procedures. We
must also accord due importance to continuous training
and heightened efficiency. The problem is that,
although we all work within a single structure, which is
the United Nations, we do not plan together. As a
result, we cannot face the future armed with considered
positions of shared responsibility that would ensure the
development of coherent policies in addressing crises. I
would therefore propose that we review and further
develop our interpretation of Chapter VIII.

Thirdly, the concepts governing international
action change as life changes. As a result, the Council
should address new issues that threaten not only the
stability of States, but the international community as a
whole. That includes climate change, in which the

Council has an important role to play, although we
cannot fail to recognize the General Assembly's central
role therein as well. We should always coordinate with
the General Assembly and support its efforts. I propose
that the Security Council add two items to its agendas,
one on the impact of climate change on the well-being
and stability of the international community, and the
other on an assessment of the implementation of the
Millennium Declaration and the impact of the failure to
implement certain programmes and goals. The Council,
in a spirit of solidarity in response to the needs
presented by such challenges, should focus on serious
factors that threaten humankind.

Fourthly, another issue worthy of review and
consideration is how crises are managed. Contenting
ourselves with managing crises instead of courageously
solving them gives rise to a great number of questions
as to how effective crisis management really can be. In
many instances on the ground, crises that are managed
in fact persist.

We should also focus on the role of the Security
Council, given the increasing number of issues related
to international peace. Attempts have been made to
prevent the Council from playing its central role. The
international multilateral system that we seek to
promote needs the Council's leadership. The Council
can play the role of ensuring respect for the United
Nations Charter and the principles of international law.
If the Security Council wishes to restore its legal,
moral and political authority, it must extensively assess
situations in which violations of international law and
the challenges to the Charter are ignored. Multilateral
action should focus on resolving rather than on merely
managing crises.

It is time to be frank and more transparent with
regard to the parties involved in various crises. That
would be more acceptable and could lighten the load of
the regional and subregional organizations that are
forced to bear the burden of such crises. It would
enable regional and subregional organizations to focus
more on growth and sustainable development and on
building modern civil societies so that the world can
become more democratic, more balanced and more
tolerant.

Fifthly, multilateral action requires us to
recognize that such action affects the United Nations
and all organizations working in that vast domain,
including regional organizations. Thus, it is essential
that the various organizations involved in the different
crises that arise act in a joint and integrated manner.
Concerned parties should not be asked to participate in
isolation from one other. Regional organizations should
not be called on to work in one area yet be excluded by
narrow interests from working in others. I therefore
call for agreed working methods or a code of conduct
to govern relations between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations.

Sixthly, the League of Arab States has effective
cooperation agreements with the African Union, the
European Union, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, the Common Market of the South, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
The Arab League plays an important role in addressing
many of the major problems in the Near East and
Africa, such as in Yemen, the Sudan, Somalia, Iraq,
Mauritania and other countries, in addition to its role in
development, socio-economic matters and the
strengthening of democracy. We must not forget that
the basic document developing a balanced vision of
Israeli-Arab peace came from the Arab League.

In that regard, it must be stressed that the League
of Arab States has strengthened its cooperation with
the African Union. Similarly, the solution to the Darfur
crisis, which came from the African Union, is to be
implemented by League of Arab States. The
establishment by the Arab League of institutional
structures, such as the Arab Peace and Security
Council, to address issues concerning the maintenance
of regional peace and security also gave rise to
cooperation in all areas with the African Union so as to
further coordination between those emerging structures
and the African Peace and Security Council in the area
of peacekeeping.

Lastly, I would like to state that a cooperation and
coordination mechanism should be established among
the various multilateral bodies, under the auspices of
the Secretary-General, to address all these issues. In
that regard, I call for a group similar to the Group of
Twenty to be set up that would bring together the
United Nations and regional and other international
organizations so as to effectively relaunch multilateral
coordination.

I would also like to propose that such a
mechanism be presided over by the Secretary-General
and that its members be chosen from various United

Nations agencies, such as the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations
Environment Programme, the United Nations
Development Fund for Women and UNICEF, as well as
specialized agencies such as UNESCO, the World
Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the World Food
Programme and the International Labour Organization.
This is important because the international agenda
comprises a wide variety of issues, including the
conflict of civilizations, the fight against epidemics
and the food, water and migration crises, all of which
require a fairly comprehensive mechanism.

Apart from those members, the mechanism
should include international political and security
organizations, such as the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, and regional and
subregional organizations, such as the European Union,
the African Union, the League of Arab States and the
Organization of American States. It should also include
the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the
World Trade Organization, the International Committee
of the Red Cross and other bodies. Thus, such a
mechanism would have from 20 to 25 members. Apart
from providing ongoing coordination, an annual
official meeting of the group within the United
Nations, presided over by the Secretary-General, could
solve problems and effectively relaunch the
multilateral system and make it as useful as possible.

