Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): I shall speak
in my national capacity.

Since its conclusion, Italy has considered the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) to be proof
of how diplomacy can effectively lead to a solution
to issues related to nuclear non-proliferation. In
particular, the JCPOA has been set up with a robust
and comprehensive structure, supported by a solid
verification mechanism, which is crucial to upholding
mutual trust and the credibility of the Plan. For that
reason, Italy will continue to strongly support the
International Atomic Energy Agency in its verification
and monitoring duties. In that respect, Italy commends
the Agency for the work it has done to date and the
productive dialogue it has held with all stakeholders.
Italy also commends the High Representative of the
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Federica
Mogherini, for her leadership as Coordinator of the
Joint Commission established by the JCPOA.

Two days after the first anniversary of
implementation day, it is clear that the mechanism
effectively contributes to global security. The
implementation of the JCPOA and of resolution 2231
(2015) has advanced very significantly thus far. We
trust that all the parties will continue to respect their
commitments and the spirit of the agreement in good
faith. Only good faith implementation of the JCPOA
and of resolution 2231 (2015) will contribute to regional
and international peace and security.

We encourage all stakeholders to continue to
promptly resolve any potential issues through dialogue,
using all the relevant mechanisms set up by the JCPOA.
Of course, the Security Council has a key role in this
process, and Italy will do its part to facilitate the smooth
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), taking the
excellent work done by my predecessor, Ambassador
Roman Oyarzun Marchesi, as an example.

In conclusion, we believe that in coming years the
international community should continue to ensure that
the JCPOA yields benefits for all and that it maintains its
central role in the global effort against the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction.

