Mr. Mlynz'tr (Slovakia): Before delivering my
remarks, I would like to state that Slovakia fully aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered by the observer
of the European Union.

Reconciliation is aimed at rebuilding trust,
strengthening resilience and forging a functioning
relationship between the people and the Government,
known as the social contract. It can be successful only
if the process is representative and inclusive, embraces
universal rights and values, such as freedom and
human dignity, and if that reconciliation focuses first
and foremost on the people and their safety, security
and welfare.

Recalling the twin resolutions on the review of
the peacebuilding architecture (General Assembly resolution 70/262 and Council resolution 2282 (2016)),
promoting healing and reconciliation and building a
professional, accountable and effective security sector,
including through its reform, are critical components
to consolidating peace and security, promoting poverty
reduction, strengthening the rule of law and good
governance and preventing countries from relapsing
into conflict. Let me focus on three important areas.

First, Slovakia is a keen advocate of the issue of
security sector reform as an important instrument to help
maintain peace and stability, particularly in countries
recovering from conflicts and undergoing the processes
of post-conflict reconstruction and reconciliation.
In April 2018, South Africa and Slovakia, on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform,
co-hosted a high-level round table on security sector
reform and sustaining peace. The event underlined that
security sector reform plays a key role in the successful
implementation of both the sustaining peace agenda
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Given the vital role that security sector reform plays
in conflict prevention, post-conflict reconstruction and
sustaining peace, an expanded understanding of United
Nations involvement and the contributions of security-
sector reform to reconciliation is essential. We need a
better understanding of, and education on, why peace
agreements are often not fulfilled and why we are
witnessing relapses into conflict.

Today it is more than evident that incorporating
greater numbers of marginalized ethnic and religious
groups into the military and police forces, security
structures and rule-of-law institutions and fostering
a cultural shift towards non-discriminatory and
accountable public policy can help to alleviate
grievances around security, especially in the aftermath
of conflict.

Secondly, on partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations for building and sustaining
peace, Slovakia holds this year's chairmanship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). Our three priority areas in that context have
been preventing, mediating and resolving conflicts;
building a safer future; and effective multilateralism.
As well as supporting peaceful settlements through
inclusive political dialogue and mediation processes,
we have placed a particular focus on easing the daily
lives ofthe people affected by conflict. Peace processes,
including mediation and reconciliation, must be
inclusive. Everyone's voice must be heard, particularly
that of the youth. Young people's perspectives and
their active engagement are crucial to promoting and
strengthening international peace and security.

Another important part of that, of course, is the
context of Sustainable Development Goal 16, on
building sustainable, peaceful and inclusive societies
that are supported by a functioning and accountable
institutional framework. I would like to highlight the
development of the first OSCE guidelines on security
sector governance and reform, which we consider as
practical guidance and an important milestone in that
respect. The third priority of our OSCE chairmanship
has been effective multilateralism and, in that context,
the importance of United Nations-OSCE cooperation
and partnership, including through the important work
of the United Nations Liaison Office in Vienna.

Lastly, Slovakia has presented its candidature to
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which has a key role in bringing together
the various actors of the United Nations system,
including the United Nations country teams and civil
society, which are instrumental in reconciliatory
efforts in many settings. We believe that the advisory
role of the Peacebuilding Commission to the Security
Council could and should be better used and further
drawn upon to ensure that appropriate attention is paid
to reconciliation at all stages of the conflict cycle. In
that regard, we look forward to further engagement
between the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Security Council.

Before concluding my remarks, let me also mention
that, in just a few days, from 5 to 6 December, we will
organize the OSCE Ministerial Council in Bratislava.
Many of these issues are very high on the Ministerial
Council's agenda. It is a unique opportunity for
the largest regional peace and security cooperation
organization to focus on important issues, including
peacebuilding and reconciliation, and the participating
States will review and assess the organization's
activities, including on strengthening dialogue on
security issues in all of the OSCE's three dimensions.

