Mr. Amil (Pakistan): I would like at the outset to
avail myself of this opportunity to congratulate you,
Sir, on your successful and eventful presidency of the
Security Council and on your able guidance and
stewardship of the Council's work this month. As you
are a dear friend of the people of Pakistan, and since
you are coming to the end of a brilliant career, our
delegation should like particularly to wish you all the
best in your future endeavours.

This timely debate is testimony to the continued
attention of the international community and the
Security Council to Afghanistan. We are also thankful
to Mr. Kai Eide for his informative briefing this
morning. Pakistan appreciates the important role of the
United Nation in Afghanistan.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/323) presents an objective analysis of the
situation in Afghanistan. While Afghanistan has made
progress on certain frontiers, considerable challenges
remain on the political, security, governance,
humanitarian and development fronts. The overall
deterioration of the security situation is a matter of
concern. Development and reconstruction efforts are
slow and uneven. The absence of State authority
beyond some major cities, a lack of good governance,
rampant corruption and economic hardships are
shattering the people's confidence in the ability of the
Government to provide protection and better conditions
of life. An increase in civilian casualties is further
fuelling public grievances against foreign forces. This
has been a major impediment to winning the hearts and
minds of the Afghan people, which is necessary for
success in Afghanistan.

Afghanistan is standing at the crossroads of
history. The challenges facing Afghanistan are numerous
and daunting. For decades, Afghanistan has suffered
the ravages of war and civil strife. The brotherly people
of Afghanistan have been the victims of instability,
violence, terrorism, factional fighting, illegal arms,
narcotics production and trafficking, and organized
crime. This has had a disastrous effect on the Afghan
economy, infrastructure and society. The time has
arrived to put an end to this vicious cycle, but there is
no magic wand to turn the devastation of decades into
development overnight.

The absence of a comprehensive strategy has
prevented us from gaining any significant headway in
the consolidation of peace and achieving stability in
Afghanistan. We must move from the fragmented and
piecemeal approach to tackle these formidable
challenges and mount an integrated response fully
owned and led by the Afghan people, with the support
of the international community.

Partnerships with regional States, as well as the
international community, will remain key to sustainable
peace and development in Afghanistan. A series of
recent international and transregional meetings
indicates the dedication and commitment of regional
and international partners to the development of
Afghanistan. The abundance of international attention
and goodwill towards Afghanistan is a good
opportunity to galvanize our efforts and evolve a new
consensus on achieving a comprehensive strategy for
peace in Afghanistan and the region. Based on
cooperation and shared responsibility, such a consensus
should address the past and present shortcomings and
set a clear strategic direction for the international
efforts in Afghanistan.

In this regard, let me briefly mention some
aspects which would require particular attention.

First, the challenges faced by Afghanistan are of
internal origin and therefore require internal solutions.
Any comprehensive strategy devised to address these
challenges must enjoy the full ownership of the Afghan
people and the continued support of the international
community, particularly the neighbouring countries.

Secondly, the use of military force alone cannot
deliver. The resultant civilian casualties have been a
major cause of alienation. It would be worthwhile to
focus less on military operations and to devote more
energy to protecting populations and securing areas.

Thirdly, a civilian development surge is needed.
Massive investment is required in reconstruction,
development and social welfare programmes, improving
governance and putting a premium on the strengthening
of State institutions and capacity-building. Providing
better living conditions and making peace dividends
visible would greatly help to win the support of the
Afghan people.

Fourthly, we must not deal with the problems of
terrorism and violent extremism in isolation; they are
part of a wider issue and should be tackled accordingly.
The rise in militancy in Afghanistan is directly linked
to the unchecked growth of narcotics there. Financial
resources generated through illicit trade in drugs have
helped sustain the activities of insurgents and extremist
elements. There is a dire need to address this narcotics
problem. Short-term measures need to be
complemented by comprehensive, durable and long-
term solutions based on alternative livelihoods and
development.

Fifthly, any strategy, no matter how innovative or
dynamic it is, would be doomed to failure without the
support of all elements of Afghan society. There is a
dire need to launch an Afghan-led process of
reconciliation based on dialogue. The renewal of the
democratic mandate in the forthcoming elections in
Afghanistan is an ideal opportunity to promote political
and socio-economic inclusion and national reconciliation.

Sixthly, the parameters of a sustainable solution
should include a comprehensive regional approach,
taking into account the interests, the capacities and the
aspirations of sovereign States and their people. It
should build solid stakes for all sides in lasting peace.
Given its strategic geographical setting, the region has
a vast potential to be transformed into an international
cooperation and development hub. We must move from
confrontation and rivalry to competition and cooperation
in order to harvest the latent benefits. Tapping this
5
potential would be a win-win proposition for all in the
region and beyond.

The role of the United Nations is the cornerstone
of the international efforts to help Afghanistan. We
appreciate the constructive role played by UNAMA in
Afghanistan. Given the formidable scope and gigantic
task at hand, we believe that the Mission should be
provided with the necessary resources to carry out its
mandate.

Apart from Afghanistan itself, no other country
has a more vital stake in the establishment of peace,
security and prosperity in that country than Pakistan.
Pakistan is the direct sufferer of ongoing instability in
Afghanistan. Peace in Afghanistan is essential to the
tranquillity and development of Pakistan's own border
regions. Therefore, we are firmly committed to helping
the Government of Afghanistan and the international
partners in restoring security and bringing stability to
Afghanistan. Pakistan has been host to the world's
largest refugee population, with all its consequences.
The security forces and the people of Pakistan continue
to make tremendous sacrifices.

Pakistan attaches high priority to close, friendly
and cooperative relations with Afghanistan and wants
to have a broad-based, mutually beneficial relationship
with its western neighbour. Pakistan-Afghanistan
relations have improved tremendously with frequent
contacts at the highest political levels and commitment
on both sides to working together to address common
problems and realizing our joint potential. The Third
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan, held in Islamabad on 13 and 14 May, was
a further demonstration of Pakistan's commitment to
the stability and economic development of Afghanistan.

Let me highlight some of the words spoken by
my Prime Minister at that meeting. Since his meeting
in Colombo in 2008 with President Karzai, our two
democratic Governments have jointly brought about a
fundamental transformation in our bilateral relationship.
Today our multi-track engagement is comprehensive,
encompassing the political, economic, security and
social spheres.

Pakistan has also been engaged in the capacity-
building of Afghanistan's State institutions in the fields
of diplomacy, law enforcement, judiciary, agriculture,
counter-narcotics and medical services. Our
participation is meant for the Afghan people, on
projects identified by the Afghans and implemented

through the Afghan authorities. A culturally nuanced,
Afghan-led process of dialogue and reconciliation has
to proceed in tandem with efforts to co-opt local
populations. Pakistan welcomes the renewed focus on
transregional development. The Prime Minister also
announced specific measures at that forum, including
1,000 scholarships for Afghan students, setting up
model villages for Afghan refugees when they return,
and the establishment of vocational training centres.

Lately, Pakistan has been engaged in trilateral
summits involving key players, from the United States
to Turkey, Iran and Russia, and has participated in
other international meetings on Afghanistan, which
continues to demonstrate our commitment. We welcome
the reinvigoration of the United States focus on the
region to promote broad-based cooperation between
Pakistan and Afghanistan. The meeting of the foreign
ministers of three countries in February, followed by a
trilateral summit in May, has greatly helped to define
the future contours of a comprehensive strategy for
Afghanistan.

Our participation in the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization meeting in Moscow on 27 March further
enhanced trilateral cooperation among the Russian
Federation, Pakistan and Afghanistan. We welcome the
readiness expressed by the Russian Federation to
contribute to all positive initiatives. Similarly, our
participation in the trilateral summit, very graciously
hosted by our brother country Turkey in Ankara in
April, constitutes a step forward in trilateral cooperation
among our three nations in the field of security and
intelligence-sharing, leading towards building greater
trust among all sides. Equally important was the
meeting in March in Tehran at which Pakistan, Iran and
Afghanistan established a trilateral mechanism. This
was followed by a senior officials' meeting in April in
Islamabad to strengthen further coordination.

Pakistan envisions a peaceful, stable, prosperous
and thriving region and stands ready to play its part in
that process. We reiterate our full support for durable
peace and stability in Afghanistan. We also call on the
international community and the United Nations to
remain steadfast in their commitment to Afghanistan.

