I would like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for her briefing. The use of chemical weapons is morally reprehensible and defies all norms of international law. It is an issue of serious concern to the international community, as well as a crime. The international community needs to act collectively and with resolve so as to hold accountable those who use chemical weapons and rid the planet of these horrific weapons of mass destruction. Tunisia's remains steadfastly committed to the chemical-weapon disarmament and non-proliferation regime. We firmly condemn the use of chemical weapons anywhere, under any circumstance, by whomsoever - be it a State or non-State actor - and call for perpetrators to be held to account. Tunisia supports the important technical mandate of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in verifying the implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), including in the Syrian Arab Republic. We welcome the continued efforts and engagement of the OPCW with the Syrian authorities, particularly in the light of the latest deployment of the OPCW Declaration Assessment Team in Syria for the twenty-third round of consultations, despite the impact of the coronavirus disease on OPC W-mandated activities, We urge the Syrian Government to continue its cooperation and dialogue with the OPCW in order to resolve all outstanding issues and fulfil its obligations under the CWC and resolution 2118 (2013). It is also essential that all allegations of chemical-weapon use in Syria undergo thorough, impartial and credible investigations in order to identify those responsible for such use and properly ascertain issues of compliance. We take note of the ongoing process at the OPCW decision-making organs, which have reached advanced stages with regard to assessing Syria's complance with its obligations under the CWC in the light of the conclusions of the first report of the Investigation and Identification Team and the ensuing proceedings of the Executive Council and the Conference of the States Parties. The aim continues to be for the international community to work together, with determination and in accordance with the CWC, in order to uphold the total ban on the use of chemical weapons. Finally, Tunisia reiterates that only collective, coordinated and united action, including that of the Council, can eventually bring to a close the file on Syrian chemical-weapon use and contribute to resolving the Syrian conflict.
