Mr. Lavrov (Russia) (spoke in Russian): Russia,
like the whole international community, is alarmed by
the dangerously explosive dynamic of recent
developments in the relations between Palestinians and
the Israeli population. This can have a very negative
impact on the overall situation in the Middle East. We
decisively condemn the terrorist actions and the raids
of extremist organizations against civilian populations
in Israel. This only results in discrediting the legitimate
claims of the Palestinian people to exercise its national
rights. It undermines any attempts to change the course
of events and revert to a political settlement, and
impedes the possibility of resuming a peaceful Arab-
Israeli dialogue. This is why we believe that the
leadership of the Palestine Authority, and Yasser Arafat
personally, should take very energetic and harsh
measures to put an end to the violence on the part of
the Palestinian extremists; they should arrest and
punish the terrorists and dismantle their infrastructure.

At the same time, we are convinced that it is not
through the use of force that a solution to the problems
of Israeli-Palestinian relations will be found. That is
not the way out. The status quo is totally untenable,
because ultimately there can be a settlement only in
political terms. It is against this backdrop that we are
convinced that any attempts made by Israel to ensure
its security through the use of military force can in no
way resolve this urgent problem. On the contrary, this
can only lead to renewed acts of vengeance between
the Palestinians and the Israelis.

It is not in the interest of Israel to have a de facto
destruction of the Palestine Authority. The Israeli
leadership cannot question the legitimate right of the
Palestinian people to build its own independent State,
and therefore cannot question the existence of
Palestinian self-government headed by the legitimately
recognized leader of the Palestinian people, Yasser
Arafat.

This is why the Israeli Government should not
undertake any measures that would burn bridges; it
should preserve the possibility of a political dialogue
between Israel and the Palestinian self-government. In
such circumstances, we need concrete steps on both
sides to achieve de-escalation of the critical situation
and energetic political efforts to get out of the dead
end.

Russia, together with the American co-sponsors
of the peace process, with the European Union, with
the United Nations and within the framework of the
quartet of international intermediaries and other
concerned parties, will spare no effort to overcome the
explosive spiral of recent developments and to revert
the process to a political settlement.

The draft resolution that has been presented for
the Council's consideration is a balanced one; it
decisively condemns terrorism and all other forms of
violence; and it calls for the implementation of the
Mitchell plan and the resumption of the peace process.

In the light of our well-known position, the
Russian Federation will vote in favour of this draft
resolution.

