Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): I should like to express to you
very briefly, Mr. President, our compliments, which are
well deserved. I must say that it is an honour to return to
this table as a non-member of the Security Council and to
speak on behalf of the Brazilian delegation at this very
important meeting. If you will allow me, I should like to
express my best wishes for success to the members that are
just beginning their term of office, and especially to
Jamaica, which has replaced Brazil in one of the seats of
the Latin American and Caribbean Group in the Council.

As previous speakers have stressed, in many African
countries AIDS overburdens State institutions, undermines
traditional family support schemes and adds to the climate
of despair and disarray that tends to fuel conflicts. Although
the reality in Africa may be harsher than elsewhere, the
social, economic and political implications of AIDS are felt
everywhere. Its spread is a global problem that must be
addressed in a comprehensive manner. The impact in Africa
is especially severe because of the lack of resources for
prevention and treatment. Africa requires the instruments of
cooperation to be strengthened. In doing so, the
international community will be helping itself, not just
Africa.

What we need most at this moment is international
solidarity. Africans themselves have much to offer, with
their many successful national experiences in combating
AIDS.

It is clear that the international response to the AIDS
epidemic in Africa does not fall within the specific mandate
of the Security Council. But our debate today may help
raise the worldwide awareness of the social and economic
devastation wrought by AIDS and of the greater threat
ahead if effective action is not taken. Our debate places the
problem of AIDS in Africa in the spotlight of
international attention and stresses its implications, which
extend far beyond health issues.

Notwithstanding the support provided by multilateral
agencies, bilateral and plurilateral partnerships remain
fundamental. Throughout the 1980s, Brazil benefited from
international cooperation and has since consolidated its
national programme for preventing and combating AIDS.
At the regional level, Brazil took an active part in the
setting up, in March 1996, of a horizontal technical
cooperation group on HIV/AIDS.

Brazil's contribution to that group, which brings
together a number of Latin American and Caribbean
States, is centred on training and capacity-building in
organizing local programmes for the prevention and
control of AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases.
Based on our regional experience, the Brazilian
Government developed, in 1997, a similar cooperation
scheme with the Portuguese-speaking countries of Africa.
In 1999 experts from the Brazilian Ministry of Health
visited Kenya, Zimbabwe, South Africa, Namibia and
Botswana with a View to identifying cooperation projects
that could be quickly set up.

Being a developing country, Brazil is not a major
donor. Nevertheless, our technical expertise has been put
at the disposal of others, and we will continue to work
closely with UNAIDS and the donor community in
helping third countries to curb the spread of AIDS.
Furthermore, Brazilian policies to cope with both the
causes and consequences of AIDS may provide a useful
example to other countries that face similar budgetary
constraints.

Our health system distributes free anti-HIV drugs to
all patients. This policy has helped reduce the number of
hospitalizations.

In Brazil, strong public campaigns through the mass
media have been key in our preventive strategy.

Education and dissemination of information
concerning AIDS constitute the best way to halt the
spread of the disease in Africa and all over the world.

It is tempting to compare the effects of AIDS to
those of wars. The so-called age factor is a characteristic
shared by AIDS and war, for both AIDS and war impose
a heavy toll on young adults, depriving many societies not
only of an important part of its workforce, but also of

 

loving parents. The consequence is a rising population of
orphaned children left behind, often without adequate
assistance. If our debate helps reverse even in a modest
way the fate of these helpless children, it will have been
worth undertaking.

The impact of AIDS on Africa is a test case for the
United Nations capacity to be both a catalyst of
international solidarity and a vehicle for transforming pious
words into tangible action.

