Mr. Kariyawasam (Sri Lanka): I am personally
happy, Sir, to see you presiding over this important
discussion in the Security Council. My delegation
welcomes this debate on the issue of children and
armed conflict, and I thank Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy for her presentation this morning.

Sri Lanka, as a party to all seven core United
Nations human rights conventions and several related
protocols, has taken the necessary legislative,
executive and judicial measures to promote the rights
of children and their welfare. The Government follows
a cooperative approach with respect to all United
Nations human rights mechanisms and has accordingly
subjected itself to constant scrutiny by treaty bodies
and United Nations mechanisms. In addition, Sri Lanka
is committed to a policy of zero tolerance on the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict. That
policy has found constant reflection in our
contributions to the work of several United Nations
bodies on subjects ranging from human rights to
disarmament and international terrorism to organized
crime.

Ever since it was discovered that the Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) armed group was
engaged in the recruitment and use of children in
battle, Sri Lanka has not only voiced concern but has
taken every possible action to persuade the LTTE to
cease that deplorable practice. The LTTE has been
designated as a terrorist group by many States,
including those of the European Union, and has been
identified continuously for several years in reports of
the Secretary-General as a recruiter of children for
armed conflict. Nevertheless, despite international
condemnation, the LTTE continues to disobey and
disregard its commitments to demobilize children and
to cease the recruitment of children. Therefore, the
time has come for the Security Council to seriously
consider targeted punitive action against repeat
offenders such as the LTTE.

It is imperative that we keep our attention
focused firmly on preventing the use and recruitment
of children as soldiers. In that context, my delegation
has studied carefully the report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict, including its
recommendations. We note that several aspects of the
report relating to issues such as development and
humanitarian access could be considered by the
relevant bodies of the United Nations mandated to
address those issues, so that we do not lose focus on
our core issue of concern.

In his first recommendation, the Secretary-
General suggests that the Security Council expand its
focus and give equal weight to all categories of
violations against children. However, my delegation
supports the position reflected in all resolutions
adopted by the Security Council and the General
Assembly on this subject, which specifically identify
the "recruitment and use of children in armed conflict"
as the first category, while referring to other categories
of violations as "other violations and abuses".
Understandably, this specific priority focus on "the
recruitment and use of children" is due to its grave and
far-reaching implications for international peace and
security, which is the main responsibility of the
Security Council and the reason why this issue was
included in its agenda. The Council must therefore
continue to maintain its focus on this issue in order to
ensure that the important issue of child soldiers and
related abuses receives undiminished attention, with a
view to taking definitive action.

The report also contains an erroneous
observation. In paragraph 117, it is stated that Sri
Lanka is among "the seven situations that were
designated as priorities for the first phase of
implementation". In this regard, we would like to
reiterate that our decision to be considered first was
voluntary and not intended to change the order of
chronological precedence or the timeline set by
resolution 1612 (2005), which requires addressing the
situations listed in annex I before considering those
listed in annex II. It was the voluntary nature of the
scrutiny provided for in resolution 1612 (2005) for
situations listed in annex II that prompted Sri Lanka to
place itself in the programme of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and

take action to put in place the task force on monitoring
and reporting in a timely manner.

Let me recall that resolution 1612 (2005)
requested that an independent review of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism be submitted to the Security
Council by 31 July 2006. However, in paragraph 116 of
his report, the Secretary-General states that he has
"requested the Office of Internal Oversight Services to
carry out this independent review", that the "review is
ongoing and key partners are fully cooperating with the
exercise", and that he will "present the results of this
review to the Security Council in November 2006".

At the same time, in paragraph 135 of his report,
the Secretary-General recommends that the Security
Council "expand the call for action plans to all
situations of concern". My delegation wonders why the
Secretary-General should make this recommendation to
expand the call for action plans to all situations of
concern in the absence of a timely review of
monitoring and reporting mechanisms, as required by
resolution 1612 (2005), or an explanation for the delay.

My delegation's view that we should concentrate
more on consolidating the implementation of existing
action plans and mechanisms than on making
ambitious recommendations that cannot be
implemented unless accompanied by the corresponding
necessary technical, financial, and, above all, political
support.

The report of the Secretary-General seems to
assume that the review on the monitoring and reporting
mechanism will be done in an administrative or
managerial sense. However, several of the aspects
involved in such a review go beyond the mandate of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services. A meaningful
review would require not just an assessment of the
administrative effectiveness of the mechanism but also
a focus on the gaps and overlaps in mechanisms and
processes within the United Nations system, as well as
the integrity of the system in general.

The Secretary-General also states, in paragraph
116, that "key partners are fully cooperating with the
exercise". In our view, there would be no better
partners than the affected States themselves in devising
and implementing action plans and assisting in the
review of the monitoring and reporting mechanism.
When key stakeholders are not involved, serious lapses
could occur in the outcomes that ensue, impeding the
smooth implementation of the results of the review and

the decisions made. If strategic plans are developed by
the United Nations in the framework of the agenda on
children and armed conflict in consultation with all
stakeholders, in particular affected States, that will no
doubt increase confidence in the ability of the United
Nations to effectively address issues of concern.

My delegation therefore calls for greater dialogue
between the Secretary-General and concerned Member
States in the preparation of programmes and policies
relating to children and armed conflict and for the
involvement of concerned Member States in all
processes and mechanisms for the implementation of
such programmes and policies. "Megaphone
advocacy", on the other hand, will hardly help to curb
and eradicate the menace of child recruitment and
abuse during armed conflict. Moreover, unbridled
expansion of the mandate could dilute the attention
paid to the core issue of concern, that is, the
recruitment of children as soldiers. Sri Lanka, as an
affected State, appeals to all concerned not to miss the
wood for the trees.

