Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this open Security Council debate to
take up once again an issue of crucial importance for
the international community: the illicit traffic in small
arms and light weapons.

Small arms and light weapons are now central to
all civil wars and armed violence throughout the world.
They have very particular characteristics: they are
small; they do not weigh much; they do not cost much.
That makes them very easy to transport and to use:
with minimum training, even a child can use them -
and, indeed, children do use them. Furthermore, these
weapons are easy to hide, and it is very difficult to
monitor the trade in them or trace them to their final
destination. Many of them are exported legally, but
then enter the illicit market, and today they are the
main source of income for armed gangs and other
criminals, including mercenaries and terrorist groups.

The illicit traffic in such arms is becoming an
ever greater threat to international security in this
century. In the past 15 years, small arms have been
used in more than 90 per cent of civil conflicts, and
they are responsible for most weapons-related deaths
that take place throughout the world - more than half
a million every year.

Despite the fact that, since the Second World
War, small arms and light weapons have proved far
more lethal than heavy weapons and weapons of mass
destruction, the United Nations, since its
establishment, has paradoxically focused on
developing international arms control regimes for
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons. That is, of
course, extremely important. But it is really a paradox
that we do not yet have an international treaty to
regulate the arms that have caused most weapons-
related deaths since the Second World War, and that
continue to kill.

Although we have made progress on the basis of
the Programme of Action adopted in 2001, the fact that
it is not legally binding at the international level means
that we are still a long way from genuine, effective
solutions, as there are no mechanisms for verification
or for punishing non-compliance.

That is why it is encouraging now to see the
Security Council's growing interest in this problem,
which affects human security in every continent. We
believe that, in order to combat the illicit traffic in
small arms and light weapons, the Security Council
should support the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2005/69). Last year,
when speaking on this same issue at the 4896th
meeting, I put forward a detailed list of actions that
needed to be taken. Today, I shall confine myself to
reiterating two that I consider to be the most important.

First, the Security Council must establish
concrete mechanisms to make States comply with arms
embargoes. Provision should be made for enforcement
measures against Member States that violate such
embargoes, with monitoring mechanisms to ensure
compliance. An effective tracking system would enable
us to combat the improper use of small arms from the
moment of their manufacture until they reach the
end-user. That would make it possible to prosecute
individuals and to hold Governments accountable for
illegal sales and for violations of United Nations
embargoes.

Secondly, the Security Council must include in
peacekeeping mandates provisions relating to the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants. The focus should be on collecting
and destroying surplus small arms and light weapons
so as to prevent the illicit traffic in arms that could
cause fresh conflict and violence unrelated to the
conflict. Such actions must be closely related to a
necessary increase in financial resources for
disarmament programmes in the context of
peacekeeping operations.

My country participates in all ongoing initiatives
to prevent and combat illicit army trafficking. We
submitted our national report pursuant to the 2001
Programme of Action. We also took part in drafting the
Andean Plan to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects. We also participated in the most recent
Biennial Meeting on the Programme of Action, which
took place here in New York. We supported - and will
continue to support - every initiative that can enable
us to move ahead on this issue.

The best thing that the Security Council could do
now would be to lend its full support to the Working
Group that is negotiating an international legal
instrument to enable States to identify and trace, in a
timely and reliable manner, small arms and light
weapons. We hope that the Working Group, which has
just concluded its second session, will complete its
work by July 2005.

Although it is true that a legal instrument alone
will not guarantee an end to the multimillion-dollar
business represented by the numerous traffickers of
illicit small arms and light weapons, such an
instrument would undoubtedly be major progress, a
point of departure, that would enable us to improve a
situation that is clearly a new threat to international
peace and security in this century. For Peru, an
instrument that helps to identify and trace the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons should be legally
binding and should cover ammunition and explosives,
which are part of this category of weapons.

