The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Bangladesh, Canada,
Egypt, Ireland, Japan, Nepal, Peru, the Republic of
Korea, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa and
Uganda, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, Without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Ms. Marjatta Rasi, President of the
Economic and Social Council.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the President of the Economic and Social
Council to take a seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Denis Caillaux,
Secretary-General of CARE International.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite the Secretary-General of CARE
International to take a seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ian Martin, Vice-
President of the International Center for Transitional
Justice.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Vice-President of the International
Center for Transitional Justice to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations. I
should like to draw attention to document S/2004/442,
which contains a letter dated 1 June 2004 from the
Permanent Representative of the Philippines addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a background
paper on the role of civil society in post-conflict peace-
building.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

As another measure to optimize the use of our
time in order to allow as many delegations as possible
to take the floor, I will not individually invite speakers
to take seats at the table and invite them to resume
their seats at the side of the Chamber. When a speaker
is taking the floor, the conference officer will seat the
next speaker on the list at the table.

Our topic today focuses on an important segment
of global society whose role is increasingly felt by
most people in post-conflict situations. Since peace-
building is an important mandate of the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security, the Philippine presidency deems it appropriate
that we focus our debate on how the Security Council
could harness the participation of civil society
organizations in post-conflict peace-building. We have
distributed a concept paper on this issue, contained in
document S/2004/442. I should like to invite all
speakers to address the questions we have set out in the
concept paper.

I welcome the presence of the distinguished
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and invite him to
take the floor.


