Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like, first of all, to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this meeting. The Chinese delegation
welcomes the presence of the Prime Minister of Timor-
Leste, His Excellency Mr. Ramos-Horta. We would
also like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Atul Khare, for his briefing. We
would also like to express our satisfaction with the
work undertaken by the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) during the past few
months.

Over the past six months, Timor-Leste has made
good progress in terms of national recovery and
reconstruction. The political leaders have taken
encouraging and important steps in conducting
political dialogue and promoting national
reconciliation. China appreciates those developments.
We hope that the various parties in Timor-Leste will
put national stability and peace for the general
population above all else, and that, with the assistance
of the United Nations and the international community,
they will maintain the momentum of the dialogue,
consolidate the results of reconciliation, resolve
existing problems within a constitutional and
democratic framework, and rekindle the Timorese
people's hopes and confidence in the future of their
country.

The elections that are to be held within the next
few months will be a major milestone in the political
process in Timor-Leste. They will also be a test to see
whether or not Timor-Leste will move towards unity
and harmony. We have noted that, under the leadership

of the Timorese Government, preparations for the
elections are under way. But, of course, time is
pressing. UNMIT should, on the basis of the Security
Council's mandate, do its best to provide assistance to
Timor-Leste. The Security Council should also fully
consider and meet the legitimate requests of the
Timorese Government.

The elections are neither the beginning nor the
end of the political process. It must be borne in mind
that there are many major issues that need to be
addressed. Efforts must be intensified to build the
national machinery, including the police, the judiciary
and educational institutions. More important, the
majority of Timorese are still suffering from poverty
and want. Helping Timor-Leste to attract investment,
develop its economy, expand employment and join the
regional integration process will provide a fundamental
guarantee for lasting peace in Timor-Leste. That calls
for joint efforts and a sustained commitment on the
part of the United Nations, countries of the region and
other stakeholders.

Timor-Leste is a new member of the Asian
family, as well as of the United Nations family. The
international community has a joint responsibility to
help Timor-Leste to overcome its difficulties and make
the success story a lasting one. I would like to take this
opportunity to appeal to the international community to
sustain its interest in and support for Timor-Leste.
China will continue to contribute towards peace and
development in T imor-Leste.

