Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
would like to thank Mr. Egeland for his thorough
update on the humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and northern Uganda. We
certainly would have liked to hear more about other
parts of Africa, but I hope we shall have another
opportunity to discuss and get insight on the evolving
situation in other parts of the continent.

We are delighted to hear that what used to be
called the "forgotten emergency" in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is finally getting some attention.
We urge donors, non-governmental organizations and
the international community as a whole to improve the
food pipeline and to assist the courageous non-
governmental organizations on the ground so that their
work can be effective.

We are alarmed by the reports of impunity,
especially in the area of sexual violence. It is
imperative, as the Democratic Republic of the Congo
moves towards elections and a Government elected by
the people, that the training of the armed forces be
given priority, especially in the area of discipline and
relations with the civilian population. It is very
disturbing to hear that most of the cases reported have
related to the armed forces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo or elements thereof.

It is of particular importance that, in the eastern
part of the country, where the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) is effectively involved but some
armed groups remain, MONUC undertake closer
coordination with the Congolese armed forces to
address not only the security area, but the extent to
which the confidence of the population can be restored,
especially after the elections. As we watch the outcome
of the next round of elections, we hope that the
Government will take more decisive measures in
addressing the issues of discipline, even including the
dismissal of armed forces and the disbandment of
militias that have been engaged in such atrocities.

We are gratified to hear about the improvements
in the situation in northern Uganda. It should be borne
in mind that humanitarian action can greatly facilitate
the negotiations that are going on in Juba. We
appreciate Mr. Egeland's overtures and the contacts
that he has already made. In the area of the release of

abducted persons, we should continue to be more
vigilant, because abductions, especially of young
people and women, have been the trademark of the
Lord's Resistance Army.

We are particularly concerned, with respect both
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and northern
Uganda, that the issue of disarmament and
reintegration has not received adequate resources. That
may not only entail the danger of militias' returning to
arms, but cause continuing insecurity among the
population. It is an issue not only of food, but also of
sustainable reintegration. We are also mindful of the
need for the reintegration of refugees who are returning
from neighbouring countries and the internally
displaced persons who will need to be resettled. It has
often been a problem of resources, and in the
integrated appeals that will follow, the humanitarian
dimension should be given priority.

As I said earlier, we hope that Mr. Egeland will
be able in subsequent discussions to provide a broader
survey of the humanitarian situation in the continent -
not only in Darfur and the Horn, but also in southern
Africa, where there are still countries that are going
through humanitarian crises precipitated by several
factors, such as in Zimbabwe at the moment.

