Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
Mr. Meza-Cuadra for this morning's briefings. The
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), under
the leadership of these two Ambassadors, have been
working actively. China commends both of you, and
your teams, for your efforts.

Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery pose a
serious threat to international peace and security. The
international community must improve its cooperation
and take comprehensive steps to effectively address
these issues. We would like to make the following
comments on the various Committees' work.

First, the 1267 Committee represents an important
counter-terrorism sanctions mechanism of the
United Nations and its Security Council. It plays
a significant role in assessing terrorist threats and
strengthening sanctions measures. China supports the
1267 Committee in working under Council mandates,
communicating closely with the countries concerned
and fostering cooperation with regional and subregional
counter-terrorism mechanisms, with a view to making
greater contributions to international counter-terrorism
efforts. We hope that in its work, such as listing
exemptions and de-listing, it will abide strictly by the
relevant Council resolutions and the norms guiding
it, uphold the principles of objectivity, impartiality
and professionalism, and base its efforts on solid
evidence and consensus among the relevant parties so
as to safeguard the authority and effectiveness of the
sanctions mechanism.

Secondly, in accordance with the mandates of
Council resolutions, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) has been working hard to promote the
implementation of counter-terrorism resolutions and
raise awareness about them, keep track of new threats
and trends in terrorism and provide technical assistance
to the countries concerned. It has therefore played
an important role in international counter-terrorism
efforts. China supports the CTC's continuation of its
work, including through joint meetings and visits
designed to improve information-sharing and enhance
coordination and cooperation with other relevant
United Nations agencies. We hope that the CTC will
further increase its dialogue with Member States, help
them to build their counter-terrorism capacity and
cooperate with international, regional and subregional
organizations to jointly address such new challenges as
the use of the Internet and new technologies to incite,
plan, finance and carry out terrorist activities.

Thirdly, the 1540 Committee is an important
component of the international non-proliferation
regime. It plays a significant role in raising awareness
about non-proliferation and building Member States'
capacity in that regard. The priority for its next phase is
to advance the comprehensive review ofresolution 1540
(2004) scheduled for 2021 in a balanced and orderly
manner. China supports the Committee's continued
work in a spirit of cooperation and dialogue and based
on mandates from Council resolutions aimed at fully
and effectively implementing the resolution. In order
to respond effectively to proliferation threats from
non-State actors, all parties must work earnestly to
safeguard the authority, universality and effectiveness
of the international non-proliferation regime, uphold
the principle that national Governments bear the
primary responsibility for non-proliferation and
deepen international cooperation in that regard, with
special attention to developing countries' needs for
international assistance.

China is opposed to terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and to the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery. We stand
firm in seriously implementing Council resolutions
and supporting the work of the Council's subsidiary
bodies. We support the joint thematic activities of
the various Committees and hope that their Groups
of Experts will enhance coordination, fully leverage
their own advantages, keep improving their work and
professionalism and pay more attention to the views
of Member States. China will continue to work with
the international community to actively promote
international counter-terrorism cooperation and
improve the international non-proliferation regime so
as to jointly maintain world peace and stability.

