Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): The
representative of Greece will shortly be making a
statement on behalf of the European Union; my
delegation naturally endorses what he will say.

I should like to join others in thanking Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi for his very useful
introduction to our debate today. The United Kingdom
is very concerned about the recent cycle of violence in
Kosovo - for example, as mentioned by Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi, the assassination of a
witness in the "Dukagjini Group" near Pec/Peja on 14
April and the bombing of the railway bridge on 11
April by Albanian National Army (ANA) extremists.
We welcome the condemnation by the head of the
Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) of the individual KPC
members who were involved in the bombing.

We therefore fully support the administrative
order issued by Michael Steiner, the Secretary-
General's Special Representative, on 17 April
proscribing the ANA as a terrorist organization. All the
indications are that local extremists think that they can
act with impunity. Michael Steiner's action makes clear
that they cannot. We urge local leaders to condemn all
acts of violence and to support the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
police and the Kosovo Police Service (KPS) in their
efforts to clamp down on extremism.

The United Kingdom is also concerned at reports
of an increase in organized crime. We therefore
welcome the closer cooperation between UNMIK
police and the Central Intelligence Unit, the Kosovo
Organized Crime Bureau, the Financial Investigations
Unit and others, as they work together to combat
organized crime.

The United Kingdom reiterates its support for the
process of transferring powers to the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo, as set out
in chapter 5 of the Constitutional Framework. But that
transfer can only be on the basis of compliance with
the provisions of Council resolution 1244 (1999). And
full account should be taken of the capacity of
Kosovo's structures and politicians to cope with the
transfer, along with the wider implications. This is an
opportunity for all parties in Kosovo to show that they
can carry out their commitments within the Framework
and that Kosovo is serious about running itself and
integrating minority communities into Government. We
should not rush towards transferring the reserved
powers. We need first to make the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government genuinely multi-
ethnic.

The United Kingdom condemns unilateral
statements on Kosovo's final status from either side.
We will not recognize any move to establish political
arrangements for the whole or part of Kosovo, either
unilaterally or in any arrangement that does not have
the backing of the international community.
Accordingly, the United Kingdom fully supports the
policy of "standards before status". We agree with
Michael Steiner and UNMIK that there is considerable
work to be done to fulfil the benchmarks and that
democratic governance must take hold in Kosovo
before there can be a settlement of Kosovo's status.

We welcome Hashim Thaci's proposal for a
moratorium on discussing Kosovo's final status. We
hope that others will recognize that progress must be
made on the benchmarks before it is possible to
determine that final status. We also welcome the
favourable response by Serbian Prime Minister
Zivkovic to Mr. Thaci's proposal. We hope that Kosovo
Albanian politicians will engage positively in due
course.

We see a strong case for relaunching expert talks
between Belgrade and Pristina to help the process of
normalization. Initially, such efforts should concentrate
on technical issues discussed between experts and
officials on important regional issues such as transport,
environment, economy and trade. We also want to
encourage people-to-people links at every level as part
of the normalization of relations.

We call on local leaders from all communities to
pursue statesmanlike policies and to discharge their
responsibilities in respect of the proper governance of
Kosovo. In particular, the United Kingdom supports
Michael Steiner's action, mentioned by Mr. Hedi
Annabi, of giving the Assembly a deadline for passing
four laws, including on higher education, in a form
compatible with resolution 1244 (1999) and with the
Constitutional Framework. Kosovo's Institutions
should be in no doubt that they must assume their
responsibilities consistent with the Council's
resolutions and other agreements. There is no
alternative way forward.

Mr. President, the first time I attended the
Council was on 28 February 2000, when there was an
open meeting on Kosovo under the chairmanship of the
then president Ambassador Listre of Argentina. Today
is the last occasion on which I will attend a formal
meeting of the Council. I feel that I have come full
circle and that we are once again discussing Kosovo
under the presidency of a representative of your region.
The last three years have been without doubt the
busiest three years in the Council's history. I believe
that we have collectively achieved a great deal, almost
always acting united and by consensus.

Mr. President, through you, I should like to say to
all my colleagues on the Council, in other delegations
and in the Secretariat, "Thank you for your
cooperation, thank you for your friendship and thank
you, sometimes, for laughing at my jokes."

