Mr. Laher (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for your excellent initiative in continuing
this important debate and for jointly preparing the
concept paper on working methods (see S/2012/853, annex) together with Portugal in its capacity as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions.

We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered later this morning by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran in its capacity as Chair of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The past few years have seen greater demands by
the global community for democracy, transparency and
accountability. That has translated into positive changes
in many Member States. The Security Council cannot
remain immune to such complexities of a changing
international environment. To remain relevant, the
reform of the Council in both its composition and its
working methods remain one of the key priorities of the
United Nations.

We have seen some progress by the Security
Council in responding to those new demands through
an increasing focus on improving its working methods.
In that regard, presidential note S/2010/507 continues to
be a key commitment in order to enhance the efficiency
and transparency of the Council's work. The consistent
implementation of its provisions must therefore remain
central to the Council's work for ensuring greater
accountability. The challenge is to ensure that those
measures are made permanent. Those reforms, as well
as the provisional rules of procedures, should become
permanent so that the Council can have predictable
rules that can be followed.

As its decisions affect Member States outside the
Council, its work and decisions can benefit from the
views of all Member States. South Africa welcomes the
continuing progress in increasing the number of public
meetings and the greater frequency of public briefings
by special envoys and special representatives. It is also
worth noting that briefings to the general membership
by the incoming and outgoing Presidents ofthe Council
are becoming standard practice. We commend the
work of the Secretariat in publishing documents on
the mandate cycles and on revamping the Council's
website. Those developments increase transparency in
the work of the Council.

The Council's outreach has also expanded through
the work of its subsidiary bodies. As Chair of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa, South Africa has endeavoured to
involve the broader membership and non-State entities
in the discussions on the Group's agenda by opening up
its meetings. We are of the View that other subsidiary
bodies of the Council could also benefit from such
engagement. In that regard, we welcome the initiative of
the Sanctions Committees on Somalia and Eritrea and
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example,
to engage the relevant stakeholders and Member States
in its deliberations.

An encouraging development has been the use of
the informal interactive dialogue, which has allowed
the Council to interact informally with individual
Member States, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
and subregional and regional organizations. In our
View, given the linkages between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, the Council has benefited tremendously
from its increased interaction with the PBC. Given
the advisory role of the Commission, however, that
interaction should translate into the Views of the PBC
being reflected when the mandates of peacekeeping
missions are considered.

Equally, interaction with troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) has been on the increase and has
been scheduled well in advance of Council meetings.
However, we could benefit from more meaningful
and substantive engagement during such meetings,
in particular as TCCs are often directly affected by
decisions of the Council. The Council's request in
resolution 2076 (2012) that the Secretary-General
consult with troop - and police-contributing countries
to the the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
welcome development.

While those are modest measures, they continue
to be important steps towards improving the work of
the Council and ensuring greater transparency and
accountability. More needs to be done to ensure that
those developments translate into substantive and
meaningful engagement between the Council and the
general membership.

Field visits by members of the Security Council
continue to be an important vehicle for the Council's
understanding of the situation on the ground and for
its ability to make informed decisions. During the
past year, visits to Haiti, West Africa and Timor-Leste
were beneficial and helped the Council in carrying out
its mandate effectively. Equally, visits by Chairs of
subsidiary bodies enhance the outreach of such vital
bodies. Given the usefulness of such visits, including
mini-missions, the Council may wish to consider
increased field Visits, as well as by Chairs of subsidiary
bodies. However, South Africa was disappointed that
the Council was not able to visit key regions on its
agenda, such as the Middle East, in spite of formal
invitations and the overwhelming support of Council
members for such Visits.

In our experience, elected members of the Council
are confronted by numerous constraints that result from
the current configuration, which affords dominance
and permanence to the non-elected members. That
dominance is experienced at the very start of one's
tenure on the Council when the five permanent
members allocate the chairmanships of the subsidiary
bodies without themselves chairing any - and with
little or no consultation with the members concerned. It
further permeates the daily work of the Council as three
permanent members are penholders on almost every
country-specific issue on the Council's agenda. We are
encouraged by the efforts of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
under the able stewardship of Ambassador Moraes
Cabral, to promote greater transparency, efficiency
and inclusiveness in the appointment of the Chairs of
subsidiary bodies, penholdership, the preparation of the
annual report and monthly assessments. Those efforts
must be continued and further enhanced.

In addition, we remain concerned that resolutions
and decisions of the Council are often drafted in small
groups and presented as faits accomplis to elected
members. While we support broad consultation by the
Council, its decisions should be open to debate among
all members of the Council.

In responding to an increasingly complex and
changing world, the Council has become increasingly
reliant on regional and subregional organizations
that are playing a direct role in conflict prevention,
resolution and management. South Africa is
particularly pleased with the enhanced strategic
cooperation between the African Union Peace and
Security Council and the United Nations Security
Council, specifically in connection with the adoption
of resolution 2033 (2012). The positive impact of that
strategic coordination is evidenced in the subsequent
adoption of resolution 2046 (2012), concerning the
Sudan and South Sudan, as well as the adoption of
resolution 2036 (2012), which authorized an increase in
the troop levels ofthe African Union Mission in Somalia.
The ongoing consultation between the Council and
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel,
which is playing a leadership role in resolving post-
Comprehensive Peace Agreement issues, continues to
benefit the Council in addressing the matter.

South Africa is also pleased that the annual
consultation between the Council and the Peace and
Security Council has become more structured and
effective. In that regard, we are of the view that greater
strategic coordination between the United Nations
and the African Union will enhance the effectiveness
of the Council in addressing challenges to peace and
security on the African continent. We are confident that
the continued cooperation and unity between the two
Councils could be of immense benefit with respect to
addressing the challenges we face in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo, Guinea-Bissau and Mali and the
widerSahel region.

In spite of those positive developments, my
delegation remains concerned about the tendency in
some cases whereby the Council is selective in picking
elements of decisions of regional organizations, such as
the African Union and the League of Arab States, that
advance the national interests of some members. It is
important that the principle of subsidiarity be respected
if we are to establish better synergies in enhancing
cooperation, especially on the African continent. We
therefore call for greater consistency from the Council
in engaging with regional bodies.

As a means of concretely fostering cooperation,
South Africa encourages the President of the Council
to interact regularly with the Chairperson of the Peace
and Security Council on issues on the agendas of both
Councils. The two Councils could further benefit from
more interaction and substantive discussion on a regular
basis. In that regard, the use of video technology could
successfully be deployed to regularize such interaction
between the two Councils.

In conclusion, whereas the debate on working
methods could be mistakingly considered as a mere
technical matter, it continues to be a political debate
dependent upon the political will of its members. As
such, the Council should continue to work towards
increasing and improving its transparency and
accountability, thereby ensuring greater effectiveness
and legitimacy in its work. In responding to an ever-
changing world, the Council and its working methods
cannot remain static. They must adapt to ensure greater
legitimacy and effectiveness. Cosmetic changes to the
working methods do not advance the fundamental need
for a reform of the Council and the expansion of its
membership in both the permanent and non-permanent
categories. We must therefore speed up the reform of
the Council if we are to avoid further erosion of the
legitimacy and credibility of this organ.

