Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I would first like to extend my congratulations
and gratitude to Sir Jeremy Greenstock for the detailed,
current and enlightening information he has just given
us with regard to the work of the Committee whose
chairmanship he has assumed with such competency,
commitment and skill. I must say that we are becoming
accustomed to being spoiled by Ambassador
Greenstock. It is always with great pleasure that we
rush to the briefings he gives us on the Committee's
work. As the Council will understand, it is a pleasure
for Cameroon to endorse the well-deserved tribute that
was paid to him a few moments ago by the Ambassador
of France and others for his vigorous work at the head
of the Committee.

The tragic events of 11 September 2001 not only
had the immediate effect of instilling chilling fear, they
also marked the onset of a growing commitment to
international peace and security by the international
community and the emergence of a sense of
mobilization and solidarity in the fight against
terrorism, which is indeed a negation of the right to
life. The unanimous condemnation that emerged in the
wake of 11 September is evidence of the degree of
revulsion aroused by acts whose consequences may be
eternal. But above and beyond that condemnation, what
is important is the individual and collective action of
States. That is why we attach great importance to the
adoption of tangible measures and to frank cooperation
in the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), which
we believe to be the best road map available to us in
this field.

Apart from the condemnation voiced at the
highest levels of the State, and while awaiting the
adoption of more elaborate national legislation in this
area, Cameroon already possesses a general legal
framework to underpin the effective implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), which Cameroon fully
supported from the very beginning. The report
transmitted by my country to the Committee is
especially illustrative in that regard. We will of course
be prepared duly to provide any additional information
requested of us.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) has
been in existence for six months. We are here today to
try to evaluate the road travelled so far and to look
towards the future. I would like to say right away that,
as described to us in the introductory briefing by the
Chairman of the Committee, the Committee's present
structure and its working methods enjoy the full
support of Cameroon. As far as the balance sheet is
concerned, if we can in fact draw one up at this
moment, I would say that we have been particularly
struck by the number of reports the Committee has
examined in such a short span of time. Examining 62
out of a total of some 143 reports is really
extraordinary, especially given that the Committee had
to organize itself and begin to examine reports while it
was being set up and while its manual was being
written, as it were. That is highly praise-worthy work.
We should encourage such swiftness. This work was
possible thanks to the ambitious strategy of
transparency established by CTC and to the
professionalism of the six experts and the members of
the three Subcommittees, to which we should also like
to repeat our encouragement.

Cameroon, for its part, will continue to make its
contribution to Subcommittee A, of which it is a
member, in order to enable CTC to complete its
programme for the third 90-day period. It is evident
that the Committee cannot effectively accomplish its
task unless all States fulfil their obligations under
paragraph 6 of resolution 1373 (2001), which calls
upon them to submit national reports on the counter-
terrorism measures they have undertaken.

For that reason, in the context of the review of the
Committee's activities during the first six months, my
delegation would like to raise four specific points,
concerning national reports, relationships between the
Committee and States, relationships between the CTC
and international organizations and, finally, a
particularly important problem: that of assistance to
States.

First, national reports: here again, we cannot fail
to welcome the major step already taken. Despite the
Committee's newness and that of the field of its action,
the Chairman told us earlier that 143 countries have
already submitted their reports. I believe that is an
edifying figure. We may rest assured that the remaining
States will not fail to submit their reports in the coming
months, it being understood that they are well aware
that the effective fight against this scourge depends
largely on the degree of solidarity in the international
community. Only sharing and awareness of the national
measures being undertaken will enable us to leave
these horrible acts behind us.

The second point concerns relationships between
the Committee and Member States. In our view, the
dialogue engaged in since the beginning deserves to be
maintained and strengthened. For that reason,
Cameroon has welcomed and approved, in form and
substance, the letters sent to States following
consideration of their national reports. Also, the regular
briefings organized by the Committee, seem to us the
best way to enable all States to be sufficiently informed
of its activities. Therefore, those briefings should be
continued. Furthermore, the participation of an ever-
increasing number of Council members in our debates
and the large attendance attest to the interest of States
and to their commitment to the fight against this
scourge.

The third point concerns the Committee's
relationships with international organizations.
Cameroon believes that the dialogue between the
Committee and such universal, regional or subregional
organizations that have or intend to have counter-
terrorism programmes, cannot fail to facilitate the
effective implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
For that reason, Cameroon believes that such dialogue
should be intensified and at the same time that the
Committee should remain faithful to its mandate.

The final point we should like to emphasize
concerns the importance of technical assistance to
States. As previous speakers have said, such assistance
is necessary and indispensable for the setting up and
strengthening of national and regional structures and
capacities in the fight against terrorism. In that regard,
we welcome Norway's offer of cooperation to the
Organization of African Unity. We should also like to
return to our request with regard to assistance from the
Committee and its member States for the organization
and holding of regional and national awareness
seminars. We believe that the appointment of an expert
concerned exclusively with assistance requests could
be extremely useful in that respect. We stress this point
because, on the national level, Cameroon intends to
publicize throughout its territory all legal instruments
related to counter-terrorism. Naturally, the principal
targets are administrative, judicial, military and law
enforcement bodies, as well as on decentralized
communities and civil society. Such an operation, if it
is to be accomplished, will require varied and
multidimensional cooperation from our partners.

With regard to the Committee's future activities,
Cameroon fully endorses the programme of work for
the next 90 days submitted by the Chairman and
reaffirms its readiness to contribute to the success of
the Committee.

In conclusion, Cameroon would like to insist
once again on the need to work effectively towards the
adoption of a comprehensive convention against
terrorism. As we have emphasized before, only such a
convention will be able to fill the current legal vacuum
and deal with the enemies of life: the terrorists.

