Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Allow me to warmly thank the President for organizing
this debate on children and armed conflict. As you
know, my country attaches great importance to the
issue and has done so for many years.

I would like to pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and thank
her for the vital work she has accomplished. I would
also like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Herve Ladsous, for his
briefing and the indispensable contributions made by
peacekeeping missions' personnel to protect children
affected by armed conflict. I would also like to thank
UNICEF Deputy Executive Director Ms. Yoka Brandt
for the exemplary work done by her teams in the field.
I would finally like to welcome the fact that civil
society has had the opportunity to address the Council.
Civil society has indeed an important role to play,
both in terms of raising our awareness and in terms of
monitoring commitments.
Luxembourg fully endorses the statement to be
made by the representative of the European Union.

We have gathered in the Chamber today to discuss
the question ofchildren and armed conflict, as described
by the latest annual report by the Secretary-General
(S/2013/245) and against the backdrop of the conflicts
in Syria, in the Central African Republic, in Mali and
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
name but a few.

Allow me to consider for a moment the situation
in Syria.

In Syria, close to three million children have been
affected by the conflict so far. Thousands have lost
their lives, and many others have been subjected to
atrocious torture or sexual violence. Even those who
have escaped the worst are unable to live a normal life.
More than half of the country's hospitals have been
damaged or rendered inoperable. Nearly 2,500 schools
have been partially or completely destroyed. While the
numbers may appear abstract, how much suffering is
obscured by them and how many shattered lives hide
behind them?

The situation cannot continue. We must do
everything to end those massacres, of which children
are most cruelly and unjustly the first victims. We
must put an end the conflict in Syria. We need to find
a political solution, a solution that brings a political
transition to Syria and that responds to the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people. We need to find it
quickly. The Geneva II conference on Syria appears
more and more like a last-chance opportunity. The
international community, and chiefly this Council,
must finally shoulder its responsibilities in the area.

A dozen years ago, the Security Council had decided
to resolutely tackle the issue of children and armed
conflict and to give it the full attention it merits. Since
then, nine resolutions and 11 presidential statements
have been adopted on the topic and considerable
progress has been made. In particular, I welcome
the adoption, later today, of a new draft presidential
statement on the occasion of today's debate, in which
the Council unanimously and unambiguously reiterates
its commitment - even if that took some time - to
end violations and abuses committed against children
in armed conflict. However, for all its importance,
that normative framework is not enough. It must also
implemented. For the Security Council that means
constantly monitoring its decisions and ensuring that
they are implemented.

An increasing number of Member States concerned
are making commitments to end violations against
children affected by armed conflict. Tens of thousands
of children have already been freed thanks to the
implementation of action plans by Governments in
cooperation with the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and other relevant United Nations entities. I
welcome the fact that, to date, almost all concerned
Member States have signed action plans. I commend in
particular the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict's campaign,
supported by the Secretary-General, which is trying to
end to the recruitment of children into regular armed
forces and their use in armed conflict by 2016.

However, there again commitments are insufficient.
They must be fully implemented. Since the previous
annual report (S/2012/26l) two countries were removed
from the so-called "list of shame" thanks to the effective
implementation of their commitments. I am speaking
of Nepal and Sri Lanka. Those examples demonstrate
that the matter of children in armed conflict requires an
approach that combines incentives as well as coercive
measures. Action plans create a space for cooperation
that gives Governments an opportunity to work with
the United Nations to put an end to grave violations
perpetrated against children. In that context, technical
and financial support for the implementation of action
plans must not be neglected.

However, we must not limit our action to governance
alone. The great majority of persistent perpetrators are
non-State armed groups. It is necessary to continue
engaging with them and to bring pressure to bear upon
them so that they stop their abuses against children. The
issue of children in armed conflict cannot be solved
definitively unless all parties to a conflict respect their
obligations.

In situations where dialogue with the parties to
the conflict fails, other measures become necessary.
As it has been stressed by the Special Representative
of the Secretary -General, most of the parties listed in
the annexes have been present there for many years.
The international community must act to put an end to
such practices. In that regard, I welcome the ongoing
discussions in the Security Council Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict on the best means
to increase pressure on persistent perpetrators. In that
regard, the Security Council must lead the way and send
a strong signal, when necessary, by applying sanctions
against persistent violators of children's rights.

Justice cannot be served so long as the perpetrators
of the worst atrocities against children are not held
accountable for their actions. That is the very reason
that the International Criminal Court's conviction of
Thomas Lubanga for the recruitment of children is such
a landmark case. It is a strong powerful message to all
of those who commit crimes against children. They
shall no longer go unpunished.

The growing importance that regional and
subregional organizations and arrangements, notably
the African Union and European Union, are attaching
to the problem of children in armed conflict is also a
reason for satisfaction and one ofhope. It is evident that
commitment at the regional level can be beneficial only
if it supports complements the efforts of the United
Nations. The same applies to NATO efforts undertaken
to integrate the normative framework developed by
the Security Council on children in armed conflict
into its policies and operations. NATO and the United
Nations joint development of a special training module
is particularly welcome in that regard.

In 2003, Secretary-General Kofi Annan advocated
for an era of implementing the Security Council's
resolutions on children in armed conflict. Ten years
on, significant progress has been made. However, much
remains to be done to ensure that children may one day
be spared from the horrors of war.

