Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank Mr. Pascoe for his very
detailed briefing. I should also like to thank the
representative of Palestine for her statement. Lastly,
like my colleagues, I should like to pay tribute to our
colleague and friend Dan Gillerman, who, with talent
and a great sense of interaction, was able to uphold the
positions of his country, Israel, a country that is a
friend and crucial partner of France and Europe,
particularly within the Barcelona Process-Union of the
Mediterranean that has just been established in Paris.
Like my colleagues, I would like to wish him all the
best as he continues his personal and professional life.

Today, I have the honour to speak on behalf of
France and on behalf of the European Union, as well as
the countries that align themselves with those
statements.

In the Middle East, we have been getting
encouraging signs from the different tracks of the
peace process: between Israelis and Palestinians, who
have engaged in comprehensive discussions since
Annapolis; between the Israelis and Syrians, who have
engaged in indirect talks under the auspices of Turkey;
in Lebanon, where the implementation of the Doha
Agreement and of resolution 1701 (2006) has
continued; and lastly in Gaza, where with Egyptian
mediation a truce has been called.

The international community must continue to
mobilize and support that momentum so that the
various parties involved in Middle East tension and
conflict move towards sustainable peace.

08-4326]
The recent Union for the Mediterranean Summit
showed that the European Union could make a
contribution to stability and peace in the Middle East,
notably via the creation of new dialogue forums.

Pursuant to the commitments made in Annapolis,
the objective remains to create a viable, independent,
democratic and fully sovereign Palestinian State living
in peace and security alongside Israel by year's end.
Naturally, that is a hard road, obstacles exist and both
parties must make painful compromises that will be
necessary in the coming weeks and months.

Negotiations between the parties continue, whilst
the day-to-day reality damages public opinion
regarding the credibility of the political process in the
eyes of the public as a result of attacks in Jerusalem,
Israeli incursions into the West Bank, the critical
humanitarian situation in Gaza and continued sporadic
violence despite the truce, including firing rockets that
the European Union strongly condemns, the
maintaining of checkpoints, settlement activity,
especially in East Jerusalem but also in the West Bank.
The building of settlements anywhere in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, is
illegal under international law. Settlement activities
prejudice the outcome of final status negotiations and
compromise the viability of a jointly agreed two-State
solution.

In parallel with negotiations and in order to
ensure that the populations involved stick to the
ongoing political process, the situation on the ground
and in day-to-day life must change. The reforms
undertaken by Mahmoud Abbas and Salam Fayyad are
to be welcomed, but if they are to bear fruit,
meaningful gestures must be made in the days and
weeks to come. That is most urgent. If the Palestinian
economy is to develop, a genuine improvement in the
free movement of goods and persons in the West Bank
must be a priority. For its part, the Palestinian
Authority must pursue its security efforts. The Israeli
freeze on all settlement activity and the dismantling of
unauthorized settlement outposts built since 2001 must
begin.

The situation in the Gaza Strip, a territory that
has suffered for far too long, must not be forgotten. We
welcome President Abbas's efforts to achieve political
reconciliation among the Palestinians. His approach to
peace should enjoy the broadest possible support.
Hamas must comply with the three Quartet principles
guiding the peace process, first and foremost among
which is the renunciation of violence.

If the gains achieved in Annapolis and at the
Paris, London, Berlin and Bethlehem conferences and
the summit of the Barcelona Process-Union for the
Mediterranean process are not to be squandered, the
parties must push ahead with negotiations and the
situation on the ground must change for the better.
Naturally, it is up to the leaders of the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples to decide through negotiation upon
the terms of a comprehensive settlement. The
international community, and in particular the
European Union and all nations of the Middle East, can
contribute to the finalization and implementation of the
final agreement. The international community can
provide guarantees to the parties to promote the
implementation of an agreement on peace, security, the
economy, refugees and Jerusalem.

The changing situation in Lebanon has helped to
restore sorely needed calm to the eastern coast of the
Mediterranean and to the Near East. In that context, we
welcome the formation of a Government of National
Unity, headed by F ouad Siniora, that allows all major
stakeholders to be represented. Following the election
of President Michel Sleiman, that was another step in
implementation of the Doha agreement. The agreement
favours the logic of dialogue that the European Union
has tirelessly promoted through the ongoing efforts of
the League of Arab States and Qatar. As we all know,
the implementation of the agreement should now
proceed with the drafting of an electoral law and the
launch of national dialogue in the interests of all
parties in Lebanon and throughout the region.

The Europeans are committed to encouraging the
irreversible process of establishing the Special
Tribunal. They remain committed to the unity,
independence, sovereignty and stability of Lebanon in
accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions,
in particular resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
It is essential that the Lebanese State be able to extend
its authority throughout its territory. The European
Union comprises the backbone of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and will continue to lend it
its full support.

While fully respecting the independence and
sovereignty of both countries and well aware of the
special relations that history has bequeathed them, we
hope that the detente made possible in Lebanon by the
Doha agreement will encourage dialogue between
Syria and Lebanon. We welcome the commitment
made in Paris by the two heads of State to establish
diplomatic relations. That decision must now be
implemented, as must the border demarcation between
the two States.

In conclusion, Syrian and Israel have begun
proximity peace talks under the auspices of Turkey.
That is yet another example of the triumph of the logic
of dialogue and should be encouraged without
dismissing the difficulties involved and by advancing
through a series of necessary phases. That progress
must be pursued and Syria must continue to play a
constructive role in the region.

