Ms. Bensouda: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council for the
fifth time on the situation in Libya since it was referred
to the International Criminal Court (ICC), in February
2011.

When the Security Council referred the situation
in Libya to the Court, it had determined that it would
be in the interest of peace and security. We have all
witnessed developments in Libya since the demise of the
Al-Qadhafi regime. Despite important progress made
in moving Libya forward on the path of democracy,
the rule of law and respect for human rights, many
challenges remain. The resolve of the Council when it
referred the situation in Libya was not only to ensure
accountability for perpetrators of crimes, but also to
secure lasting peace for the Libyan people. The Council
must therefore continue assisting Libya through the
difficult times that it faces. It is only through our joint
coordinated efforts that justice and peace will prevail.

Following the admissibility challenges filed
by the Libyan Government with regard to the Saif
Al-Islam AI-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senassi cases and
in accordance with the Rome Statute, investigations
with respect to those cases have been suspended.
The Al-Qadhafi case has advanced to a stage where
it remains for the Chamber to pronounce itself on
the submissions made by all parties. We expect the
Chamber to do so in the near future. Only last week,
my Office filed its response to Libya's challenge on the
admissibility of the Al-Senussi case. It is commendable
that Libya is invoking its rights under the Rome
Statute through a judicial process. In doing so, Libya
demonstrates its full understanding of the difference
between the Council's political mandate and the ICC's
judicial mandate, even where the Council has referred
the situation to the International Criminal Court.

More important, Libya is engaged in the
development of the law. Irrespective of the outcome,
the admissibility processes under way at the ICC will
set the standard for years to come on how the Court
and States interact with each other regarding national
proceedings. As the Statute dictates, a State seeking
a finding of inadmissibility of cases before ICC must
satisfy the judges that it is genuinely investigating and
prosecuting the same persons for the same conduct as
that under investigation by the Office of the Prosecutor.
That is the law and nothing short of that will suffice.
By conducting fair, just and transparent judicial
proceedings for all alleged perpetrators, while also
continuing to respect the ICC judicial process, Libya
can set a lasting example for other States.

Given the extensive crimes committed in Libya
and the challenges facing the new Libyan Government,
the ICC's mandate is still essential to ending impunity
in Libya. My Office therefore continues to conduct
investigations of crimes committed in Libya.

My Office is aware of allegations of serious crimes
committed by former Al-Qadhafi officials, some ofwho
are now outside of Libya. We are currently engaged in
the process of documenting the most serious of those
crimes and are documenting the current activities of
those officials who were most responsible for them. The
Office plans to take a decision regarding a second case
in the near future and will consider additional cases
after that, depending upon the Government of Libya's
progress in implementing its comprehensive strategy.

My Office also continues to be concerned about
the allegations of crimes committed by rebel forces,
including the expulsion of residents of Tawergha, who
have been unable to return home, the ongoing alleged
persecution of ethnic groups perceived to have been
affiliated with the Al-Qadhafi regime and specific
incidents as yet unaccounted for, such as the alleged
execution of 50 persons on the grounds of the Mahari
Hotel in Sirte in October 2011, and the alleged arbitrary
detention, torture, killings and destruction of property
that arose during Libyan Government and militia
operations in Bani Walid in September 2012.

Complementarity and cooperation define
the relationship between the Court and national
justice systems. Both are therefore essential for
the implementation of international justice and the
punishment of crimes under the Rome Statute. Above
all, both are essential for ensuring that prosecution
of the few does not result in impunity for the many.
It is for that reason that my Office continues to
explore possibilities for mutually reinforcing judicial
activities with the Government of Libya in fostering
complementarity.

I recently met the new Libyan Prosecutor-General,
Mr. Abdul Qader Juma Radwan, and the Libyan ICC
focal point, Mr. Ahmed El-Gehani, who travelled
to The Hague at my request to discuss our ongoing
investigations. The constructive and fruitful discussions
between my Office and the Libyan delegation focused
on cooperation and the coordination of efforts to
advance the Office's investigative activities, both
within and outside Libya. Those preliminary positive
discussions illustrate the willingness of my Office and
the Government of Libya to cooperatively work together
in furthering investigations that could lead to the arrest
and surrender of alleged perpetrators, both inside and
outside Libya. I plan to travel to Libya soon to further
my discussions with the highest political authorities.

Allow me to stress the importance of all of us
working together with the Government of Libya to
realize a comprehensive strategy for justice. My Office
is encouraged to see the important strides made in
transforming Libya, including the first democratic
elections in more than four decades, the installation of
a new Government last November, and the appointment
of a new Prosecutor-General.

Those signs of progress cannot eclipse the
challenge that Libya faces in addressing the legacy of
so many years of impunity. It need not be a challenge
that Libya faces alone. By the same token, Libya must
realize that with the international intervention in Libya,
in the context of all of the developments that have taken
place in the last three years in the region, what happens
with Libya's perpetrators is a page in the history
books of international justice, no matter where those
investigations and prosecutions take place. They must
be a shining example of what we can achieve through
human endeavours to seek justice. These trials can be
Libya's Nuremberg moment, one that will endeavour to
seal the primacy of the rule of law, due process and
human rights for future generations.
My Office looks forward to discussing with
Prosecutor-General Radwan and the Libyan authorities
the best way forward and how we can collaborate
and coordinate our efforts to ensure that all alleged
perpetrators are held to account.

As Prosecutor, I cannot and should not get involved
in political considerations; nor should I ever stretch the
interpretation of the norms adopted in Rome. Equally,
neither the Council or its members nor any State, for
that matter, should ever seek to interfere with the
judicial processes of the Court.

Regardless, I look forward to continuing my
discussions with the Council about how we can ensure
that our coordinated follow-up of referrals of situations
like that in Libya will allow us to bring our considerable
resources and knowledge to bear in ensuring that peace
and justice prevail in Libya.

