Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): First, I should like
to associate myself with the statement which will be
made later on in this debate by the representative of
Belgium on behalf of the European Union.

The United Kingdom welcomes the successful
and peaceful Kosovo Assembly elections on 17
November. We also welcome the participation in
significant numbers of all of Kosovo's ethnic
communities in the elections. The elections were a
landmark in Kosovo's development as a multi-ethnic,
democratic and tolerant society. Congratulations are
due to Hans Haekkerup and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), to the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and to KFOR for helping to make the elections
possible.

However, congratulations must be given most of
all to the people of Kosovo. As Ambassador Corr just
indicated, it is now up to Kosovo's politicians to take
responsibility for governing Kosovo. This will be a
significant challenge, but as far as the United Kingdom
is concerned, we will do all we possibly can to help
them succeed. As part of this, it is essential that all
ethnic communities put aside their differences and
work together for the sake of Kosovo's future.

The agreement on the UNMIK/Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia common document on 5 November was
also a significant step, both for Kosovo and for the
region. Again, we congratulate Mr. Haekkerup,
President Kostunica and Deputy Prime Minister Covie
on this achievement.

We are very much looking forward to the first
meeting of the high-ranking working group including
representatives of the newly elected institutions. It is
clearly important that that particular relationship
develop well and soundly, since improved Belgrade-
Pristina links are critically important both for regional
stability and for economic development. We look to
Belgrade, UNMIK and the new provisional institutions
to ensure that rapid progress is made in all of the
important areas identified in the common document.

But the biggest brake on Kosovo's development
as a democratic society is the regional scourge of
extremism and organized crime. Kosovo's leaders must
do what they can to terminate this threat. As we have
said in earlier statements in the Council, combating this
challenge must continue to be a top priority for
UNMIK, building on the existing progress made.

