Mrs. Nt'lfiez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I have the honour to address the Council on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The Non-Aligned Movement has been monitoring
recent developments and the continuing deterioration
of the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem.

The Movement expresses its grave concern about
the dire security, humanitarian, socio-economic and
political situation prevailing the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and the consequent
rise in suffering and hardship that confronts the
Palestinian people.

The Non-Aligned Movement condemns the
prolonged Israeli military occupation of the Palestinian
territory since 1967 and expresses grave concern over
the recent distressing developments. For four decades,
Israel, the occupying Power, has been unrelentingly
violating international law, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights
norms, in its actions in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. During this time,
the occupying Power has been committing grave
human rights violations against the Palestinian people,
including, reportedly, war crimes.
07-49288

Moreover, for four decades the occupying Power

has carried out deliberate and unlawful policies and

practices aimed at altering the demographic

composition, character and nature of the Palestinian

lands and, in fact, at annexing those lands, particularly

via the implementation of its illegal colonial settlement

policy and, since 2003, the illegal construction of a

wall in the West Bank, including in and around East
Jerusalem.

In addition, Israel continues to impose a
humiliating and discriminatory network of checkpoints
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory to impose
closures, seal off the Gaza Strip and carry out intense
military raids and incursions in Palestinian population
centres, causing extensive loss of life and injury to
Palestinian civilians and widespread destruction of

property.

The Non-Aligned Movement condemns all such
illegal actions by Israel, the occupying Power, and
calls for their immediate cessation. It believes that
these illegal Israeli actions, including ongoing military
attacks, have seriously undermined the functioning of
the Palestinian Authority and have undoubtedly
contributed to the growing polarization of Palestinian
society.

The Movement also condemns the recent criminal
actions in the Gaza Strip and calls for urgent efforts to
avoid the complete disintegration of the foundations of
a future sovereign, viable and independent State and to
rehabilitate and develop Palestinian institutions.

Further, the Movement calls for the restoration of
the situation in the Gaza Strip to that which existed
prior to the recent events and for the adoption of
measures to preserve the territorial unity and integrity
of the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. It
stresses the necessity for mobilization of Palestinian
capabilities in order to end the occupation and to
achieve the Palestinian national goal.

The Non-Aligned Movement calls upon the
Palestinian leadership, the leaders of all factions and
all Palestinians to unite in support of the President of
the Palestinian Authority, Mahmoud Abbas, and his
Government and all democratically elected Palestinian
institutions to resolve their political differences by
peaceful means. The Movement supports national
dialogue among Palestinians to achieve national
reconciliation. In this regard, the Movement reaffirms
its position that the Palestine Liberation Organization

remains the sole and legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people and remains an essential party to
any negotiations aimed at resolving the conflict.

The Non-Aligned Movement calls upon the
parties to resume urgently peace process negotiations
at all levels on the basis of international law, relevant
United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for
peace and the Arab Peace Initiative, in order to resolve
comprehensively the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the
Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole. In this regard, the
Movement reaffirms its support to all peaceful efforts
aimed at ending Israel's 40-year occupation of
Palestinian land, the achievement of a final and
peaceful settlement to the question of Palestine with
the realization of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people in an independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and a just solution to
the plight of the Palestinian refugees. The Non-Aligned
Movement expresses its continuing and firm support
for a peaceful settlement and calls upon the
international community to adopt specific positive
steps towards this goal.

The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its
satisfaction with the steps undertaken by the Lebanese
Government to implement Security Council resolution
1701 (2006), particularly through the deployment of
the Lebanese Armed Forces in the region south of the
Litani River and along the Blue Line. The Movement
also welcomes the deployment of the Lebanese Armed
Forces along the northern and eastern borders of
Lebanon in order to ensure security and stability at the
borders.

The Movement remains deeply concerned by the
ongoing Israeli air and land violations of the Blue Line
in breach of resolution 1701 (2006). We strongly call
on Israel to end the occupation of the northern part of
al-Ghajar, on the northern side of the Blue Line, to
immediately refrain from any violation of Lebanese
sovereignty and of resolution 1701 (2006) and to
refrain from any provocation to the Lebanese Armed
Forces or the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon.

The Movement calls for the prompt settlement of
the question of the Shab'a farms with full respect for
Lebanese sovereignty and territorial integrity, as
stipulated in resolution 1701 (2006). We call upon all
parties to cooperate in protecting Lebanon's sovereign
5
rights in that area and we take note of the important
endeavours of the Secretary-General in that regard.

The Movement is acutely aware of the enormous
challenge facing Lebanon resulting from the
1.2 million cluster bomblets launched by Israel during
its aggression against Lebanon last summer. The
Movement condemns once again the use of such
weaponry by Israel and deplores the death toll resulting
from them. The Non-Aligned Movement strongly calls
upon Israel to provide the exact location of those
deadly weapons and the maps of mines planted during
its occupation of Southern Lebanon.

The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms once again
that all measures and action taken or to be taken by
Israel that purport to modify the legal, physical and
demographic condition and the institutional structure
of the occupied Syrian Golan and the Israeli measures
to implement its jurisdiction and administration in that
area are null and void and have no legal effect. We also
reaffirm that all of these measures and actions,
including the illegal construction and expansion of the
Israeli settlements in the Syrian Golan since 1967, are
a challenge to the international community and a clear
violation of international law, international agreements,
the Charter and decisions of the United Nations,
including Security Council resolution 497 (1981) and
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949.
The Movement demands that Israel abide by Security
Council resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
completely from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders of 4 June 1967.

The Non-Aligned Movement will continue to
support and contribute in all possible aspects to
achieving a just, complete and lasting peace in the
Middle East, based on all of the United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, the
principle of territory for peace, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Road Map.

