The Deputy Secretary-General: We have long
known that the flow of illicit arms to Africa is largely
made possible by the secrecy that surrounds it. We are
thus grateful to the Gabonese presidency for convening
a debate on this important subject in the Security
Council. The Council has often addressed conventional
weapons issues, most frequently in the context of
specific crises and in the consideration of arms
embargos.

In 1999, the Council placed the issue of small
arms on its agenda and adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRST/1999/28) emphasizing the
importance of regional cooperation in tackling the
10-27987
issue. Since then, the Council has repeatedly
recognized the devastating impact of illicit weapons on
international and regional peace and security, social
and economic development, and civilians, women and
children.

The Council has also stressed the need for
measures to discourage arms flows in Central Africa.
In the subregion, local demand continues to be sizable,
especially from many militia and rebel groups. Limited
national and regional capacity, porous borders and the
spillover effects of conflicts in the region have
impeded effective small arms control. As a result,
Central Africa is awash with illicit weapons,
exacerbating intercommunal violence, increasing
cross-border crime and threatening ongoing peace and
national reconciliation processes.

The illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons
is never an isolated phenomenon. Weapons trafficking
in Central Africa has complex links, not only to
conflict, but also to a number of other criminal
activities that undermine our efforts to engender social
justice, foster the rule of law and ultimately achieve
the Millennium Development Goals. The link between
the illicit exploitation and trade of natural resources
and the illicit proliferation in trafficking of arms has
become increasingly apparent. This, in turn, has
become one of the major factors fuelling and
exacerbating conflicts in Central Africa.

The primary responsibility to eradicate this illicit
trade remains with States. Measures taken by national
authorities to promote disarmament and arms control
programmes are commendable; so, too, are collective
efforts through the Economic Community of Central
African States. However, the challenge continues to
loom large. In this regard, allow me to make three
observations.

First, peace and security in Central Africa require
a strong commitment by States in the subregion,
together with State suppliers of weapons, to expand
their individual and collective efforts to eradicate
weapons trafficking.

Secondly, such efforts must include greater
commitments by the States of the subregion to
implement global instruments and to strengthen their
capacity to identify and combat those involved in illicit
brokering activities. These instruments include the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
10-27987
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, the United
Nations Firearms Protocol, and the International
Tracing Instrument. We also must support the adoption
of an arms trade treaty at the global level and the
implementation of community-based disarmament and
confidence-building projects.

Thirdly, the States of Central Africa should make
the best possible use of United Nations tools and
expertise. The United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs, for example, plays an important role in
assisting States in the regulation of conventional
armaments and in promoting disarmament and non-
proliferation. The United Nations Regional Centre for
Peace and Disarmament in Africa provides States,
subregional organizations and civil society with
technical advice and capacity-building programmes,
including training, legal assistance and the elaboration
of regional registers and transparency instruments.

The Secretary-General and I welcome the
ministerial decision of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa to mandate the Centre to assist in drafting the
subregion's first legally binding instrument on the
control of small arms and light weapons, ammunition,
explosives and equipment supporting their
manufacture. Other urgent priorities include stockpile
management, the security of weapons and ammunition,
and measures to control the import, export, transit and
retransfer of weapons. More must also be done to build
national capacities to mark weapons, keep adequate
records and trace illicit ones, in line with international
and regional standards.

It is well understood that weak regional and
national regulatory and enforcement capacities to
address illicit arms trafficking are associated with the
structural causes of armed Violence and conflict.
Therefore, the decisions and actions of the Standing
Advisory Committee are of great significance in
tackling the tools of violence, designing ways to
improve subregional security, and creating the
conditions necessary to sustainable development. The
Secretary-General urges the Security Council and all
Member States to offer whatever assistance is needed
to support States in Central Africa in achieving these
goals.

I once again commend the Government of Gabon
for its leadership in bringing this issue to the Council.
3
