Mr. Sugiyama (Japan): I would first like to express
my sincere appreciation to you, Sir, for taking up
this timely and important topic. My appreciation also
goes to Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson and other
speakers for their insightful briefings at a time when
the topic before us is the most important item on the
common international agenda.

My Government is sincerely and firmly supportive
of the presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6, which we
have just adopted.

This year alone we have witnessed numerous
terrorist attacks all over the world. Facing the sobering
reality of an increase in and the spread of terrorist
attacks in recent years, Japan has reconfirmed its
determination to fight against terrorism in cooperation
with the international community. The importance of
utilizing all tools at our disposal in the fight against
terrorism cannot be overstated. We would particularly
like to emphasize that the international community
should put more efforts and resources into the prevention
of terrorism, as well as countering factors conducive
to terrorism, most critical of all violent extremism. We
firmly believe that violent extremism has nothing to do
with any religion, nationality or civilization. However,
terrorist organizations use narratives and ideologies
based on their distorted interpretation of those factors,
not only to justify their ideas but also to mobilize
resources and garner support.

There is therefore urgent need to prevent violent
extremism throughout the world. In that regard, we
strongly welcome the Secretary-General's Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism and call for its
rapid implementation under United Nations leadership.
In particular, the Security Council has made enormous
efforts to eradicate these imminent threats against
international peace and security, namely, terrorism and
violent extremism. I would like to emphasize that it
must make further efforts for that purpose.

Japan has been supporting efforts by United Nations
entities in countering violent extremism. I would
like to briefly touch on one example that, although it
may appear small, substantively is quite imporant.
A workshop held for Iraqi officials in February 2015
under the sponsorship of my Government brought
together victims of terrorism and family members of
late fighters of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) (Da'esh) and offered them an opportunity to
engage in dialogue about their personal experiences
and thoughts. The participants came to a common
understanding about the fighters" irrational decisions
to join ISIL (Da'esh). It was then shared with the local
community as part ofthe effort to counter ISIL (Da'esh)
narratives.
Japan also supports a whole-of-society approach to
preventing violent extremism. Japan recently provided
$1.5 million to the Global Community Engagement and
Resilience Fund in order to support local community-
based initiatives against violent extremism.
Furthermore, Japan has conducted a number of projects
related to countering violent extremism in cooperation
with countries of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations. Last February, Japan hosted a panel discussion
on the role of civil society in preventing violent
extremism, with the participation of representatives
from Governments and civil society from South-East
Asian countries. There emerged a general consensus
among the participants that we should be more vocal in
promoting moderate ideas against violent extremism.
Again, those may be small efforts, but they are
important ones.

It is now time for the international community
to unite against the threat of violent extremism even
further and to take advantage of our strengths and
cooperate to create synergies among our efforts. We
would also reiterate the importance of empowering
moderate voices in society by promoting pluralism and
tolerance. Prime Minister Abe mentioned in Cairo last
year the importance of moderation, a notion shared by
different civilizations, cultures and religious beliefs.
He did so stating,

(spoke in Arabic)

"the best way to go is in the middle."
5 oke in En lish)
P g

At the same time, we believe that such efforts must
be conducted in full accordance with all the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
including the peaceful resolution of disputes, the rule
of law and respect for human rights.

In about a fortnight, Japan will host the Group of
Seven (G-7) Summit. As this year's Chair, we are taking
the lead in preparing the G-7 action plan on countering
terrorism and violent extremism, hopefully to be
adopted by the G-7 leaders at Ise-Shima, Japan. Our
aim is to create an action-oriented plan that could be a
valuable addition by the G-7 leaders to existing global
efforts to tackle terrorism and violent extremism. At the
moment, we are working very hard and wholeheartedly
with our G-7 colleagues so that we can share something
with the entire international community in that regard.

To conclude, I would like to emphasize once
again our deep conviction that we will not be idle in
eradicating violent extremism and will redouble our
efforts against it. Let us unite to address this common
threat. On behalf fo the Government of Japan, I can
assure the Assembly that we Japanese continue to stand
firmly with the entire international community in this
important endeavor.

