Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for having convened today's debate.

We align ourselves with the statements to be
delivered by the Permanent Representatives of Egypt
and Kazakhstan on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, respectively.

Pakistan continues to support the inalienable right
to self-determination of the people of Palestine. The
continued denial of that right poses the risk of a
conflagration in which the whole region could be
embroiled.
The Security Council continues to evade its
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security, at the peril of its own credibility. We welcome

the resolution adopted by the Human Rights Council
establishing an independent international fact-finding
mission to investigate the implications of Israeli
settlements for the rights of Palestinians in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem.

We are also encouraged to note that the
Secretary-General visited the region in February,
affording him the opportunity to experience first-hand
the plight of a nation living under occupation in
appalling conditions. It was a timely initiative that, we
hope, will help to refocus the attention of the
international community on this festering dispute, for
the dragon's teeth are planted in the fertile soil of
wrongs unrighted, of disputes left to fester for years.

Flying in the face of the international
community's will, Israel continues to implement
policies in defiance of international law and to work
towards undermining the basis of the two-State
solution. Its efforts to redraw the map of Palestine
through the continuation of illegal settlement activity,
the continued persecution of Palestinians and its
reluctance to accept the 1967 borders as the basis for
negotiations is taking the region to a state akin to a
powder keg.

We reiterate that continued inaction on the part of
the international community is not an option. We
strongly condemn the announcement made by Israel on
4 April concerning new tenders for the construction of
more than 1,100 settlement homes in East Jerusalem.
Similarly, the so-called Mayor of Jerusalem has also
announced plans to establish a new settlement that
would effectively divide East Jerusalem. Such acts are
systematically reducing the space for the establishment
of a viable Palestinian State and constitute a major
roadblock to peace.

Special Coordinator Robert Serry, in his briefing
to the Council on 27 March 2012 (see S/PV.6742),
painted a gloomy picture for prospects of restarting
direct negotiations. He also said that without a road
map, the State-building efforts of the Palestinian
Authority were also at risk.

The Middle East Quartet, which met in
Washington, DC, on 11 April 2012, has reaffirmed its
commitment to all elements of its road map of
23 September 2011. However, it is disconcerting to
note that its statement focuses more on the financial
viability of the Palestinian Authority than on settlement
activity or providing a road map for the resumption of
the peace process. It has also failed to apportion blame
to Israel for actions that have stalled the peace process.

The Security Council should put its weight
behind the creation of conditions conducive to
restarting the peace process and holding Israel
accountable for its continued defiance. We would also
remind the Council that the Palestinian Authority has
invited it to undertake a mission to the occupied
Palestinian territories, including the West Bank. We
will continue to engage with other members of the
Council in trying to bring the visit to fruition.

While the international community continues to
highlight illegal detentions in other parts of the region,
more than 4,700 Palestinians languish in inhumane
conditions in Israeli prisons. The international
community should heed the plight of the 1,200
prisoners currently on a hunger strike to protest
arbitrary detentions and force the occupying Power to
mend its ways.

We once again request the high contracting
parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention to demand the
implementation of the Convention in the Palestinian
territory, especially regarding Palestinian prisoners.
Israel's continued blockade of Gaza is diminishing
further the already nominal economic prospects for the
residents of the area. We therefore once again call for
the full implementation of Security Council resolution
1860 (2009).

We appreciate and strongly support the
Palestinian Authority's progress in building State
institutions. The paper it presented to the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians entitled
"Equitable development: moving forward despite the
occupation" provides details of the progress made
despite seemingly insurmountable odds.

Palestine has undoubtedly proved that it is ready
to take its rightful place among the comity of nations.
Pakistan supported its bid for UNESCO membership
last year and stands committed to supporting its full
United Nations membership.

Pakistan supports lasting peace for all inhabitants
of the Middle East. The broad framework for that
peace is already laid down elaborately in a number of
Security Council resolutions, the Quartet road map, the
Madrid terms of reference and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

Political will on the part of the international
community - a sine qua non for the implementation of
those documents - is conspicuous by its absence. For
lasting peace in the Middle East, progress on the Syria-
Israel and Lebanon-Israel conflicts is imperative as
well. We continue to insist on the full withdrawal of
Israel from occupied Lebanese land and from the
Syrian Golan, in compliance with the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions.

We are concerned and disappointed that the
question of the Syrian Golan, which is an integral
element of the Council's consideration of this agenda
item, has not found mention in the Secretariat's
briefing to the Council. The region is in turmoil, and
the Arab Spring cannot and will not bloom fully if the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people are not
fulfilled.

Benign neglect, inaction, complicity with
oppression and apathy will only discredit the advocates
of peace and strengthen the narrative of extremists.

