Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First of all, let me join other
colleagues in thanking Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs Ursula Mueller for her - as
always - excellent briefing. Our deep appreciation
goes to her and her staff for their great work and
commitment to providing humanitarian assistance
to the people in need. We welcome also Ms. Nujeen
Mustapha. Let me echo other delegations in ensuring
her and all people with disabilities that they are not
invisible any more i certainly not in this Chamber.

As Assistant Secretary-General Mueller highlighted,
the whole population of Syria has suffered a litany of
horrors. Let me focus on the situation of persons with
disabilities, precisely because the ongoing conflict has
a disproportionate impact on persons with disabilities.
Let me cite some estimates, which are based on the
October 2018 report of the Humanity and Inclusion
organization. There are 3 million people in Syria who
are living with permanent disabilities, a number that
increases with every month that the conflict continues.
Almost one-fourth of Syrian refugees in Lebanon and
Jordan have some level of impairment and more than
60 per cent of households have at least one member
with a disability. Those staggering numbers speak for
themselves and demonstrate that we cannot discuss the
humanitarian situation in Syria without addressing the
very specific needs of persons with disabilities. In that
context, allow me to touch upon the following issues.

The first point concerns data collection. Despite
the increasing attention being paid to persons with
disabilities in humanitarian contexts, very scarce
information has been collected. As already mentioned
by Ambassador Cohen, the lack of sufficient data on
persons with disabilities in the humanitarian context
was one of the key findings of the Arria formula
meeting on the situation of persons with disabilities in
armed conflicts, which was organized last December
by Poland, together with Germany, Kuwait, Peru and
Cote d'Ivoire.

That lack of sufficient data collection has a
clear impact on our assessment of the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. In that regard, I have the
following question for Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller, who briefly referred to data collection in
her statement. Could she elaborate further on what
challenges she faces in terms of data collection, how
she is collecting it and what kind of impact it has on the
delivery of humanitarian assistance?

Another issue to which we would like to draw the
Security Council's attention is that of health services
provided to persons with disabilities. We are deeply
concerned about the dramatic deterioration of public
hospital and health facilities. Unfortunately, the attacks
on public hospitals and health facilities continue, which
means that there is no proper care being provided to
patients with injuries and as a result those injuries
may become lifelong disabilities. That is why it is
our strong belief that the Security Council should
vigorously advocate for the health and protection of
civilians, especially women, children and persons
with disabilities.

Last but not least, we reiterate our call to all sides
to strictly comply with international law and human
rights law, which means the protection of civilians and
granting unhindered access to humanitarian assistance
for the entire population is not a matter of choice - it
is a legal obligation under international law. It is our
firm belief that those responsible for violating and
abusing international humanitarian and human rights
law should be held accountable. It is also a matter of
conflict prevention. In that context, we strongly support
the ongoing work of the Human Rights Council's
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic and the work of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism.

Allow me to also touch briefly on the situation
in Idlib and Rukban, which was also raised by many
delegations. Let me stress that the significance of the
agreement between Russia and Turkey on the Idlib
de-escalation zone as a crucial move towards avoiding
a humanitarian catastrophe. All parties to the conflict
should assure the full implementation of that agreement.

With regard to Rukban, we know that at the
beginning of February the second humanitarian convoy
to Rukban provided life-saving support to 40,000 people
living in the camp. Nonetheless, it was only a temporary
measure, sufficient for merely a month. As we approach
the end of April, it is clear that we desperately need
a safe, voluntary and dignified long-term solution for
thousands of people, many of whom have been staying
in the Rukban area for more than two years.

In conclusion, let me underline that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian conflict. A political
agreement in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) remains the
only way towards peace.

Lastly, allow me to reiterate the common position
of the European Union on the reconstruction of Syria.
We think that it should commence once an inclusive
political transition is firmly under way, as we need to
support the safe return of millions of Syrians who fled
their homes.

