Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): We commend New
Zealand for convening this historic meeting of the
Council to pay tribute to the victims of the Srebrenica
genocide 20 years ago. We are grateful to Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid Ra'ad Al
Hussein for their respective briefings.

Having previously served in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, I attended the annual commemoration
of the Srebrenica massacre. It was very painful for
me, particularly witnessing first-hand the sorrow and
agony of the mothers of Srebrenica as they buried their
loved ones after a painstaking process of collecting and
identifying the remains found in mass graves. To date,
over 1,000 victims ofthe massacre have yet to be found.

As one of the mothers put it: "Every year, I think this is
the year I will bury my son".

Today's meeting is indeed timely, not only
in conjunction with the twentieth anniversary of
Srebrenica, but also in view of the seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations. On this solemn occasion, on
behalf of the people and Government of Malaysia, I
wish to convey our deepest and heartfelt sympathies
and condolences to the families and loved ones of those
who perished at Srebrenica. As the oft-quoted saying
goes: "Those who fail to learn from history are doomed
to repeat it".

In light of the region's troubled history and signs of
rising ethno-nationalism, we believe that it is crucial for
the Council and for the international community to send
a strong signal condemning genocide and its denial. We
are convinced that the substance and the uncovering
of the truth, particularly on the fate of those killed
at Srebrenica, will go a long way towards promoting
and deepening national healing and reconciliation. In
that spirit, Malaysia worked alongside other Council
members to achieve an outcome that would support
such aspirations. We believe that the draft resolution
initiated by the United Kingdom would have made a
serious and substantive contribution to that end, and as
such we co-sponsored and voted in favour of it.

In recalling the statements and views expressed
during the Srebrenica commemoration event last
week, one particular statement stands out - that of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's assessment that the
Secretariat, the Security Council and Member States
share the blame for failing to prevent the genocide
at Srebrenica, despite the mounting warning signs. I
would like to believe that, 20 years after Srebrenica, we
have come a long way, particularly in learning from the
mistakes of the past. We are encouraged by the tangible
improvements in the workings of the United Nations,
including improved peacekeeping capabilities, the
establishment ofthe Office ofthe Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide and the ongoing conversations
on the doctrine of the responsibility to protect.

After the Holocaust, the Rwandan genocide
and Srebrenica, we must pause to reflect and ask
ourselves: How many times will the world have to
bear the unfulfilled promises of "never again"? The
international community, particularly the Council,
owes it to the victims and the loved ones to live up to
that promise, including by exercising our collective
responsibility to protect civilians from the most serious
international crimes and to learn from the mistakes of
the past.
We remain concerned that the lack of political will
and divisions in the Council could lead to devastasting
tragedies at the risk of the loss of multitudes of
innocent lives. In our View, tragedies such as that of
Srebrenica could have been prevented had the Council
been united and been able to muster the necessary
political will. Malaysia believes that ending impunity
is crucial to preventing future atrocities. While we
failed to prevent Srebrenica, we must at least strive
to ensure that justice is served for its victims. In that
regard, Malaysia continues to support the work of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
in ensuring accountability for the crimes committed
during the war in the region. We urge all States to fully
cooperate with the Tribunal si that it can implement its
mandate to completion.

We fully agree that there is a need, evoked by earlier
speakers, to look forward and promote reconciliation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the region. In the
immediate aftermath of the war, Malaysia supported
Bosnia and Herzegovina in its reconstruction efforts.
We will continue to do so. Through our investments
projects, we have sought to bring the various ethnic
groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina together on the path
towards economic and social integration. We firmly
believe that the first steps towards reconciliation are
to acknowledge and accept the past in order to build a
common future. We owe it to the victims of Srebrenica
to demonstrate that we have indeed learned from the
past, that we are now a better people because of it, and
that we will give our all to prevent such atrocities from
reoccurring.

Against that backdrop, we are disappointed and
deeply regret that the Council has been unable to
overcome its division to unite and find agreement in
sending a message of solidarity with all the victims of
the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly
those of Srebrenica. We fear that such continued
politicized division distorts historical facts and denies
justice to the victims of genocide.

