Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this very informative
and useful debate. Let me also thank Under-Secretary-
General Le Roy for his introductory remarks and the
Force Commanders for their briefings. I would also
like to commend Lieutenant General Obiakor for his
service and wish him well in his future endeavours.

My delegation welcomes all the Force
Commanders here today and, on behalf of the United
States, offers our deep appreciation for their service.
We recognize the tremendous sacrifices they and their
troops make. They deserve our full support.

In its presidential statement of August 2009
(S/PRST/2009/24), the Council recommitted itself to
improving the overall performance of peacekeeping
and to addressing the challenges it faces today.

First, we committed to providing peacekeeping
operations with credible and achievable mandates. The
United States believes that mandates and means must
be better aligned and that we must be realistic about
what we can achieve. The Council committed to
ensuring that missions have the resources and
capabilities needed to effectively implement mandates.
That is why we must keep on our collective agenda the
need to address chronic shortages of enabling
capabilities, including transport, helicopter,
engineering and medical units. We also need to
increase the pool of well-trained, well-equipped and
highly disciplined troops and police available for
peacekeeping operations.

Through the United States Global Peace
Operations Initiative, the United States continues to
provide training and equipment for potential
peacekeepers. We stand ready to provide expertise as
needed to enhance United Nations missions. Further,
there is ample scope for the Secretariat to improve the
administrative and logistics support it provides to
United Nations peacekeeping forces. We thus welcome
the General Assembly's recent positive response to key
elements of the global field support strategy, which we
hope will make early deployment and ongoing support
faster and more efficient.

Secondly, in addition to addressing mandate and
means, the United States believes it vital to continue to
improve the performance of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. This Council is improving its
ability to measure progress in the implementation of
complex mandates through the use of benchmarks
tailored to each conflict and reviewed periodically for
their viability, but we can do better.

Also, we believe it essential to strengthen the
body of guidance and training available to United
Nations peacekeeping missions, particularly regarding
when to use conciliatory or confrontational tactics in
the face of threats to civilians or United Nations
personnel, obstacles to freedom of movement, or direct
challenges to the implementation of mandates. Civilian
personnel also need enhanced guidance, training and
support for the implementation of peacemaking and
peacebuilding tasks central to successful exit
strategies. We urge the Secretariat, Member States,
troop-contributing countries and the Council to
continue to work together toward these goals.

Thirdly, we also made clear in our statement that
peacekeeping operations must be accompanied by -
and not a substitute for - critical peacemaking and
peacebuilding efforts. The United States has been
engaged and will continue engaging intensively on
fragile peace processes where key United Nations
peacekeeping missions are deployed. We are
concurrently exploring ways to enhance our support to
the work of the Peacebuilding Commission.

Fourthly, we stress the importance of ongoing
institutional reform and of strengthening not only the
United Nations but also regional organizations'
capacity to plan, deploy, manage, evaluate and
successfully complete peacekeeping operations.

The United States is committed to following
through on these commitments and has made
strengthening United Nations peacekeeping one of our
top priorities at the United Nations. The insights of the
Force Commanders here today are most helpful to us as
we consider renewing mission mandates and
establishing new missions. We ask for their continued
leadership in employing all the tools and resources at
their disposal to make their missions successful.

My Government believes that success includes
retaining the trust, respect and confidence of the host
population in whose midst peacekeepers are deployed.
The United States therefore welcomes the steps that the
commanders have taken to address issues of conduct
and discipline. We urge all commanders to be stalwart
in carrying out the policy of zero tolerance for sexual
exploitation and abuse.

On a distinct but related note, we were gratified
by the launch this week of guidelines for integrating a
gender perspective into the work of the military in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We thank the
generals for their professionalism, dedication and
courage. We remain grateful that they have answered
the call to protect the vulnerable and promote a more
peaceful world.

If I may, I have a couple of specific questions.
One is to General Cruz of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We
remain concerned about the incidents of sexual and
gender-based violence within internally displaced
persons settlements and wonder what steps
MINUSTAH could take to address this scourge further.

Also, given the historic ties between my country
and Liberia, we are particularly aware of the enormous
contribution of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) to Liberia's stability. General Afzal
mentioned the challenges posed by the upcoming
elections, and as we prepare to discuss renewal of the
Mission's mandate in September, we would appreciate
his perspective on any particular challenges he
anticipates in supporting these elections.

