Mr. Lowcock: Last week, my office released
the 2019 Humanitarian Needs Overview for Yemen.
Agencies pooled data from more than 100 earlier
assessments. We also collected new data from nearly
7,000 locations in 331 of Yemen's 333 districts, and we
conducted more than 22,000 interviews. With a stronger
evidence base than ever, the 2019 Humanitarian Needs
Overview represents an authoritative analysis of the
scale, drivers and trajectory of Yemen's crisis, and it
paints a bleak picture.

About 80 per cent of the population, 24 million
people, need humanitarian assistance and protection.
Some 20 million people need help securing food,
including nearly 10 million who are just a step away
from famine. Nearly 240,000 of those people are right
now facing catastrophic levels of hunger. Almost
20 million people lack access to adequate health care,
and nearly 18 million do not have enough clean water
or access to adequate sanitation. More than 3 million
people, including 2 million children, are acutely
malnourished. Some 3.3 million remain displaced from
their homes, including 685,000 who have fled fighting
along the west coast since June 2018.

Those numbers are considerably worse than
they were last year. Conflict and a failure to respect
international humanitarian law, together with the
economic collapse in mid-2018, are the driving forces
behind that deterioration. The most severe needs are
in areas of active hostilities or with large numbers of
forcibly displaced people. Violence has declined in
Al-Hudaydah following the Stockholm Agreement, but
it has continued elsewhere and escalated in some front-
line areas, particularly in Hajjah.

Amid the conflict, the economy continues to
unravel. The Yemeni rial is again losing value. The
exchange rate is around 600 rials to the dollar, down
from about 400, which was the level it recovered to
following substantial injections of foreign exchange
into the Central Bank by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
in late 2018. As the rate falls, so the price of food for
ordinary people rises.

In short, things are very bad. Unfortunately, aid
agencies are running out of money. Among the many
challenges the aid operation faces, funding is quickly
becoming the biggest. We expect current resources to be
used up by the end of March, just six weeks from now.

The United Nations-coordinated humanitarian
relief operation in Yemen is the biggest in the
world. It has delivered impressive results. More than
250 humanitarian agencies, most of them Yemeni
organizations, worked together in 2018 to assist nearly
8 million people across the country every month. We
delivered a step-change in the operation last year. The
World Food Programme reached more than 10 million
people last December, which was a record achievement.
Compared to 2017, the number of people who received
health assistance increased by 40 per cent last year, to
12 million, and the number of people who were helped
with water, hygiene and sanitation needs rose by 20 per
cent, to 11.5 million.

Of the many milestones achieved last year, three
stand out in terms of impact, scale and efficiency. At
the beginning of last year, 107 districts were facing
extreme food insecurity. By the end of the year, 45 of
those districts were no longer at the pre-famine stage,
because ofthe massive, synchronized and rapid scale-up
of all forms of humanitarian assistance.
Working through public institutions, UNICEF,
the World Health Organization (WHO) and
non-governmental organizations stemmed the largest
cholera outbreak in modern history, reducing the number
of new cases from 1 million in 2017 to about 370,000
in 2018. UNICEF, WHO and nutrition partners, also
working through public institutions, helped to identify
and cure a higher percentage of children suffering
from severe acute malnutrition than in any comparable
operation globally. Nutrition programmes last year
treated 310,000 children for severe malnutrition, about
20,000 more children than originally planned.

None of that would have been possible without the
generous funding provided by all our donors in 2018:
nearly $2.6 billion, or 83 per cent of the humanitarian
response plan requirements. The single-most important
contribution was the $930 million we received from
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates. It was not just a large commitment; it was
also transferred in a single payment early in the year.
Without it, the scale-up I have described would not
have been possible.

As the largest humanitarian operation in the world,
agencies in Yemen face obstacles beyond funding. The
operating environment is far from what it should be.
Humanitarian agencies struggle every day with issues
such as delays in the issuance of visas, restrictions
on movements, delays in imports, bureaucratic
impediments, restrictions on monitoring or interference
with principled humanitarian action.

We are particularly concerned that the operating
environment is becoming ever-more restrictive in
northern Yemen. At the same time, we are concerned
that Cabinet Decree 75, imposed by the Government
of Yemen last year, continues to hinder commercial
fuel imports, which are needed to pump water and
keep hospital generators running, among other critical
functions. As of yesterday, four vessels carrying the
equivalent of half an average month's commercial fuel
imports were being denied entry by the Government of
Yemen under Decree 75.

Many operational challenges faced by humanitarian
agencies are eventually overcome through dialogue,
and it is by resolving those challenges that we have
been able to reach so many people in all 333 districts.
As Martin Griffiths said, we are also hopeful that an
assessment mission will finally be able to reach the Red
Sea Mills in Al-Hudaydah in the next few days.

The operation in Yemen also faces risks of aid
diversion that exist in all conflict settings. Those risks,
too, can be mitigated. My office continues to coordinate
an independent, impartial third-party monitoring
programme that covers the entire humanitarian
response plan. Early results have been positive, which
indicates that the vast majority of assistance is going
where it is supposed to go. It is therefore is clear that,
while daunting, the operational challenges in Yemen
can be managed.

I cannot say the same of funding-related challenges.
Let me explain the position clearly. The aid operation
will grind to a halt without adequate resources, at a time
when more people need more help than ever before.
Humanitarian agencies aim to assist up to 19 million
people across the country in 2019. That is more than
half the population, including 12 million people who
will receive emergency food assistance every month.

It will cost more than $4 billion to deliver all the
lifesaving and protection programmes set out in the
2019 United Nations-coordinated response plan, which
was released today. The response plan lays out a clear,
evidence-based and prioritized strategy to address
hunger, roll back cholera and other diseases, improve
conditions for displaced people and support critical
institutions. It is a lifeline for millions of Yemenis.

As Mr. Griffiths reminded the Council, the
Secretary-General will convene a high-level pledging
conference in Geneva a week from today, to be
co-hosted by Sweden and Switzerland. That event will
provide an important opportunity for the international
community to make clear its continuing commitment
to save the lives of the starving and vulnerable people
of Yemen, as we continue to work in the way that
Mr. Griffiths described towards political solutions. I
urge Member States to attend the Geneva meeting at a
senior level and to pledge generously. Together we can
save millions more lives in Yemen, but only if we have
the resources we need.

Let me make one last point, again similar to one
Mr. Griffiths made. The year 2019 needs to be one not
just of saving lives but also of recovery. I would like at
the end of the year to be able to say that Yemen is no
longer the world's worst humanitarian crisis. I would
like to see a reduction in the number of people who
need humanitarian assistance. The people of Yemen
need a realistic chance of a better future.

