Mr. Ping (spoke in French): At the outset, please
allow me to express my sincere thanks to the President
09-66048

and members of the Security Council for having agreed
to meet to discuss the report of the African Union
High-Level Panel on Darfur (S/2009/599, annex I).
That is an eloquent manifestation of this organ's
interest in the situation in the Sudan and the efforts
being made to help that country to address the
numerous challenges it is facing.

I am pleased to take the floor today under the
presidency of Burkina Faso - an African presidency,
both committed and proactive - and I wish to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and the representatives
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Uganda on having
accomplished fruitful terms on the Council in the
service, among other things, of the causes of Africa. I
would also like to congratulate all the other
representatives whose terms will conclude at the end of
this month.

I would like to express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
commitment to peace, security, stability and
development in Africa, as well as the trusting and
promising cooperation that is developing between the
United Nations and the African Union (AU).

Darfur occupies a special place in the efforts of
our two organizations in favour of peace on the African
continent. More than any other, that region symbolizes
the unique nature of the links between the African
Union and the United Nations, having provided the
context and the theatre for the first hybrid operation
between our two organizations. This pioneering
experience encourages us to better coordinate our
actions and to harmonize our respective cultures and
practices to the imperatives of joint work whose
objective circumstances leave us no other alternative.
Certainly, it can sometimes seem to be frustrating, but
we have no other choice than to persevere down this
path.

In the Sudan, as in other situations of crisis and
conflict on the African continent, the future will rely
increasingly on joint action and united efforts on the
basis of the respective comparative advantages of the
United Nations, with its expertise and resources, and
regional organizations, particularly the African Union,
whose political will - reflected in the implementation
of a continent-wide architecture of peace and security -
geographic proximity and detailed knowledge of the
situations at hand, constitute an undeniable asset and
grant the required legitimacy to the actions undertaken.
3

As members of the Council know, the AU High-
Level Panel on Darfur was established upon a decision
adopted at a ministerial meeting of the AU Peace and
Security Council (PSC) on 21 July 2008 in order to
consider and to make recommendations on the ways
and means to better address issues related, on the one
hand, to peace, reconciliation and pacification and, on
the other, to justice, the fight against impunity and
accountability.

By taking that decision, at the instigation of the
African Union Commission, the PSC was convinced
that the challenges of peace, justice and reconciliation
in the Sudan were inseparable. While affirming that
there could be no impunity for the flagrant violations
of human rights committed in Darfur, the PSC also
underscored the need to seek justice in a way that
would facilitate achieving the goal of peace and
reconciliation. Moreover, that is also the spirit of
Security Council resolution 1593 (2005) on Darfur.
Clearly, those issues cannot be divided. They must be
dealt with together with the resolve to create a positive
momentum and an add-on effect covering all the areas
where there must be action.

The Panel carried out its mandate over a period of
six months. Throughout that undertaking, it strove to
interact with each of the stakeholders, whether
Sudanese or international. It is significant that, even
with regard to its recommendations, the Panel deemed
it useful to keep the Sudanese and international actors
informed so as, wherever possible, to ensure their
acceptability and viability and to build the greatest
possible consensus on the proposed way forward,
taking due account of achievements such as the Darfur
Peace Agreement, signed in Abuja in 2006, and the
lessons learned from the efforts made to date through
so much goodwill, African and non-African.

It is just as significant that, during its various
visits to the Sudan, the Panel spent over 40 days in
Darfur going not only to areas under Government
control, but also to those controlled by the armed
opposition movements. That approach, which gave the
Panel and its report unequalled authority, was all the
more necessary given the fact that, since the start of the
war in Darfur, many people have claimed to speak on
behalf of the people of Darfur. The populations of
Darfur have rarely had the opportunity to speak for
themselves.
I wanted to make these remarks to highlight two
elements that seem to me essential. On the one hand, I
am convinced that the conflict in Darfur is, first and
foremost, a Sudanese problem and that its settlement
will depend primarily on the Sudanese themselves,
with the international community playing a supportive
and supplementary role; on the other hand, the
recommendations made by the Panel arise from the
concerns of the Sudanese parties such as they have
been able to harmonize and unify themselves, as far as
possible, and not from some disengaged deconstruction
of their realities that we might have sought to impose
on them.

I would also like to add that the Panel configured
a comprehensive approach based on the conviction that
the aims of peace, justice and reconciliation in Darfur
are closely linked and equally desirable. At the same
time, the Panel highlighted the robust desire of the
peoples of Darfur for peace and security. Nothing can
express that aspiration better that the statement made
by a nomad whom the Panel met in El Fasher in June
2009:

"We want peace. If it is flying in the air, I am
prepared to fly and catch it. If it is buried
underground, I am prepared to dig to get it. If it is
available in the market, I will find the money to
buy it."

At the same time, as the Panel has underscored,
all the Sudanese parties expressed their devotion to
justice, respect for which will facilitate the pursuit of
peace, given that justice and reconciliation are
inextricably linked and must be tackled and
implemented in a comprehensive and supportive way.

It is of the greatest importance to stress here that
the conclusion that the Panel reached regarding the
need to set any settlement of the Darfur crisis in the
more global context of settling the crisis that has
affected the Sudan ever since its independence, some
of the causes of which go back to the colonial period.
The fundamental inequality that characterizes the
relationship between the Sudanese centre and
hinterlands partly explains the various rebellions that
the Sudan has experienced and continues to experience.
That is why the Panel has rightly defined the crisis in
Darfur as a manifestation of the wider crisis in the
Sudan as both a country and a State.

Members are aware that the High-Level Panel's
report and its recommendations were endorsed by the
PSC at its meeting held at the level of head of State
and Government in Abuja on 29 October. The PSC also
asked me to set up a High-Level Implementation Panel,
comprising former Presidents Thabo Mbeki, Pierre
Buyoya and Abdulsalami Abubakar, in order to
facilitate the implementation of the recommendations
made and to help the Sudanese parties to implement
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and other related
processes as elements of the democratic transformation
of the Sudan.

We have since undertaken a number of steps to
implement the Panel's recommendations, which
henceforth will be the platform for all the AU's action
in the Sudan. In that context, the Implementation Panel
went to the Sudan a few days ago. It met with all the
stakeholders, who reaffirmed their support for the
recommendations and the decision of the PSC. On the
basis of that visit, the Panel drew up an action plan
recommending activities to be systematically and
diligently undertaken concerning both Darfur and the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement.

We have come to the United Nations to request its
support in the belief that, with the Panel's report, the
methodology on which it was based, the
comprehensive character of its vision and
recommendations, and the positive reactions of the
Sudanese parties, including the Government of
National Unity, today we have a suitable instrument to
guide our efforts and to achieve our objectives.

Hence, today's meeting and the attitude that we
expect of the Council are very important. It is also true
that the success of our joint work in the Sudan will
require this meeting to be more than a one-off event;
rather, it must mark the launching of a process in a
spirit of partnership in the service of peace, justice,
security and reconciliation in the Sudan. I am sure that
we are all aware of the fact that today is a turning point
in the efforts of the international community to date to
reach a settlement in Darfur and to support the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement so that the Sudan can experience a
significantly new era in its history.

The situation is critical. The Sudan is on the eve
of two major dates that will determine the future of the
country and whose impact on that of Africa must not be
underestimated. First are the general elections in April
2010, which ought to mark an important stage in the

democratic transformation of the Sudan as envisaged
by the January 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
Following that, there is the self-determination
referendum of January 2011, which in accordance with
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement will enable the
people of Southern Sudan to decide either to maintain
the unity of the Sudan or to partition the country. It is
obvious that the choice made will have considerable
consequences for the Sudan and for the rest of Africa,
just as it is obvious that the conditions and
circumstances prevailing before, during and after these
votes will have the greatest impact on the course and
coherence of events.

For Africa, what is happening and what is at stake
in the Sudan is of existential importance. The Sudan is
the biggest country in Africa. It is a melting pot of the
cultural, religious and ethnic diversity that
characterizes Africa and that, far from being a
handicap, is an advantage. The Sudan shares its borders
with nine other African States, and they, more than any
others, will be the first to suffer from the continuance
of the current situation and even more from possible
negative developments in the future.

By forming the High-level Panel and by working
actively on the follow-up to its recommendations, the
African Union, despite difficulties, setbacks, suffering
and heartbreak, has affirmed its faith in the capacity of
the Sudanese to live up to their historic responsibilities
and to overcome their differences for the good of their
country and for the good of Africa. A collective step
forward is possible if inhibitions, the weight of the past
and distractions do not continue to obscure the
generous vision of the future that the African Union
would like to popularize.

The mission entrusted to the African Union Panel
is intended to promote a comprehensive approach to
solving the crisis in the Sudan as well as the peaceful,
democratic transformation of the country. This mission
works harmoniously with the mandates of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the
Joint Mediation and the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan, mandates whose implementation it is meant to
facilitate, without overlapping tasks, duplicating work
or contesting competencies. This sui generis mission
responds to real needs, and it will only strengthen the
effectiveness, coherence and credibility of the
international community's actions in the Sudan.
The Sudan needs to move forward, and Africa is
determined to provide all necessary assistance, on the
basis of the report of the African Union High-Level
Panel, which has become the strategy and the source of
inspiration for the activities of the African Union in the
Sudan. We ask all our partners within the international
community to lend their support to this unprecedented
effort, remembering that the solutions that will produce
the desired results are those with Sudanese ownership
and Africa's support. The African Union trusts in the
support of the United Nations in a beneficial endeavour
whose success will honour the entire international
community and shelter from the scourge of war many

future generations in the Sudan, Africa and the world.

I thank the Council for its gracious attention, and
I ask you, Mr. President, to invite President Mbeki to
present the conclusions of the High-level Panel and the
perspectives that point to the large-scale actions that
we must undertake with the Sudanese and all the other
actors in the best interest of everyone.

