Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Unfortunately, the participation of the
Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Covic, in today's
meeting of the Security Council is due to a tragic
event. Russia learned with outrage and sorrow of the
horrendous crime committed on 13 August in the Pec
area of Kosovo, where two people were killed and four
Serb children were wounded. There is no possible
justification for that incident. It deserves strong
condemnation, as well as a commensurate, robust
response. We hope that the guilty will be found and
duly punished. We express our profound condolences
to the relatives of all the victims, particularly to those
who lost their children in this tragedy. There is no
doubt whatsoever that this is another manifestation of
terrorism. And in the context of the realities of Kosovo,
it is particularly dangerous since it adds further tension
to complex inter-ethnic relations. As experience has
shown, such incidents, which clearly have an ethnic
subtext, can trigger a chain reaction, with extremely
negative consequences for the settlement in the
province.

We note the expeditious steps taken by the
international presence, inter alia, by the Head of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Holkeri, to apprehend the
criminals and to bring them to justice. That incident
clearly demonstrates once again the complexity of the
challenges in Kosovo facing the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, primarily in
maintaining - or rather, in restoring - the multi-
ethnic nature of the province. That tragic episode has
proven once more the validity of the policy of the
international community to step up efforts to advance
the peace process and to prioritize the normalization of
the situation in Kosovo, primarily by ensuring equal
security and the rule of law. Meeting those challenges
is the duty not only of the international presence but
also of Kosovo politicians, who bear some of the
responsibility for the situation in the province.
Russia's position on the processes going on in the
province is well known. Over the last four years, since
the Security Council adopted resolution 1244 (1999),
an enormous effort has been invested in the settlement,
and significant progress has been made. However,
despite the progress in providing for significant
autonomy and self-government in Kosovo, as
stipulated by resolution 1244 (1999), there are still
serious unresolved problems in the province.

The main problem remains the absence of
adequate security and the continuation of ethnically
motivated violence. So far, those persons guilty of
committing the brutal 4 June murder of a Serbian
family in Obilic have not yet been identified and
therefore have not been duly punished. Today, we are
once again witnessing a horrendous crime whose target
was children.

There are still serious difficulties in providing for
the adequate representation of minorities, particularly
of the Serbian minority, in the structures of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government of the
province. As well, there are difficulties in establishing
the process for the return of refugees to the province.
Like other members of the Security Council, we are
convinced that unless there is a radical improvement in
the situation regarding those issues, the idea of
building a multi-ethnic society in Kosovo will be
further stalled, which will fuel unhealthy illusions
among the remaining extremist forces in the province.
That would create fertile ground for the continuation of
violence.

Under the leadership of Mr. Holkeri, UNMIK will
have to do painstaking work fully to implement the
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999) and work on the
concept of "standards before status", which provides
for the necessary basic democratic conditions to be put
in place before a final decision is taken on the future
status of Kosovo. We urge the Mission to take a more
active and more consistent position on countering any
manifestation of inter-ethnic intolerance, ethnic crime
or the growth of radical tendencies in the province, and
on establishing law and order.

