Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I too would like to start
by paying tribute to Paddy Ashdown, one of Mr. Inzko's
predecessors who did a fantastic job in in the country
at the time. I would also like to pick up the quotation
that Mr. Inzko used: "Bosnia is not a place we can leave
behind." In this respect, I thank him for his work and
his commitment to the country. When we look around
with regard to envoys - just a few weeks ago, we lost
the longest-serving envoy, Matt Nimitz, who held his
post for 20 years - I think Mr. Inzko has been in his
office for 10 years, which gives him another 10 years
to finalize what the representative of the United States
said before with regard to the High Representative's job.

Germany remains committed to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and to its European
perspective. Our commitment was reflected in the
conference that we held in Berlin last week, to which my
French colleague just referred. In this respect, and also
with regard to the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I would at this stage like
to commend Serbia. I was very critical of Serbia and
its Foreign Minister the last time we had a discussion
on Kosovo (see S/PV.8459), but as has been mentioned
again here today and I want to highlight, despite all
the secessionist rhetoric we get out of Banja Luka,
President Vucie has clearly committed himself and his
country to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Returning to our commitment to the Balkans, we,
together with our French partners, conducted an Arria
Formula meeting on small arms and light weapons
in the Balkans. Of course, the police arms race
that Mr. Inzko alluded to runs totally counter to our
intention and that of the international community of
limiting small arms and light weapons in the country.

To return to our commitments, Germany supports
UN-Women, which does the very important work of
supporting those who survived sexual violence during
the 1992-1995 war. The efforts that it is supporting there
reflect the substance of resolution 2467 (2019), adopted
two weeks ago, which has a survivor-centred approach.

With regard to current issues, particularly the

formation of the Government, the rule of law, corruption
and socioeconomic reforms, the exodus of young people
that Mr. Inzko mentioned is very upsetting. I do not want
to go into detail, as I can align myself in general with
what was said by the representatives of the European
Union, the United Kingdom, Poland, Belgium, France
and others. The representative of the United Kingdom
asked Mr. Inzko what more we can do. I would ask the
same question and also turn it around to ask what else
Mr. Inzko can do. The Bonn powers were mentioned,
and I would like to ask Mr. Inzko to what extent the
Bonn powers can be used. There has been discussion
around the table of nationalistic rhetoric, revisionism
and the police arms race. What else can be done? The
entire judiciary system is also in a deplorable state. We
need to know what else can be done about that, because
it is key. There is also a problem with ensuring respect
for international law and international rulings. In that
context I have heard that a dormitory in Republika
Srpska has been named "Karadzic". What can be done
to get rid of that?

Finally, I would like to know what can be done in
general to increase women's participation at the various
levels of the various Governments. There are so many
Governments in Bosnia that we should have more
women in them.

