Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): To the
Deputy Secretary-General and Foreign Minister Axworthy,
we are delighted that you are here. I also understand we
have some Model United Nations students in the gallery, so
welcome - I hope you are inspired today to follow us all.

This morning we are here to discuss a very difficult,
but a very important topic, one that was at the forefront of
the minds of the founders of the United Nations and of
many other statesmen and political leaders before them. The
United Nations founders set up this Organization "to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war", and to
limit the human suffering and death that are the inevitable
result of war. The Geneva Conventions stipulate that, at a
minimum, civilians shall be treated humanely and not be
murdered, tortured, mutilated, taken hostage, cruelly treated
or made to face humiliating outrages against their dignity.
This focus on the impact of war upon civilians has been at
the heart of the United Nations since its beginning.

Unfortunately, ever since the founding of the United
Nations and the conclusion of the Geneva Conventions, we
have continued to see what the Secretary-General has
termed a "civilianization of conflict" - as conflicts
increasingly involve actors who blithely disregard the
fundamental protections afforded civilians under
international humanitarian law and are indeed often ignorant
of, or indifferent to, fundamental rules of armed conflict.
The traditional tools of diplomacy are not always
completely effective, but as members of the Security
Council with a responsibility to maintain international peace
and security, we must identify means to address the
outrages being perpetrated against civilians.

All of us here in the Council face a dilemma. We are
aware of, and wish to promote and uphold, the ideals that
motivated the founders of the United Nations. However, as
we all know, we are constrained by various political
realities. Our job is to walk a fine line and find a balance
between what is ideal and what is feasible. The Secretary-
General's report now before us sets out more than three
dozen recommendations for steps that can be taken by the
Council, by Member States and by other organs in the
United Nations system to do a better job of protecting
civilians from falling victim to armed conflicts. In fact, in
various situations we have already put into practice many
of the steps the Secretary-General recommends. While we
support the ideals and the general goal of his report, we
believe that every specific situation of armed conflict
must be dealt with individually, in its own context, and
bearing in mind the global standards set by the applicable
provisions of international humanitarian law.

The United States appreciates the opportunity to
exchange ideas on this difficult topic during the long and
painstaking negotiations that have resulted in the draft
resolution we are to adopt today. We support this draft
resolution and will work with the other members of the
Council to implement its provisions as appropriate in
different circumstances.

The best way to protect civilians, of course, is to
prevent conflict before it erupts, and the Security Council
acknowledged this when it discussed the matter last
November. We recognize the importance of early warning
and early preventive actions, and we also recognize the
many serious risks civilians face during armed conflict:
they are often subjected to armed attack, or rape, or
abduction. Whether they have fled their homes or
remained in an unstable area, whether they have crossed
an international border to relative safety or sought refuge
nearby, their lives or their basic human needs may be at
risk. They may face danger from the indiscriminate and
irresponsible use of landmines or the uncontrolled spread
of small arms and light weapons carried by too many of
their fellow citizens and, many times, by their fellow
child citizens. Clandestine radio broadcasts inciting
genocide add another evil dimension to an already
dangerous situation. And camps for displaced persons and
refugees, which should be a temporary haven, may be
infiltrated by armed elements who then hold the most
vulnerable among them hostage.

There is a variety of options that we can consider.
At times, encouraging diplomatic talks between the parties
may be the proper response. At other times, the Council
may need to dispatch monitors or impose targeted
sanctions or even deploy civilian police or peacekeeping
troops. In other situations it may be appropriate to
establish temporary humanitarian corridors or safe zones,
or to choose an entirely different course of action
altogether. Badly devised actions risk raising the dangers
for the very people that we are seeking to help.

We also need to be sure that the United Nations
personnel in the field are trained and equipped to get the
job done right. Already, peacekeeping troops receive
military training; civilian police receive training in

 

patrolling and investigations; civilian administrators receive
training in management techniques; and relief workers are
trained in the logistics of delivering assistance. However,
they also must be fully aware of the rules of international
humanitarian law and of the special protection needs of the
most vulnerable populations, including those of women,
children and victims of disabling or communicable diseases.
The United Nations has a role to play in helping make such
training available, as do Member States. The United
Nations also has a role in helping with the demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration of former combatants,
including child soldiers. But it cannot do these things alone.
The host Governments must do their part. The World Bank,
the United Nations Development Programme and other
development agencies can also help make the transition
from the initial phase of demobilization to the longer-term
phase of reintegration into society.

In closing, I want to reiterate a point of paramount
importance: civilians cannot be adequately protected by the
international community alone. The authorities of the State
in which armed conflict is occurring must cooperate with
the international community and humanitarian organizations
in ensuring access to the civilian population at risk, and by
ensuring the safety and security of the United Nations and
humanitarian personnel involved in operations designed to
assist civilians. Each party to a conflict has an obligation
under international law towards civilians, and each
Government has a responsibility towards its citizens. Each
Government must do all in its power to live up to the tenets
of international law I referred to at the beginning of these
remarks and to protect the civilians under its authority
against threats to their lives, their dignity and their personal
rights.

