Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I congratulate China on
its accession to the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We count on your well-known vision and
wisdom, Sir, in the stewardship of that work. I should
also like to thank you for convening this open debate
and for the concept note that you circulated earlier this
month (S/2016/306, annex).

I would like to start by commending the
Secretary-General for his briefing and his leadership
in coordinating the efforts and actions of the United
Nations on this issue.

Algeria has most likely paid the heaviest toll to
the scourge of terrorism, and welcomes the fact that
international cooperation against terrorism is nowadays
at the top of the agenda. I take this opportunity to
reiterate our strong and unequivocal condemnation of
all forms ofterrorism, regardless oftheir motivation and
wherever, whenever and by whomsoever committed. It
is appalling and always shocking to learn of and see
all the places and cities that have been attacked and hit
so hard. We need to act swiftly and together. We are
also appalled by the magnitude of new phenomena like
foreign terrorist fighters.

The struggle against violent extremism and

terrorism must also include the fight against
xenophobia and Islamophobia, which are emerging as
the new faces of violent extremism. We will continue
to warn against all misconceptions and dangerous
associations of terrorism with a religion, a civilization
or a geographical area.

Only the resolute and coordinated action of
the international community will bear fruit against
this scourge.

Terrorism is a global threat, and it requires a
global response. In that regard, the United Nations
framework is the most suitable and efficient forum for
dealing with it. Preventing and combatting terrorism
still requires a high level of vigilance, mobilization
and multi-faceted cooperation at the national, regional
and international levels. Countering terrorism cannot
be limited exclusively to the necessary repressive
dimension but depends on various other upstream and
downstream actions, with a coherent strategy based on
prevention, dialogue and understanding. Why and how
some people resort to terrorism remains an unanswered
question. In 2006, Member States adopted the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which
provides an encompassing approach, from preventing
and combatting terrorism to addressing the conditions
conducive to terrorism and from strengthening the
capacity of States and the United Nations to ensuring
the full respect of human rights. This year will mark
the review of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
We look forward to that important step, which we see as
an opportunity for keeping the United Nations strategy
relevant and up-to-date, in the light ofthe emerging new
threats and evolving trends in international terrorism.

Algeria reiterates its support for convening a
high-level conference under the auspices of the United
Nations to formulate a common stance on the eradication
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations in
accordance with several General Assembly resolutions.
My delegation stresses the need to agree upon an
accurate definition of terrorism in line with the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, which
should avoid any confusion between acts of terrorism
and the legitimate struggle of peoples under colonial
and foreign occupation to achieve their inalienable
right to self-determination, as endorsed by General
Assembly resolution 46/51 and other related United
Nations texts.

The increasing number of incidents of kidnapping
and hostage-taking committed by terrorist groups
looking for funds or political concessions remains a
disquieting issue. Algeria's policy not to pay ransom or
make other substantive concessions to hostage-takers
is well known and clear. We welcome the significant
progress made in the prohibition of the payment of
ransom. As part of our counter-terrorism efforts,
Algeria will also host, in the latter part of this month
and in the beginning of May, two workshops on the role
of the Internet and social networks, cyberterrorism, and
democracy in counter-terrorism efforts.

Algeria's efforts include regional and international
awareness and cooperation in that regard. From the very
beginning, Algeria has sought to strengthen efforts
against terrorism at the African level. Today, we have
many legal instruments. Initiatives have been taken
that today play a very important role in enhancing the
effectiveness of efforts on the part ofAfrican countries.
In that respect, through its decision with regard to the
payment of ransom to terrorist groups, the appointment
of a special representative for counter-terrorism
cooperation and the establishment of a sub-committee
on terrorism within the African Union Peace and
Security Council, the African Union is doing its share
and showing its full commitment in the fight against
terrorism in all its forms. In its communique adopted
September 2014, the African Union Peace and Security
Council urged

"member States to take the measures required to
combat effectively transnational organized crime,
in line with the relevant African and international
instruments, and to ensure that terrorist groups
do not benefit from the proceeds of such criminal
activities, including drug trafficking, to finance
their activities".

In the Sahel region, the concepts ofcoordination and
cooperation are developing their full potential, because
the prevailing situation requires both coordination and
the strengthening of countries' capacities. Bearing in
mind the principle of ownership, Algeria has engaged
in a concerted approach through numerous cooperative
mechanisms aimed at facilitating the development of
cooperationinlinewithSecurityCouncilresolutions.One
of the primary aspects, for example, is the coordination
and strengthening of border-control measures, as well
as intelligence-sharing among countries of the region.
With the enhanced strengthening of the control of
our borders, we are not only fulfilling the mission to
protect ourselves, but also strengthening the security
and stability of our immediate and distant neighbours.

In the same vein, Algeria continues to contribute to the
stabilization and promotion of peace in the Maghreb,
the northern part of Mali and the Sahel region, based on
strict respect for the universal principles of sovereignty,
non-interference and cooperation.

