Il also would like to thank the briefers. Estonia welcomes the positive developments that have taken place over the past six months. Allow me to also express our gratitude to the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) and Ethiopia for their contributions. We recognize that the transitions in the Sudan and South Sudan, as well as the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis, require the full attention of both Governments. However, we call on the parties to capitalize on their improving relationship to push for progress on the question of Abyei. Most importantly, it cannot be overemphasized that there is no substitute for a meaningful political process between the parties. The more that process is delayed, the worse the situation seems to get on the ground. The deteriorating security situation is a stark reminder of that; so is the worsening humanitarian situation. Furthermore, the COVID-19 pandemic is only amplifying that threat. Therefore, we call on the Sudan and South Sudan to revive a viable political process leading to the implementation of the Agreement of 20 June 2011. That could be significantly helped by the appointment of the civilian deputy head of the mission. In addition, we encourage regional actors to actively engage the parties on the Abyei question. Meanwhile, it is the responsibility of the Security Council to tackle the negative security trends decisively now. In that connection, Estonia has three recommendations. First, in the light of increasing criminality and intercommunal violence, it is crucial to expedite the deployment of the remaining authorized UNISFA personnel, especially the police component. While we recognize that the COVID-19 pandemic is causing delays, we call for the issuance of the visas needed for the deployment of all UNISFA personnel without further delay. Secondly, we need to institute as much accountability as possible to bring the perpetrators of violence to justice. In that context, we call upon the authorities to launch joint investigations into the deadly incidents in Kolom in January. Accountability will not only deter persons from causing future incidents but will also help to build much-needed trust among communities. Thirdly, we need to deploy human rights expertise to UNISFA. That will help strengthen the capacity of the local authorities to address human rights abuses and thus prevent further violence. Estonia supports the Secretary-General's recommendation to extend the mandate of UNISFA for the next six months. However, the parties must show their willingness to make progress towards resolving the Abyei question. To conclude, we welcome the recent encouraging signs of progress. Nevertheless, we also call on the parties to urgently build on that positive momentum, especially through a meaningful political process towards a final resolution of the Abyei question. Further delays will only continue to prolong the plight of the people of Abyei.
