Mr. Ward (Jamaica): I thank the Under-
Secretary-General, Mr. Guehenno, for briefing the
Council on the latest developments in Kosovo. There
has been steady progress on the development of a
multi-ethnic society in Kosovo, but there remains much
to be done. That is quite evident from reports of
violence in the territory. Violence against minorities
continues to plague the territory and to impede the
work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

We recognize that these, usually isolated,
incidents are concentrated in a few areas, and that
UNMIK continues to put structures in place to provide
for the maintenance of law and order. We must
recognize, however, that incidents of violence
overshadow the enormous progress that has been made
so far.

My delegation condemns what has been described
as the ghastly and horrific killing of five members of a
Kosovo Albanian family on 21 August. Early in the
month of August, a Serb convoy was ambushed and
three people were injured. Destabilizing incidents like
these must not be allowed to continue.

We would like to see the judicial system equipped
to deal with incidents such as these in an appropriate
and proportionate manner. UNMIK must increase its
effort to recruit a greater number of Serb judges,
prosecutors and lawyers in order to build a multi-ethnic
judicial system that will enjoy the support of all ethnic
groups. UNMIK must continue to seek ways to control
inter-ethnic violence as preparations continue for the
elections in November.

In our last statement on Kosovo in the Council we
mentioned the issue of property sales as an essential
component in ensuring the peaceful coexistence of
ethnic groups in Kosovo. We were concerned about
indications that the sale of minority housing may have
been used as a guise for ethnic cleansing. We therefore
welcome the recent signing of a new UNMIK
regulation to ensure that all proposed contracts for
property sales in certain mixed neighbourhoods in
Kosovo are thoroughly reviewed by a municipal
administrator before being approved.

With regard to relations with the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, my delegation is encouraged
by the talks held between the Serbian Deputy Prime
Minister, Mr. Covic, and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Haekkerup. We have
maintained that only through dialogue can obstacles to
the improvement of relations with Serbia and to the
advancement of reconciliation in Kosovo be overcome.
Such talks are important to the process of preparing for
elections in November, as the discussions are important
elements of Serb participation and the removal of
parallel security and administrative structures. We
encourage more frequent talks aimed at ensuring the
full implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). We also
welcome the support of the Kosovo Transitional
Council for those talks.

We continue to monitor the situation in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and its impact
on the situation in Kosovo, and vice versa. The impact
on the refugee situation remains of concern, and we
note that the return of Macedonian refugees directly
corresponds to periods of relative calm in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. We note also that the
border crossing between that country and Kosovo
remains blocked, preventing essential supplies such as
fuel from entering Kosovo and resulting in the
rationing of fuel there. Reports indicate that the closure
of the border between the territories has also impeded
rotations of United Nations police. It may also possibly
affect the shipment of medical supplies. It would be
instructive if Mr. Guehenno could comment on whether
those restrictions on United Nations police have
adversely affected the security situation. Jamaica
supports efforts aimed at a speedy resolution of the
conflict in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, for the sake of the people of that country
and for the sake of stability in Kosovo and throughout
the region.

We are encouraged by the recent return of a
number of Serb refugees to the village of Osojane. We
hope that we will soon see a situation where, having
returned, those Serbs will enjoy freedom of movement,
safety and security.

We commend UNMIK for its work. We are aware
of the difficulties it faces in carrying out its duties. It is
clear that there are serious problems that UNMIK must
address. It is our hope that significant progress can be
made prior to the elections in November.

