Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Marie Guehenno for the information he has given
us about the situation in Kosovo and the prospects
there. Like others, I would like to pay tribute to
Mr. Hans Haekkerup for the real successes he achieved
in the last year. France welcomes the Secretary-
General's announced intention to appoint Mr. Michael
Steiner to head the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We offer
him our warmest wishes for every success in his work.

The Permanent Representative of Spain will give
a full account of the position of the European Union
later in our debate. France fully associates itself with
that statement. I shall therefore confine myself at this
point to a few brief, additional comments.

Two months ago, on 17 November, Kosovo voters
of all ethnic origins elected the 120 members of the
Kosovo Assembly. They went to the polls peacefully
and in large numbers, thereby demonstrating their
sense of responsibility. In so doing they made a
decisive contribution to a new stage of the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999), namely, that
of the provisional self-governing institutions. Under
the Constitutional Framework, those institutions will
gradually take over major UNMIK functions and
become responsible for the day-to-day administration
of Kosovo. The foundations have therefore been laid
for Kosovars themselves to take over the management
of their daily lives.

However, at this point the self-governing
institutions are not yet in place, the presidency of the
Assembly is not yet complete, and the process of
electing a President of Kosovo has not yet been
concluded. The Government is therefore not yet
constituted. Accordingly, as of today, the devolution of
power provided for in the Constitutional Framework
has not yet been completed as planned. It is therefore
important that Kosovar political leaders live up to the
expectations of their peoples by helping to invigorate
the provisional self-governing institutions. Those
institutions should be established as quickly as possible
so that they can fully assume the functions allocated to
them by the international community.

In that connection, those elected must quickly
name all members of the presidency of the Assembly
and elect the President of Kosovo. The active and
responsible involvement of the members of the
Assembly is required by the spirit of this democratic
process: a boycott is no solution.

I join others in stating our concern at the murder
of Mr. Ismail Hajdaraj, a member of the Kosovo
Assembly. We condemn that cowardly attack against an
elected Kosovar representative. We support UNMIK's
efforts to arrest the perpetrators, bring them to justice,
discover their motivation and identify their possible
backers. We categorically condemn intimidation,
violence and attacks against pluralism; under no
circumstances can they be tolerated in Kosovo's public
life.

This year again, the fight against insecurity,
violence and organized crime will in a general sense be
at the centre of UNMIK's concerns. In the interest of
Kosovo and of the entire region, it is essential to
continue resolute action in that sphere. KFOR and
UNMIK - especially its police and justice pillar -
will continue to be engaged in that work. Kosovar
political leaders must lend their full support to ensure
the success of this essential activity.

Another of the priorities for the new year is to
expand the dialogue with the Yugoslav authorities, and
we earnestly call for this. Here, it is necessary fully to
implement the Common Document signed on 5
November by Mr. Haekkerup and Mr. Covic. In that
regard, the 18 January Belgrade meeting of the High-
ranking Working Group established by that document
was a good sign. It would be desirable for
representatives of the new elected Kosovar institutions
soon to join UNMIK representatives at future meetings.
The establishment of pragmatic cooperation on matters
of common concern can only be positive. Mutual
understanding, inter-ethnic reconciliation and, more
broadly, rapprochement of the Balkans with Europe
would gain from such cooperation.

In the short term, progress on prisoners and
missing persons would be desirable, and it seems to be
within our grasp. Kosovar political leaders should
speak out clearly and quickly in favour of the return to
Kosovo of persons belonging to minorities. Action in
that regard would bolster projects undertaken by
UNMIK, which we hope will go forward more quickly.

Michael Steiner is taking on his responsibilities at
a crucial time: after the 17 November elections and
before the effective establishment of the institutions of
provisional self-government. He can count on our full
support in his difficult task.

