The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.

I would like to begin by thanking the Secretary-
General for being the first to alert us in February
to the tragic humanitarian situation of the nearly
20 million people in Africa and Yemen on the verge
of starvation. The Secretary-General's impetus was
crucial to triggering prompt action by the international
community to contain the crisis and prevent mass
starvation in the countries concerned.

The link between international peace and security
and famine is both proven and documented. The
humanitarian situation in South Sudan, north-eastern
Nigeria, Yemen and Somalia is a shock to our collective
consciousness and a sad illustration of that link, since
60 per cent of those affected by food insecurity are
in conflict zones. That shows the degree to which it
is the Council's responsibility to continue to remain
actively seized of the problem. It is why France took
the initiative to organize a first Arria-formula meeting
in June on the link between famine and conflict, with
the welcome participation of the World Bank. Many
member States of the Council joined us in that initiative,
and subsequently, together with Sweden and the United
Kingdom, we drafted a Council presidential statement
(S/PRST/2017/14), adopted in August.

I am particularly grateful to the Secretary-General
for continuing to alert us by reporting on developments
in the situation we are discussing today. Many points
have already been highlighted by previous speakers,
and I do not wish to revisit the important points that
they have raised. I will limit myself to citing five
important lessons. The first is that malnutrition, a
consequence of poverty, food insecurity and inadequate
development, weakens the most vulnerable populations
and aggravates the scale of those tragedies. Chronic
food-insecurity situations create conditions that can
lead to starvation when crises occur. The working
conclusion is that the fight against food insecurity must
be a priority for all of us.

The second lesson is that it would not have been
possible to cope with the magnitude of the needs
without a strong, coordinated and rapid response from
the international community. But let us be realistic as
well as vigilant. We are not at the end of the road. Far
from it, we must continue to intensify our action in
financing food aid, and humanitarian aid in particular.

The third lesson is that without safe, comprehensive
and unhindered humanitarian access, our efforts to
eradicate famine in conflict areas will be useless.
Obstacles to humanitarian access, attacks on
humanitarian workers and the fact that hunger is still
too often used as a weapon of war must be reported,
documented and condemned as firmly as possible. Let
me point out that such actions may constitute war crimes
under international law and should be prosecuted as
such. The medieval practice of using sieges to starve
entire cities, as we have seen in Syria, is an extreme
form of such barbarous practices. The Council must
therefore redouble its efforts on such issues and provide
practical responses.

The fourth lesson is that such famines are, to a
large extent, man-made humanitarian disasters. In that
context, only political solutions will make it possible
to alleviate the people's suffering. It is therefore up to
the Council to find permanent political solutions to the
conflicts that worsen a population's food insecurity.

The fifth and last lesson is the accuracy of our
shared understanding of the continuum. Preventing and
fighting famines is both a requirement of preventive
diplomacy and an illustration of the fact that in order
to be effective and produce results on the ground, the
United Nations must make progress on the dual fronts
of peace and development, including its humanitarian
dimension. The presence of the Secretary-General here
today has an undeniable galvanizing effect, and that
is why I would like to join Sweden and several other
members in appealing to the Secretary-General to
come back to this subject in the Council. The Security
Council must remain mobilized, and France will
continue to play its full part in that.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The meeting rose at 4.45 pm.
