Mr. Pamir (Turkey): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the member States of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference. I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would also like to thank you
for organizing this meeting, which gives us an
opportunity to express our views on this important
issue.

At the outset, I also express our profound
sympathy and heartfelt condolences to the families of
the victims of the latest, heinous attack that took place
in Taba and condemn the perpetrators in the strongest
terms.

As you very well know, Sir, we had serious
misgivings with regard to the language used in the text
of the previous draft resolution, which raised a number
of important questions, especially insofar as resistance
to foreign occupation and alien domination are
concerned.

Following intense consultations with the
members of the Council, particularly the initiator
country and the co-sponsors of the draft resolution, I
am happy to say that we now have in hand a draft
resolution that enjoys much wider support from the
international community.

The Organization of the Islamic Conference
(OIC) gives thanks for the foresight, the care and the
spirit of cooperation and mutual understanding that has
governed the latest exchange of views.

Indeed, the OIC would like to avail itself of this
opportunity to strongly condemn once again all acts
and practices of terrorism. We remain convinced that
terrorism, irrespective of its motivations, objectives,
forms and manifestations, can never be justified. We
realize that terrorism requires a coordinated response
from the international community and that the quest to
eradicate terrorism requires a sustained, comprehensive
approach involving the active participation and
collaboration of all Member States of the United
Nations, to be pursued in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations and international law.

The draft resolution before the Council will
strengthen and consolidate that determination, which
today is finding a new echo in the international
community.

